IIR 11 -334 
Relational Agent for Alcohol Screening and Treatment  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
April 10, 2017  
Relational Agent to Improve Alcohol Screening and Treatment in Primary Care: RCT  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_814269], MD  
Overview : We would like to amend this study by [CONTACT_1583] a protocol for Aim s [ADDRESS_1127177] to evaluate the effectiveness of the Relational Agent for Screening, Brief 
Intervention and Referral to Treatment (SBIRT) to improve the management of risky alcohol use in  primary 
care. To the extent possible, we  are integrating the program into the practices of the Primary Care Clinic . Aim 3 
is a formative evaluation of Veterans’ experiences with the Relational Agent.  We present the full RCT protocol 
first, then the formative evaluation.  
To facilitate review we  are again attaching the Specific Aims and Research Plan for the grant proposal, 
although it was attached to Aim 1 when the initial review was conducted.  
Specific Aim 1 : Tailor the Relational Agent Intervention to the Veteran population .
Already approved.  
Specific Aim 2 : Conduct a RCT Comparing Two Different Treatments ; Treatment as Usual versus
Treatment as Usual plus the Relational Agent for unhealthy alcohol use . 
(1)Rationale
(a)Statement of the Problem.   As stated in Aim 1, there is ample evidence that screening and brief
intervention for alcohol problems in primary care is effective in reducing high risk alcohol use. There is also 
evidence that in the VA (as elsewhere) the implementation of these procedur es in primary care is  less than 
adequate. The purpose of this project is to develop and evaluate the effectiveness of a computerized program 
to deliver the screening and, brief intervention, and referral for specialty care. In Aim 2 , we are using the 
relational agent program developed in Aim 1  in a randomized clinical effectiveness trial. We will randomize 
Veterans who screen positive for unhealthy alcohol use in primary care to Treatment as Usual (TAU) or TAU 
plus additional treatment with the Relational Agent (TAU+RA) . We will measure outcomes including quantity 
and frequency of alcohol use, rates of brief intervention , and referral to specialty treatment at three months 
following randomization. We will also measure Veterans’ satisfaction with treatment for alcohol problems in 
primary care .  
(b)Hypotheses or Key Question.
The primary hypothesis  is that 1) the Relational Agent will be more effective than TAU in reducing the 
quantity (drinks per day) and frequency (number of drinking days per  week) of alcohol consumption.  
The two secondary hypotheses  are that 2) the Relational Agent will be more effective than TAU in 
improving rates of brief intervention; and 3) the Relational Agent will be more effective than TAU in improving 
rates of referral. Additional exploratory hypotheses  are listed in the Analy sis section.  
(2)Background , Significance , and Relevance to Veteran’s Health
Please see Aim 1 protocol and grant proposal.
(3) Work Accomplished
Please see grant proposal for pi[INVESTIGATOR_20732].  So far in this study we have completed part of Aim 1. We
interviewed [ADDRESS_1127178]  programmed so far  and making final 
adjustments to the program . 
(4)Work Proposed
[ADDRESS_1127179] in the Jamaica  Plain  primary  care clinic  (JP-PCC)  
of the VA [LOCATION_011]  Healthcare  System. If we are unable to meet our recruitment goals, we will also attempt to 
recruit at the West Roxbury primary  care clinic  (WRX -PCC) or Brockton primary care (BR -PCC).  In any case, 
we will exclude the veterans who participated in Aim 1.  
Recruitment  
We are working  collaboratively  with the team  leaders  and clinic  staff to identify  a process  by [CONTACT_814273] -C can be referred to the research  assistants  without  disruption  to the 
workflow  of primary care encounters.  The usual  practice  in this setting  is that the health  technician  or LPN 
administers  the AUD -C and informs  the physician  if the Veteran  has a positive  screen.  The physician  (or other 
responsible primary care clinician)  is then responsible for delivering the brief intervention. Per current practice, 
referral  to Mental Health  for alcohol  problems  is routinely made  by [CONTACT_814274].  
For this study, c linic s taff will fill out the “Permission to Contact [CONTACT_468934]” form with the veteran and 
pass it to the research assistant in clinic, or hold it in a predetermined place for the research assistant to pi[INVESTIGATOR_501284]. If possible the research assistant will interview the patient during the visit. W e will aim to have  participants  
complete the baseline  interview  (and, for Veterans ultimately  allocated  to the Relational  Agent  arm, the 
Relatio nal Agent  interaction)  prior to seeing  their clinician for the scheduled  clinical encounter; however,  if 
workflow  requires  the Veteran  to complete  his encounter  first, the research  assistant  will meet the Veteran  
immediately  following  the visit to complete  the baseline interview. If necessary, the veteran will be schedule d for 
a return visit to finish the baseline interview and/or session 1. The research assistant  will have  a private  space  to 
conduct interview s and have the veteran use the Relational Agent program.   
In addition, each week, clinic staff will provide  us with a list of patients who are due for an AUD -C 
screening.  We depend on staff to recruit and refer patients to us, and it has been slow going. 1. We would like 
to use CPRS to  access the medical files of anyone who was supposed to be screened with the AUDIT -C that 
week. If the person scored positive on the AUDIT -C we will send them a letter containing a brief description of 
our study and an opt out card. If we do not receive an  opt out card in the two weeks following the letter, our 
study team will try and contact [CONTACT_814275]. If they are interested, we will conduct the screening on the phone and, if el igible, we will schedule them 
for a baseline interview in person. 2.  
 Study flyers have been placed around the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_814270]’s telephone number around the 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  To include veterans who call our study line  directly , we would check their eligibility by [CONTACT_814276] -C over the phone. This AUD -C will not go into CPRS; it will stay in study records.  Then we will follow our 
standard eligibility requirements and procedures.  
Eligibility Criteria  
In general,  we approach  this study  as a pragmatic  clinical trial, such  that we intend  to maximize  inclusion  to 
reflect actual  clinical practice  and to demonstrate  effectiveness, rather than  efficacy, of the intervention.   
Inclusion  criteria  include : (1) having  a primary care  provider  at VA [LOCATION_011] PCC; (2) having  a positive  screen  on 
the AUD -C; (3) drinking above CDC guidelines in the past 30 days ; (4) willing to provide us with at least 1 “locator  
person ” ( and preferably 2  locator persons ) who always knows their whereabouts (explanation on p. 5). 
Exclusion criteria are:  (1) Veterans  who do not have  a valid telephone  number  and mailing  address,  and who 
expect to move in the next [ADDRESS_1127180]  and 
completion of Aim #3 ; (2) Veterans  who report  less than [ADDRESS_1127181] 30 days  when  screened  on the Quick  Drink  Screen (described  in Measures ). The purpose  
of adding  this screening  is to account for the fact that the AUD -C measures  Veterans’  alcohol consumption  over 
the past year,  and it is possible  for Veterans  to screen positive  on the AUD -C but to have  stopped  drinking  
[ADDRESS_1127182] 30 days. We will use the Quick Drinki ng Screen (see Measures) to exclude these Veterans who 
screen positive on the AUD-C but are not consuming unhealthy quantities of alcohol at the time of the study, 
because the primary study outcomes include quantitative measures of alcohol consumption.  These Veterans 
may not be currently in need of brief intervention because they have recently cut down their drinking. (3) 
Veterans who have participated in substance abuse treatment in the past 30 days because they are already 
receiving care. 
The table below summarizes the eligibility criteria. 
We note that the study will not exclude patients with mental illness, traumatic brain injury, or other mental or 
neurological conditions.  Second, we will measure health literacy to ensure the program can be used by [CONTACT_814277], no matter their familiarity with health issues. 
Measures  
 The study  measures  will be derived  from data collected  at the interviews,  as well as from the VA’s 
computerized  patient record  system,  CPRS.  The measures  are summarized  in the table below  and attach ed in 
Appendix  A. Data will be entered into REDCap , a free, secure Web application that facilitates the collection 
and entry of research data. User -friendly electronic data capture (EDC) tools enable users to quickly develop 
surveys and databases from conception to production on the Web without additional software requirements. 
This tool helps researchers enter, store, and manage their project data in a systematic manner. REDCap is a 
VA Intranet Web application ; surveys can only be administered to respondents while logged into the VA 
Intranet.  
Research  Meas ures  and Schedule  of Use 
Measures  Screening  Baseline  Session 2 
(intervention 
group  only) 3 Month  
Follow -up 
AUD -C (from  health technician)  X 
Quick  Drink  Screen  X X 
Demographics and other  X 
REALM -SF (health literacy)  X 
MINI-Alcohol  X 
SIP X X 
System  Usability  Scale  X 
ECA Questionnaire  X 
Satisfaction with alcohol  treatment  in primary  
care (1 item)  X 
CPRS  data extraction  X 
Demographics and other . Age, gender, ethnicity, branch of military service , and other descriptors or questions of 
relevance to this study (e.g., previous substance abus e treatment) are included. See A ppendix A for document.   Study Eligibility Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria  Exclusion Criteria  
AUD -C ≥ 5  Participation in Aim 1 of the study  
Receive primary care  where recruited  Drank <14 drinks/wk and <[ADDRESS_1127183] 1 (up to 2) locator  person(s)  Unwilling to supply locators.  
3
Quick  Drink  Screen  (QDS). The QDS  will be used to assess  quantity  and frequency  of drinking  over the past [ADDRESS_1127184] of gathering  
summary drinking  data.  
Rapid Estimate of Adult Literacy in Medicine —Short Form  (REALM -SF). The REALM -SF is a 7-item word 
recognition test that provides a valid and quick assessment of health literacy.   
Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) : The AUDIT  is a 10-item self -report  screening  tool that 
produces  a total score  from 0-40. The AUDIT  was developed  and used  by [CONTACT_814278],  demonstrates  good  sensitivity  and specificity  in many  populations and 
is generalizable  across  populations. The first three  items  are used  in the VA and called  the AUD -C. The AUD -C 
has been  demonstrated  to have  a high rate of agreement  with scores  on the full AUDIT. The AUD -C only asks 
about  consumption;  the full AUDIT  has questions  that reflect  hazardous  drinking  and alcohol abuse  (items  4-6) 
and questions  that reflect likely alcohol dependence  (items  7-10). 
Short Index  of Problems -Recent  Consequences  Form  (SIP). The SIP is  a short  version  of the Drinker  Inventory 
of Consequences that measures  negative  consequences  of alcohol use in the past three  months.  This 
measure  yields  an overall  score  and scores  for five sub-scales:  Physical, Interpersonal, Intrapersonal, Impulse  
Control,  and Social  Responsibility.  This will allow  us to determine  if there  have  been additional consequences  
since  baseline  or whether  problems have  diminished. The SIP has published  norms.
System Usability Scale  (SUS)  is a widely  used  simple,  ten-item questionnaire  (Likert scale)  giving  a global view  
of subjective assessments  of usability.  
Satisfaction with Alcohol Treatment in Primary Care.  Consumer Assessment  of Healthcare  Providers  and 
Systems  (CAHPS)  has emerged  as a standard  for measuring  satisfaction  with health  care delivery,  including  
primary care. We will use a single  item,  modeled  on the CAHPS, to assess  satisfaction:  “On a [ADDRESS_1127185] 3 months  from the VA for alcohol problems?”.   
ECA Questionnaire . 
This measure  assesses  participants’  satisfaction  with and trust of the Relational  Agent. It has been used in [CONTACT_814306]’s lab for al l of his relational agent studies.  
Multiphasic  International Neuropsychiatric Inventory . 
The MINI is a widely used structured  diagnostic  interview  designed  to assess  psychiatric  disorders  in 
clinical and  resea rch settings  where  a long diagnostic  interview  is not possible. The latest version of the MINI, 
7.0, yields  diagnoses  that are compatible  both with the International Classification  of Diseases 10th  Revision  
(ICD-10) and the Diagnostic  and Statistical  Manual  of Mental Disorders, Fourth and Fifth Edition  (DSM -5).   A 
comparison  of the MINI to the Composite  International Diagnostic  Interview showed  good  to very good  
agreement  for most diagnoses  and, more  specifically,  had very good  agreement  for alcohol dependence  
diagnoses  with a kappa  of 0.82. In addition,  inter-rater and test/retest agreement  for the MINI was high for 
alcohol dependence  (kappa  = 1.0 and 0.86,  respectively)  and alcohol abuse  (kappa = 0.9 and 0.85, 
respectively). The MINI Alcohol Scale,  which  is the only part of the MINI we will use, takes  approximately  [ADDRESS_1127186]  delivery of health  care in PCC . Usual  care 
includes  annual  screening  for alcohol problems  using the 3 -item AUD -C (see description of AUDIT in Measures, 
below) , prompted  by [CONTACT_814279]. In the context of this randomized  trial, 
4
 
Veterans allocated to Treatment as Usual  will proceed with their scheduled clinical encounter with the primary 
care clinician (PCP). Because each of these participants will have screened positive on the AUD-C , the clinic 
staff who completed the AUD-C screening will notify the PCP of the positive screening. This notification occurs 
either by [CONTACT_814280] a written (paper) notification. In addition, the positive screening 
score on the AUD-C generates a new clinical reminder that prompts the clinician to complete a brief 
intervention regarding alcohol use. In the course of Treatment as Usual, the clinician may elect to refer the 
Veteran for specialty care (e.g., Mental Health) for assessment and management of alcohol-related problems. 
Relational Agent Intervention. The Relational Agent is an on-screen human-l ike representation that uses 
gestures, words and phrases based on psychology and communication science to engage the Veteran in a 
simulated face-t o-face dialogue. The Relational Agent talks using synthetic speech and animation, and the 
Veteran responds by [CONTACT_91717] a multiple-choice list of phrases on a touch-screen tablet. 
The Relational Agent will be delivering the same kind of care as the PCP would ideally deliver. The 
Relational Agent will be providing a form of brief Motivational Interviewing and recommending a follow-up visit 
in one month. The Relational Agent (whose name [CONTACT_814305]) will commence with a brief assessment, which will 
be administered in order to provide personalized feedback to the Veteran. The assessment includes the Quick 
Drinki ng Screen (QDS) and the full Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (AUDIT) (see Measures, below). 
Although the Veteran will have completed the AUD-C in the initial interaction with the primary care health 
technician, we will use the full AUDIT to enable us to provide the Veteran feedback about other symptoms of 
alcohol problems. We are also using the QDS to give feedback on drinking levels and how they compare to 
national guidelines. The feedback derived from these measures is a standard method of delivering feedback 
and using drinking problems they bring to light to try and motivate the person to change.   
Next Laura will take the Veteran through the decisional balance exercise (pros and cons of change). 
Importance, confidence, and readiness rulers and responses to those will be used. At the end, Laura will ask 
for a commitment to change. If a Veteran has an alcohol use disorder, as determined below, the Veteran will be 
offered treatment through referral to specialty substance abuse clinics. A personal feedback report will be 
printed out for the Veteran that includes a summary of findings and patient input. A clinic report will also be 
generated that will be used to write a progress note and as data for a referral (see Appendix B for all reports).  
In the second visit, one month later, Laura will again ask Veterans about their drinking, and give them 
feedback about how their current drinking compares to what they reported earlier. If the Veteran has reduced 
consumption, they will be congratulated. If they have not changed drinking patterns, Laura will give the Veteran 
the option to revisit sections of the motivational intervention from session 1. If they haven ’t changed their 
drinking, or if they did not follow-u p on a previous referral, the Veteran will again be offered a referral to 
specialty care. Veterans will again receive printed feedback and a clinic report will be prepared.  
Procedures  
Screening Interview  
Clinic staff will refer patients who score 5 or above on the AUD -C, which is the VA -established cutoff for 
alcohol -related problems. Resear ch assistants will see the patient while they are onsite for the primary care visit 
if at all possible, or set up a time for a return visit. The  elements  of this interview  are as follows:  
1.Brief overview  description  of the study, noting  the following  key points (see script in Appendix  B):
(a)The Veteran  may be eligible,  depending  on the responses  to the screening  items .
(b)If eligible, the Veteran  would  be randomly  allocated  either to two visits with
a computer -based  system  of brief intervention  for individuals  who report  unhealthy  alcohol
consumption , or not . All Veterans still receive Treatment as Usual .
The Veteran  would  be asked  to complete  a baseline interview at the time of the visit, and by
[CONTACT_814281] 3 months, regardless  of the study  arm to which  he or she is allocated.
(c)Upon  completion  of each  interview (baseline and  3-month), the Veteran  will receive  $50 in
appreciation  of his or her participation.
2.Completion  of the Quick  Drink ing Screen  (QDS).  The results  of the QDS  will be compared  with the
Center for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)  guidelines  to ascertain  if the Veteran  is engagin g in
risky alcohol use (more  than [ADDRESS_1127187] 30 days). 
3.Ascertain  whether the veteran meets criteria for having a stable phone and address for the next [ADDRESS_1127188]  in participating  and meet the 3 criteria above  will be asked  to participate.
The research  assistant  will read the ICF with Veterans  and obtain  signed  informed  consent. (See  Human  
Subjects  for details  of this process.)  Upon  completion  of the signed  informed  consent process , we will ask 
whether they have been in substance abuse treatment in the last month. If they have not been in treatment in 
the last [ADDRESS_1127189] of the baseline interview continues. In addition to the veteran’s 
telephone and mailing ad dress, we will ask for contact [CONTACT_19297] 2 “locators”, family or friends who always 
know how to find the veteran. [CONTACT_268983] has done this many times before, as substance -abusing participants in 
general tend to have chaotic lives and move around a lot  or change phone numbers. We will ask the veteran to 
address an envelope to the locator, sign the locator letter (in Appendix  B), and we will insert the letter to locators 
letting them know they may be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]. We will only mail the letter if we cannot locate the participant for a 
follow -up interview. We have found this helps facilitate cooperation when we call.   If they have n ot been in 
treatment, and are willing to provide at least [ADDRESS_1127190] 
information at this point.   
The baseline interview will commence immediately, if possible. If the veteran cannot stay, we wil l schedule the 
baseline to occur as soon as possible.  
See the Figure below for flow of patients through the study.  
Primary Care 
Clinic 
Appointment
Intake by [CONTACT_814282]/LPN, incl AUD-C 
if dueAUD-C negative AUD-C positive
YesPermission
 to contact?No
Eligibility Screening 
by [CONTACT_814283]. Asst (in 
person, phone)
Eligible so 
far?Yes – consent 
and baselineNo
Randomize
Treatment as 
UsualTreatment as Usual 
+Relational AgentSubst. abuse 
treatment in last 30 
days?
Yes - ineligible
Baseline  Interview  
The research  assistant  will administer  the baseline  interview  and schedule  the 3-month  telephone  follow -up 
with the Veteran.  We will c ollect  demographic information and other items – see Demographics Form, attached  
6
 
This interview will assess the Veteran’s severity of alcohol use in greater detail and with greater precision 
than the AUD -C by [CONTACT_814284]. Although we could use the recommended cutoffs on the AUDIT, the 
MINI is a diagnostic measure that will provide greater confidence that Veterans are classified correctly. In 
addition, the research assistant will administer th e SIP, which measure s negative consequence s of alcohol use. 
Finally, the research assistant will administer the Realm-SF . The baseline interview will take about 45 minutes, 
including the consent proc ess. Veteran s receive $ [ADDRESS_1127191], the efficacy  of brief intervention  among  individuals  with Alcohol  Use Disorder has  rarely  
been  studied. Because  we undertake  this study  as a pragmatic  clinical trial,  we do not want to exclude  these  
individuals  from participation; therefore  we are stratifying  our sample  for two purposes. First, stratification  will 
enable  us to examine  a priori  the effectiveness  of the Relational  Agent  on primary  and secondary outcomes  
separately  in these  two strata.  As described  below,  we hypothesize  that the effect  of the intervention  will vary 
between  the two strata.   Second,  stratification  allows  tailoring  of the intervention  to each  stratum; we will 
configure  the Relational Agent  always  to recommend  referral  for further  evaluation  and treatment  to Veterans  in 
the Alcohol Use  Disorder  group,  whereas  it will only recommend  referral to Veterans  meeting  certain  response  
criteria  within  the risky drinking  group  (no desire to change, wish to discuss drinking with a person instead) . 
After the research  assistant  determines  the stratum, the research  assistant  and Veteran  proceed  to 
randomization.   
Randomization  
Following  the baseline  interview  and stratification, the research  assistant  will randomize  Veterans  to 
Treatment as Usual  or Treatment  as Usual  plus Relational  Agent  Intervention.  As described  above,  Veterans  
will be stratified  by [CONTACT_814285].  Within  strata, block  randomization  with variable  block 
sizes  will be used  to ensure  that treatment  groups  balance  over time.  The block  sizes  will be randomly  varied  
and of sufficient  size to minimize  the ability of any study  staff or Veterans  to guess  the next random allocation  
assignment.  Randomization  assignments  will be generated  using  computer -generated  random  numbers  and 
will be available  immediately  to the research  assistant  upon  entering  the Veteran -participant’s  information  and 
responses  from the baseline  interview.  We will use the randomization procedure available in RedCAP.  After  the 
research  assistant  determines  the random allocation  assignment of the Veteran -participant, the  Veteran  will be 
directed  either to proceed  to his scheduled  clinical encounter ( Treatment as Usual ) or will be introduced  to the 
Relational  Agent  Intervention.   
Relational Agent  Intervention -procedure  
When  a Veteran  is allocated  to Relational Agent + Treatment as Usual , the research  assistant  will first 
enroll  the participant into the Relational Agent system (entering the participant’s ID, gender, given name, and 
presence/absence of AUD) , introduce  the Veteran  to the Relational  Agent, explain  briefly  how the Relational  
Agent works,  then allow  the Veteran  to complete  the Relational  Agent program  in privacy  using  headphones.  
We are using  AUDIT  scores and previous substance abuse treatment  in addition  to the MINI as 
conservative  indicators  of the need  for specialty  treatment.  Negative  results  on these  measures  will result  in a 
brief intervention only. A positive result for alcohol abuse or dependence from the MINI during the baseline 
assessment, previous substance abuse treatment, or a score higher than 20 on the AUDIT will trigger a referral 
to specialty  treatment at the end of the intervention.   
 When  session 1 is over, the research assistant will print out the patient feedback report for the 
participant, and make sure they are scheduled for session 2 and the 3 month research interview. The patient 
feedback report will contain information about the par ticipant’s drinking and their list of pros and cons (see 
Appendix  B). The clinic report will contain information about the participant’s drinking, and whether or not a 
referral was agreed upon. The information from the clinic report will go into a progress  note in CPRS, and will be 
[ADDRESS_1127192]. Rubin if a consult (referral) i s indicated. [CONTACT_37176] or [CONTACT_268983] will spea k with t he 
participant on the phone to gather informati on for the consult and place t he consult fo r the participant. If, in the 
unlikely event that eithe r [CONTACT_268983] or [CONTACT_37176] are not available, the research assistant will contact [CONTACT_814286] s project, or wa lk the participant dow n to the offices of the Primary Care 
Mental Health staff for assistance. If there are a ny concern s about suicidality or homicidality from the telephone 
consult process, the research assistant will walk the participant over to Primary Care Mental Health staff for 
assistance. If they are not available the research assistant will alert the primary car e team an d hand off the 
patient to one of the PCC staff who can bring the patient to urgent care. See “Huma n Subjects – Protection 
Against Risk” for more detail. 
When the participant returns for session 2, the research assistant will again set up the computer for the 
participant and allow them to use the program in privacy, using headphones. At the end of the session, t he 
research assistant will print out the patient feedback report, confirm the 3 month follo w-up appointment, and 
check the clinic report for instructions. If a referral is needed the research assistant will foll ow the same 
procedure as above. Veteran s receive $[ADDRESS_1127193] the 3-month  follow -up interview by [CONTACT_814287].   Each  of these  telephone  interviews  will take approximately  15 minutes  and will include  completion  
of the QDS and SIP . The research  assistant  will also ask whether the Veteran  received  brief intervention  or 
referral  for alcohol  problems at the index  primary  care visit or in the intervening  3-month  period; this  
ascertainment will complement the documentation  of brief intervention  and referral  that may be present  in the 
computerized  patient record  system (CPRS).   In addition, the research  assistant  will ask about Veterans’  
satisfaction  with care for alcohol problems  in PCC . Veterans receive $[ADDRESS_1127194] the in-person and 3 month telephone  interviews  and will monitor their 
quality  and accuracy.  The research  assistant s will follow  a written  protocol  for conducting  these  calls,  including  
a script  (see Appendix  B) for how to interact  with automated  telephone  answering  systems  (machines  or voice  
mail)  and how to confirm  the identity of the Veteran  to ensure  privacy  and confidentiality.  Based  on our prior 
studies,  we develop ed a protocol  for multiple  call attempts if the Veteran  is unreachable, followed  by [CONTACT_8622] [ADDRESS_1127195] the participants we 
will send out the locator letters and follow them up with a phone call to the locator person(s). We will also check 
CPRS for changes in phone numbers or addresses, and to check if a participant is sched uled for a visit in the 
near future where we can speak with them.  Data  from each  of these  interviews  will be entered  into RedCAP on 
a study  laptop  computer (equipped  with all required  encryption  and passwords)  and eventually  converted  to 
Statistical  Package  for the Social Sciences  Software  (SPSS)  data file format for statistical analysis.  
Review  of the Computerized  Patient  Record  System  (CPRS)  
Upon  completion  of the 3-month  follow -up interview,  we will review  the electronic  health  record  of each  
enrolled  Veteran -participant to conduct a structured  abstraction  of key data elements  for the statistical analysis.  
[CONTACT_37176],  [CONTACT_268983]  and study  team members  will develop  a data collection  form to guide  the data abstraction  
process.  Table  [ADDRESS_1127196]  reviewers used  computerized  algorithms  to ensure  reliable  and accurate  data abstraction.  Their 
8
 
reviewers recorded documented brief intervention with the following standardized instructions: “At any time 
since the most recent alcohol screening, does the record document any of the following components of brief 
alcohol counseling for past-year drinkers? Indicate all that apply and the date counseling was noted in the 
record: 
Patient drinks within recommended limits per self-report, (2) Advice to abstain, (3) Personalized 
counseling regarding relationship of alcohol to the patient’s specific health issues, (4) General alcohol-related 
counseling (not linked to patient’s issues), (5) Patient advised to drink within recommended limits, (6) No 
alcohol counseling documented. ” 
We will use these instructions and, as done by [CONTACT_814288], we will provide reviewers with examples 
that satisfy each of the above components of brief alcohol counseling. Similarly, we will follow the approach of 
Hawkins et al in ascertaining referral for alcohol problems. Referral to alcohol treatment will be defined as a 
documented discussion in CPRS of referral for VA or non-VA services to address alcohol misuse or a 
scheduled appointment for VA services. We will train reviewers to identify and abstract information of any 
referral to VA or non-VA alcohol treatment services and document type of referred services (e.g., addiction 
specialty care, non-VA primary care services?) and date of referral appointment. Alcohol treatment services 
will be defined as any of the following with documentation indicating the purpose of the service was to evaluate 
or address alcohol misuse: VA inpatient or outpatient specialty -care addiction services, VA  alcohol-related 
telephone counseling, or referral to non-V A facility for alcohol treatment. Reviewers will also be instructed to 
indicate if a discussion of a treatment referral was documented in CPRS without actual referral being made. 
For Veterans who received appointments to address alcohol misuse, reviewers will ascertain the date 
Veterans attended their referral appointment. 
In addition, we will abstract and record other Mental Health diagnoses, especially Substance Use 
Disorders, PTSD, and TBI, to describe the sample and examine any subgroup differences. 
[CONTACT_37176], an experienced primary care physician and active user of CPRS, will train the research 
assistants to conduct the CPRS review and abstraction. The research assistants will be blinded to the 
treatment status of the Veterans. [CONTACT_37176], who will also be blinded to the treatment status, will oversee the 
data abstraction and ensure its quality and accuracy. Abstracted data will be entered into the REDCAP 
database for eventual conversion to SPSS format for analysis. 
Study Data Management  
Telephone communications . We will have one telephone line where participants or clinic staff can call 
and leave messages . Research staff will answer this phone or return calls promptly.  
Data collection and storage . Research interviews and other relevant data will be collected via the 
REDCap program behind the VA firewall and stored on a VA s erver. REDCap allows the assignment of 
different levels of access privileges and audit trails, thus ensuring proper data management and minimizing 
mistakes. For instance the Project Manager can be the only one who is allowed to edit data, while RAs can be 
allowed to enter and download data only.  At the time of this IRB amendment (2/9/16), we were given 
permission to use REDCap while it is under review for VA Research by [CONTACT_492670]. If REDC ap is disallowed,  we 
will identify and propose alternative systems.    
The Relational Agent software is installed on VA tablet/ laptops and the database for the program will be 
on a VA server. The software installed on the tablets includes custom software created by [CONTACT_814289], Unity software used for animation, and XXAMP, a web application. Also, the 
system uses MySQL database on both the tablets and the VA server. It is installed on the tablets for local 
storage, and as insurance against bei ng unable to run the program if wifi connection is unavailable. It gets 
backed up to the VA servers. Both the database on tablets and VA server and the transmission to the server 
can be encrypted.  
Study Design  for Aim 2  
This study is  a mixed  design, with  Alcohol  Severity  Groups  and Treatment  Arms  as between -groups  
variables  and Time  of Testing  (Baseline  vs. 3-Month  Follow -up) as a repeated  measure  variable. The main  
focus  of this initial  RCT is to compare  Treatment  as Usual  (TAU)  to TAU plus the Relational  Agent Intervention  
9
 
(TAU+RA) on (a) alcohol consumption, (b) rates of brief intervention, and (c) rates of referral to treatment. We 
will use a stratified randomization scheme, stratifying on whether a Veteran is a risky drinker or has the more 
severe designation of an alcohol use disorder, to ensure that the two study groups balance on severity.  
Veterans allocated to Treatment as Usual will continue to receive all usual care as delivered in  the PCC. 
Veterans allocated to Treatment as Usual plus Relational Agent Intervention will interact with the Relational 
Agent as soon as possible following the baseline assessment, and still receive usual care. 
Alcohol use and related behaviors will be assessed by [INVESTIGATOR_2993]-person survey at baseline and by [CONTACT_814290] [ADDRESS_1127197] analyses will be performed at 3 months. 
The primary dependent (outcome) variables  are number of drinking days per week (frequency) and average 
drinks per drinking day (quantity). Secondary dependent variables are percent receiving brief intervention and 
percent referred for further evaluation or treatment of alcohol problems.  
Independent Variables  
The two independent variables are the experimental condition, Treatment as Usual vs. Treatment as Usual 
plus Relational Agent Intervention, and the severity of alcohol use, dichotomized as Risky Drinking vs. Alcohol 
Use Disorder. The experimental condition will be assigned by [CONTACT_695467] (see Section 4.e.7). 
The severity of alcohol use variable, which will be used to allocate Veteran-participants into two strata prior 
to randomization, will be ascertained by [CONTACT_814291]. 
Dependent Variables 
The primary dependent variables (i.e., the main study outcome measures) are number o f drinking days per 
week and average drinks per drinking day. Because the Relational Agent will target reduction of both the 
frequency (number of drinking days per week) and the quantity (average drinks per drinking day) of alcohol 
consumption, each of these measures will be considered separately as primary outcome measures. These 
variables are measured by [CONTACT_814292]. 
Secondary dependent variables include completion of brief intervention (yes/no) and referral for 
evaluation/treatment (yes/no); these secondary dependent variables will be ascertained from review of CPRS. 
We will also ascertain completion of brief intervention and referral for evaluation/treatment from the interviews 
with participants; we will assess concordance between CPRS and Veterans’ self-report and, for main analyses, 
we will count brief intervention or referral as completed if they are ascertained from either source. 
We will measure alcohol-related consequences present at baseline and at 3-month follow-u p, as measured 
by [CONTACT_814293]. The intervention is designed and hypothesized to reduce the quantity and frequency of risky 
drinking, which can be logically  expected to  lead to reduced frequency of consequences associated with 
drinking. However, the Relational Agent is not specifically designed to reduce these consequences, and the 
relatively short (3-month) follow-u p period is not likely to be sufficient to demonstrate a differen tial rate of 
consequences between the treatment groups; as a result, data on consequences will be collected for 
exploration and hypothesis generation for future studies, rather than a priori formal outcome measures. The 
consequences will be ascertained by [CONTACT_814294]. The SIP will be administered at the baseline and 3-
month interviews. 
In addition, we will measure Veterans’ satisfaction with treatment for alcohol problems. To our knowledge, 
there exists no scale or question designed specifically to measure patients’ satisfaction with the care they 
received for alcohol problems in primary care. Prior studies have used various questions and scales to assess 
clients’ satisfaction with mental health or substance abuse treatment and the Consumer Assessment of 
Healthcare Providers and Systems (CAHPS) has emerged as a standard for measuring satisfaction with health 
care delivery, including primary care. We will use a single item, modeled on CAHPS, to assess satisfaction: 
“On a [ADDRESS_1127198] 3 months from the VA for alcohol 
problems?”  
Descriptor Variables 
We will collect data at baseline for the purpose of describing the sample and also analyzing potential 
moderating variables (i.e., covariates). This information will include age, educational level, race/ethnicity, 
branch of service, location of deployment, if any, and months of deployment. We will ask about substance 
[ADDRESS_1127199] the following information from CPRS: mental health 
diagnoses, especially post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD); and diagnosis of traumatic brain injury (TBI). It is 
unknown if these variables affect outcomes for brief intervention, a nd thus a fruitful area for exploratory 
analyses.  
Other variables that we will use to describe the sample and explore in cross-tabulations with the outcome 
variables include summary scores from the REALM health literacy questions and . the ECA Questionnaire. 
Statistical Analysis 
The figure below shows a schematic representation of the research design. For visual clarity, it does not 
show the descriptive variables mentioned above. 
Preliminary  Analyses : In preliminary  analyses,  we will examine  the distributions  of all dependent  
variables,  and consider appropriate  transformations. In particular, we will consider  an arcsine  transformation  
(appropriate  for reported  proportions) for the “number  of drinking  days  per week”  and a log transformation  
(appropriate  for highly  skewed  distributions) for “average  drinks  per drinking  day”.   The 4 groups  will be tested  
for any differences  in socio -demographic  variables.  All quantitative  variables  (e.g. Age)  will be tested  by 2-way 
between  groups  Analysis  of Variance  (ANOVA); all  qualitative  variables  (e.g. Gender) will  be tested  by 3-
dimensional Chi Square  (Mantel -Haenszel test).  Any variable  found  to be  significant will  be entered  into all 
subsequent  analyses  as a covariate.  
Checks  for “non -Response”  Bias : The potential for differential drop -out rates  among  the four groups  is 
itself an interesting  and important empi[INVESTIGATOR_25137], with  clinical implications.  Drop -out rates  will be tested  by 
[CONTACT_814295].  Factors  that may contribute  to drop-out rate  will be tested  by [CONTACT_814296]. In effect, the four 
groups  can be stratified  at Baseline  into Completers  and non-Completers.  Then, these  groups  will be 
compared  on Baseline  values  to determine  which,  if any, are  significant systematic  “predictors”  of Completion.  
Statistical  Analyses : If there  is no  significant differential drop -out rate  attributable  to Alcohol  Group, to 
Treatment Group,  or, especially,  to Alcohol x Treatment  interaction, then  the non-completion  rate can be 
considered  as a random  loss, and Completers  as a representative  sample. In that case, the dependent  
variable(s)  will be tested  by 3-way mixed  design  AN(CO)VA.  If it is determined  that there  is a differential  drop- 
out rate such  that the data are not missing  completely  at random (NMCAR), then  we will utilize  a generalized  
estimation  equation  (GEE)  approach, which  should  provide  an unbiased  estimate  of the intervention  effect.  
GEE  utilizes  inverse  probabilities  to correct for any bias associate d with NMCAR,  with participants  who are 
Completers  weighted  with the drop-out probabilities  of participants with  the “same”  characteristics  at Baseline.  
These  weighting  values  will be estimated  from the logistic  analyses  described  above.  
Independent Variable
RA + Treatment as Usual 
vs. Treatment as Usual 
Baseline Moderator Variables 
1) Presence/Absence of
Alcohol Use Disorder
(MINI) 
2) Sociodemographics
Primary Dependent 
Variable
Quantity and Frequency 
of alcohol use (QDS) 
Secondary Dependent 
Variables
1. % Receiving BI
2. % Referred for
Treatment
3. Alcohol -Related
Consequence s (SIP)
Abbreviations: RCT= randomized controlled trial; RA = relational agent intervention; BI = brief intervention; QDS = Quick Dri nk Screen; SIP = 
Short Index of Problems 
[ADDRESS_1127200] mixed-design  with Treatment Arm (Treatmen t as Usual vs. Treatment 
as Usual  plus Relational Agent Intervention) and Drinking Severity (Risky vs. Alcohol Use Disorder) and 2 
occasions (0 and 3 months) as the repeated measures design. We will take a n intent- to-treat approach to the 
analysis; Veterans will b e included in our primary analyses regardless of their level of adherence with their 
assigned intervention. Participant s who do not complete the 3-month follow- up assessment will be considered 
to have missing data for that assessment and will not be included in the analysis of intervention effectiveness. 
The secondary outcomes, which will be “incidence rates”, will be tested by [CONTACT_51621]. 
Primary Hypothesis: The Relational Agent will be more effective than Treatment as Usual in 
reducing th e quantity and frequency of alcohol use. 
Our primary analyses of the effectiveness of Treatment as Usual vs. Treatment as Usual plus Relational 
Agent Intervention will focus on measurement outcome variables at the 3-month follow- up. Separate analyses 
will be performed for the two primary outcome measures: number of drinking days per week (frequency) and 
average drinks per drinking day (quantity), both reported over a month. Here we describe the analytic approach 
for the outcome of quantity of alcohol us e (average drinks per drinking day); the approach for frequency will be 
analogous.  Initially our analysis will b e through analysis of covariance models. We will include baseline values 
of the outcome variable as a covariate in these models, so our analyses may be interpreted as focusing on the 
change in outcome from baseline to three month follow- up. If any key characteristics of our sample were found 
to differ between groups, we will enter those as co variates a s well. 
Secondary Hypothesis: The Relational Agent will be more effective than Treatment as Usual in 
improving rates of brief intervention. 
For our secondary outcome of increased rate of delivering brief intervention, we will compare the two study 
groups on the proportion of patients receiving brief intervention through the chi-square test.  Logistic regression 
will be used to calculate odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals in order to describe differences in rates of 
brief intervention between groups. To further examine baseline patient characteristics that predict brief 
intervention, and control for any covariates found to differ between treatment groups at baseline, we will 
develop a multivariable logistic regression model predicting rate of brief intervention from baseline 
characteristics as well a s indicator variables representing the intervention group and presence/absence of 
alcohol us e disorders. 
Secondary Hypothesis: The Relational Agent will be more effective than Treatment as Usual in 
improving rates of referral to specialty treatment. 
Secondary analysis also includes a comparison of referral rates, and analyses similar to those described 
for the secondar y Hypothesi s above will be employed. We will compare study groups on the proportion of 
patients referred through the chi-square test. Since we expect that Veterans with alcohol us e disorders will be 
more likely to be referred regardless of group, we will test this hypothesis separately, i.e., we will us e chi- 
square to compare rates of referral based solely on presence or absence of alcohol use disorders. Logistic 
regression will be used to calculate odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals in order to describe differences in 
referral rates between groups. To further examine baseline patient characteristics that predict brief intervention, 
and control for a ny covariates found to differ between treatment groups at baseline, we will develop a 
multivariable logistic regression model predicting referral rates from baseline characteristics as well as indicator 
variables representing t he intervention group and presence/absence of alcohol use disorders. 
Additional exploratory hypotheses: 
Negative consequences for alcohol use, as measured by [CONTACT_814293], may also decrease as a result of 
intervention, and this hypothesis will be explored as well through a random effects linear regression model. 
Sample Size and P ower Considerations 
Power considerations focus on our primary hypotheses, which examine intervention effects on two primary 
outcomes, drinking days per week and average drinks per drinking day, at [ADDRESS_1127201] size (d=0.44). There are little data to suggest that those with alcohol us e disorders derive more or less 
benefit from  brief intervention.[ADDRESS_1127202] size, as defined by 
[CONTACT_30822].97 
We begin our sample size estimation with the observation tha t 5,571 underwent AUD -C screening in our 
study setting during fiscal year 2010. We estimate that 1.25 * 5,571 = 6,963 will be screened during the 15- 
month study enrollm ent period. National samples indicate that about 20% of Veterans screened receive a 
positive score on the AUD-C,26  which would be consistent with the estimated prevalence in the larger 
population. Therefore, 6,963 * 0.2 = 1,[ADDRESS_1127203]. 
Bickmore’s pi[INVESTIGATOR_14737] a Relational Agent to screen for alcohol problems in primary care (described above, 
Section 4.a.1 ) and the two recently completed pi[INVESTIGATOR_814271], we estimate that 36% of the 500 Veterans approached, or 180 Veterans, will agree to participate. 
We estimate that these 180 Veterans will be distributed in a 2:1 ratio as those with alcohol use disorders 
(N=120) and those with risky drinking (N= 60), based on studi es in VA.  
Rates of attrition, or loss-to-follow-up, in prior studies of brief intervention for alcohol problem s have 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_451659] 10% to 30%. Based on our familiarity with following up study participant s in alcohol and 
substance abuse interventions, and particularly noting our use of financial compensation for participation, we 
anticipate that our loss- to-follow- up will be on the lower end of this range. However, in the table below we show 
power estimates for three possible rates of loss to follow-up: 20%, 25% and 30%. Table [ADDRESS_1127204] a medium (Cohen’s) effec t size, at an alpha level of 0.05, given the three possible rates of 
loss-to-follow- up. 
Power  estimates  for a range  of loss-to-follow -up rates  
% Loss -to- 
Follow -Up Experimental  
Group  Alcohol  Use 
Disorders  (N) Risky  Drinking  
(N) Total  (N) Power  
20% TAU 48 24 72 0.84 
TAU+RAI  48 24 72 
25% TAU 45 22.5 68 0.82 
TAU+RAI  45 22.5 68 
30% TAU 42 21 63 0.78 
TAU+RAI  42 21 63 
Note:  TAU=Treatment  as Usual;  RAI=Relational  Agent Intervention.  
Thus, for our primary  outcome, we estimate  that we will have  more  than 80% power to detect a medium  
effect  of the intervention  with loss-to-follow -up rates  approaching  30%.  We will monitor  loss-to-follow -up closely  
and, if we discover  that the attrition  rate is exceeding  30%,  we will increase  our sample  size to account for the 
loss-to-follow -up. 
We will recruit a total of 180 Veterans  from PCC,  with approximately  60 participants  in the Risky  Drinking  
Group  and 120 participants  in the Alcohol Use  Disorders  Group.  Accounting  for 20-30% loss to follow up, we 
expect that at least  126 to 144 Veterans  will complete  the 3-month  follow -up.  
13
Specific Aim 3: Examine in -depth Veterans’ experience with the Relational Agent Intervention.
Because  this Aim is exploratory  in nature, there  are no associated  hypotheses.  Following  the RCT, we will 
conduct  a formative  evaluation (Aim 3), with  in-depth  interviews, to characterize  the elements  of the Relational  
Agent Intervention  that Veterans  prefer,  and the features  that emerge  as most effective  and those  that seem 
extraneous  or even  counter -productive.  
Rationale for formative  evaluation  
Formative  evaluation  will inform  future  evaluation  and implementation  efforts,  specifically  in the area of 
Relational  Agents  for alcohol problems and  more  generically  for interventions  using  health  information  
technology  to engage  Veterans  in their care in the primary  care setting.  Formative  evaluation  is valuable in the  
context  of an intervention  that results  in quantitative  improvement  of outcomes  because  it can yield information  
regarding  those  characteristics  of the intervention  that seemed  most  useful  and effective from the perspective  
of the study  participants.  Perhaps  more  importantly,  formative  evaluation  is crucial in  the context  of an 
intervention  that does  not result  in quantitative  improvement  in the target outcome  (i.e., in the setting  of a 
“negative  study”),  because  it can identify  the factors that may have  prevented  an otherwise -potent intervention  
from achieving  the intended  outcome.  
In-depth  Interviews  
We will carry  out in-depth  interviews  with Veterans  soon  after completion  of the study  to minimize  
perturbation  of the experimental  setting.  In-depth  interviews  are characterized  by [CONTACT_814297] - 
ended  questions.  We will prepare  a semi -structured  interview  guide  that includes  a list of questions  or issues  
that are to be  explored  and suggested  probes  for following  up on key topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102].  The content  of the in-depth  
interviews  will focus  on identifying  and characterizing  factors  related  to successful  implementation  of the 
Relational  Agent  intervention, from  study  recruitment and  enrollment,  through  actual  engagement with the 
Relational  Agent.  The interview  will encourage  Veterans  to provide  feedback  on specific  details  of the 
intervention  that they  found  helpful and  useful,  as well as those  features  that were  of little value  or even  counter -
productive. Broad  topic  areas  will include  the ease  or difficulty  associated  with using  the tablet computer, 
attitudes  toward  and reactions  to the Relational  Agent,  and perceptions  of the Relational  Agent’s  effect  on 
Veterans’  behavior.  Veterans will receive $20 in compensation for their time.  
We will use purposive  sampling  to identify  potential participants  allocated  to the Treatment  as Usual  plus 
Relational  Agent Intervention  group,  recruiting  approximately  equal  numbers of Veterans  who had a reduction  in 
alcohol use and those  who had no reduction. We will recruit a total of 20 Veterans.   All interviews  will be 
conducted  by [CONTACT_81455], with the permission  of the participants,  will be audio -recorded  for transcription  and 
subsequent  analysis.  (See  Human  Subjects  for details  on recruitment and  protection  of human  subjects.)  
These  post-intervention  interviews  will be conducted  by [CONTACT_814298] , who will be trained by [CONTACT_6283]. 
Goldman and Simon . 
Analysis  
We will perform a content  analysis  of the transcribed  in-depth  interviews,  incorporating  the principles  of the 
immersion -crystallization  method. This qualitative  approach consists  of repeated  cycles  of immersion  into the 
collected  data with subsequent  emergence, after reflection,  of an intuitive  crystallization  of the dominant  
themes.[ADDRESS_1127205]. Goldman  and other  members  of the team to review  the 
emerging  themes  and coding  strategies.  We will continue  analysis  until no new major  themes  emerge.  
Examples  from the transcribed  interviews  will be used  to illustrate  the findings  that emerge.  We will address  
recognized criteria  for qualitative  research:  credibility,  fittingness,  auditability,  and confirmability. We will 
establish  credibility  by [CONTACT_814299] 
14
 
concordance between coded themes and the real-time research associates’ experiences. In addition, having 
multiple individuals read and code each of the transcripts will enhance credibility. We will assess fittingness 
through line-by-line analysis of the transcript s and by [CONTACT_814300]. 
Through iterative discussions among the study team, these qualitative findings will b e used to characterize 
the degree to which the Relational Agent Intervention considerations for future implementation of the 
intervention. 
(5) Human Subjects
Aims 2 and 3 : Risk to Subjects
The overall goal of this project is to develop a Relational Agent Intervention to improve brief intervention 
for alcohol problems in primary care, and compare its effectiveness with treatment as usual. Aim 1 of this study 
has already been approved.  Aim 2 is quantitative: an initial RCT to compare the effect of an intervention on 
Veterans' consumption of alcohol to that of standard treatment in primary care . Human subjects’ risks and 
protections will be addressed for Aims [ADDRESS_1127206], 
and will be copi[INVESTIGATOR_814272] 1 approval for the convenience of the reviewers.  
Human Subjects Involvement and Characteristics  
For Aim 2, 180 p rimary care patients who are attending a primary care appointment at VA [LOCATION_011] will be 
recruited into this study.  Both men and women will be recruited.  Veterans identified by [CONTACT_814301] -C for alcohol use (score of >=5) will be eligible  for screening.  As detailed above, Veterans 
will be eligible if drinking above CDC guidelines in t he past [ADDRESS_1127207] 30 days .  
Participants will participate in  research interviews at baseline (right after screening) and [ADDRESS_1127208] w hether the expected screening and 
brief intervention occurred in the “Treatment as Usual” arm of the study, and to gather information on other 
psychiatric problems that may affect the outcomes of the study.  
Veterans will be asked questions to assess their levels of health literacy, computer literacy, and attitudes 
toward the Intervention , as well as drinking problems and general descriptors (e.g., age, gender, previous 
substance abuse treatment).  We will also have information about process variables from th e participants who 
use the Relational Agent program (e.g., pros and cons of drinking, confidence level to change, etc.) we will 
obtain that information from participants . 
Data for Aim 3, the formative interviews, will be obtained via in -depth interviews wit h parti cipants about 
their reactions to and assessment of the Relational Agent intervention.   
Potential Risks  
15
 
The research risk is minimal and involves additional questions and the administration of a computerized 
screening, brief intervention, and referral to treatment for alcohol problems (commonly referred to as SBIRT). 
Since each group receives treatment as usual, and primary care clinicians are supposed to provide a brief 
intervention and referral if appropriate for patients who screen positive on the AUDIT, the research-related 
SBIRT is in addition to usual care.   
The potential risks to participants in this study are minor discomforts from using a touch screen computer, 
wearing headphones, or answering questions about themselves and their alcohol use. There are no apparent 
physical risks for any of the participants.   There is also a risk of information being accidentally disclosed 
outside of the research team or, for certain information, outside of the VA primary care clinic. This risk will be 
minimized by [CONTACT_9377][INVESTIGATOR_505742] (on secure servers, in locked cabinets and locked offices) and identifying 
information is kept separate from study data .  Documentation of the research visit and actions recommended t o 
the participant will be found in a research progres s note. This  information may  also be found in a consult 
generated to refer willing participants 
to specialty treatment.  There is also a potential risk that the questions 
and conversations in the interviews could be psychologically upsetting to the Veterans. This risk is low, and 
research assistants are trained to manage these by [CONTACT_814302]. Simon or Rubin, or 
from primary care staff.  In the section below, “Protection Against Risk,” we outline approaches to ensure that 
all risks are minimized.  
Adequacy of Protection from Risk  
Recruitment and Informed Consent  
We will recruit Veterans from the PCC and Women’s He alth Clinics in Jamaica Plain. If this proves to yield 
an insufficient flow of participants, we will extend recruitment of Veterans to the West  Roxbury and Brockton 
campuses. Clinic staff will do the actual recruitment by [CONTACT_814303] -C of the study. If the Veteran is interested, they will sign the “Permission to Contact”  form and clinic staff 
will pass on the form to research staff. If it fits in the workflow of the clinic, clinic staff will provide a “warm 
handoff” of the veteran to the research staff .  Potential p articipants will be informed that the collection of data 
will be strictly confidential and that the participation of all human subjects will be completely voluntary. Our 
study will include any and all  Veteran s in Primary Care who are positive on the AUD -C and pass other eligibility 
requirements , as long as they are able to communicate and understand the Informed Consent (in English) 
document and physically interact with the Relational Agent computer sy stem.  
Clinic staff administer the AUD -C once a year to all Veterans. If a Veteran scores above the cutoff, clinic 
staff will inform the Veteran about the study and ask them to sign the “permission to contact” form if they are 
interested. This form will be passed  on to the Research Assistant, who will meet with the Veteran to conduct 
the screening. The RA will briefly explain what the study is about and ask if the Veteran will have a stable 
phone number and address for the next 6 months. If the answer is yes, the research assistant will administer 
the Quick Drink ing Screen (quantity and frequency of drinking in the past 30 days). If the Veteran is drinking 
above CDC guidelines, additional screening questions will be administered. If the Veteran is eligible, the 
consent form will be read to the participant. The RA wil l stop after each page or each section of the ICF and 
ask if the veteran understands or has any questions. Once the ICF has been signed, the RA will ask about 
substance Abuse treatment in the last month. If the veteran has not had treatment in the last mon th, the RA 
administer baseline questionnaires, randomize the participant, and inform the participant of their assignment, 
and an appointment for the [ADDRESS_1127209] for th e electronic transmission of Veterans’ clinical 
information, with which the Principal Investigator i s familia r. The master list will be stored separately from the 
coded data.  
The data collected on laptops includes a study ID, age, gend er, and alcohol-relate d questions . This data is 
stored in the MySQL database on the laptop and is backed up to the database on a VA server when the 
session with the relational agent is completed.  
Recordings of Veterans participating in formative intervie ws in Aim 3 will be treat ed with similar ca re. The 
audio recordings will be made with a portable digital recording device that will always be main tained under 
lock-and-key of study staff (either i n locked file cabinet s within a locked office. or, wh en in transport between 
facilities, within a locked box). Transcription will be conducted by [CONTACT_146814]. T he digital 
recordings will be download ed to password-protected computer file s on the VA network server , and 
transcription s from these recordings will be similarly stored a nd handled. Prior to processing the transcriptions 
for qualitative analysis, study staff will remove all names and other personal identifiers from the transcripts. 
Transcripts will be printed a s hardcopy only after all identifier s are remov ed; moreove r, study staff will be 
instructed to treat the transc ripts as confidential and a s potentially harbori ng PHI, and a s such, they will always 
be maintained in locked file cabinets in locked offices, and dispos ed of according to the existin g VA policies 
regarding the disposal a nd destruction of such documents. We expec t these processes, which our team 
member s have employed in a variety of studies both within and outside the VA, will be highly effective in 
protecting subjects from the risks of data security and confidentiality breaches. With respect to protecting 
Veterans’ from the risk of psychological distress a nd physical taxation as a result of participating in the 
interviews, we will take the following precautions. First, we will ensure that the facility available for conducting 
the intervie ws is maximally accessible to all Veterans, wit h special attenti on to needs of Veterans with ph ysical 
disabilities . Second, we will train th e research asso ciate to be sensitive to any discomfort that the Veteran may 
be experiencing; Drs. Sim on and Rubin have extensive clinical and research experience related to interviewing 
and will ensure that the research asso ciates have suffi cient traini ng in this regard .  
There are two possib le scenarios in which a Veteran may expres s a risk of harm or self or others, although 
we consider it an unlikely occurrence . First, the Veteran may answer in the affirmative to the risk management 
question s during the telephone consult process conducted by [CONTACT_40420]. Simo n or [CONTACT_268983] . In that case, Drs. 
Simo n or Rubin will ascertain the level of risk (i.e., passive th ought s of suicide, or a detailed plan ) and 
recommend the appropriate step s to the R A and the Veteran. In the seco nd scenario, the Veteran may 
spontaneously tell the RA of their thoughts. In either case, the RAs will have the following procedures in place 
to follow: 
1.The RA will contact [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Simon or [CONTACT_268983] immediately to inform us and get support for next steps
(if we are no t already in contact).
2.The RA will not leave the Vete ran alone.
3.Whether or not senior research staff are available, The RA will walk the Veteran over to the
Primary Care Mental Health (PCMHI) staff and hand off the Veteran .
4.If PCMHI are  not available the research assistant will alert the primary care team and hand off the
patient to one of the PCC staff who can bring the patient to urgent care.
5.At no time will the RA be solely responsible for the care of a Veteran at risk for suicide or homicide.
Potential benefits of research to subjects and others  
This application proposes to develop a Relational Agent Intervention to improve brief intervention for 
alcohol problems in primary care, and compare its effectiveness with treatment as usual. The potential benefits 
of this research to Veterans include more frequent and higher quality intervention for this high priority area, 
resulting in improved health of Veterans. We also anticipate that this intervention, if proven effective and, 
ultimately , integrated successfully into the primary care clinic, will allow clinicians more time with their Veteran 
patients, with a lower burden of training specific to unhealthy alcohol use, while still being involved in their 
17
patients' needs in this area. Finally , this line of research can lead to the demonstration o f the utility of an 
eHealth tool that Veterans with le ss comfort with technology c an use, leading the way toward additional 
behavioral interventions that do not add to the clinic's workload. We be lieve that these benefits d o outweigh the 
minimal risk of harm to research subjects, thu s justifying the research. 
Importance of knowledge to be gained  
This project is unique in that it brings together three high priority areas for VA; improving mental and 
behavioral health interventions, specifically, brief alcohol interventions in primary care; transforming care 
through the use of healthcare informatics, specifically, the Relational Agent; and reducing health care 
disparities, through the use of an eHealth to ol that has few barriers to use by [CONTACT_814304]. If ultimately proven effective, t he use of this eHealth tool for multiple behavioral 
issues can be integrated into the interface between primary care and behavioral  health, and can fit well into the 
model of Patient Aligned Care Teams.  
The knowledge to be gained from this study will be significant in addressing three high priority areas at 
once, and point to the pathway for using patient -facing technology to meet the  21st century requirements for all 
of our Veterans to be more involved in their own care. It will provide information on integrating eHealth tools 
into primary care as well as the effectiveness of this tool, at least for unhealthy alcohol use. The potentia l 
knowledge to be gained from this project outweighs the minimal risks to participants.  
18