REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964518] Crossover 
Study to Compare the P harmacokinetics of Budesonide Delivered 
by [CONTACT_6214]027 to  Pulmicort Respules® in Children with Asthma Aged 4 
to 8 Years (BLANC)  
Study
 center s and number of children  planned  
It is planned to randomize a sufficient number of children with asthma to obtain evaluable 
pharmacokinetic (PK) samples from [ADDRESS_964519] 4 children aged 4 to 5 years. Children who do not complete both treatment s (Treatment A and 
Treatment  B) may be replaced.  Approximately 3 study centers in Bulgaria and the United 
States ( US) are anticipated to be included. 
Phase of development  
Phase I Pediatric  
Study design  
This will be a randomized, multicenter , open- label, single -dose, 2- way crossover study. The 
purpose of this study is to compar e the systemic exposure of budesonide delivered by [CONTACT_709411] (budesonide/albuterol sulfate [BDA] metered- dose inhaler [MDI]) to  
Pulmicort Respules
®. 
To be eligible for the treatment period of the study, children  with asthma will be required to 
meet all of the inclusion and none of the exclusion criteria . 
At Visit 2, the children  will be  randomly assigned to a treatment sequence: 
A/B: BDA MDI at Visit 2  and Pulmicort Respules at Visit 3  
OR 
B/A:  Pulmicort Respules at Visit [ADDRESS_964520] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   4 of 63 The study will comprise: 
•Screening  (Visit 1): within 14 days prior to randomization.
•Tw
o treatment days:
•Vis
it 2/Randomization visit: children will be dosed with a single dose of BDA MDI
or Pulmicort Respules (A/B or B/A) and blood will be drawn for PK sampling for up
to 12 hours after dosing in alignment with the sampling schedule.
• Visit 3 will occur not less than 2 and no greater than 14 days after dosing on Visit 2
(ie, washout of 2 to 14 days) during which children will be dosed with a single dose
of BDA MDI or Pulmicort Respules (A/B or B/A) and blood will be drawn for PK
sampling for up to 12 hours after dosing in alignment with the sampling schedule.
•A follow-up telephone call  (TC) will occur [ADDRESS_964521] dose (Visit 3) for
safety follow-up (or early withdrawal, if applicable).
Sa
fety will be monitored by [CONTACT_609851] (AEs)/serious AEs (SAEs) 
and physical examination findings. Vital signs  (heart rate and blood pressure) will be assessed 
at the beginning (pre -dose) and the end (post- last PK sample) of each clinic visit to ensure the 
well-being of the children. 
Objectives  
Primary objective  Primary e ndpoint s 
To determine and compare the systemic 
exposure of budesonide after single-dose 
administrations of BDA MDI and 
Pulmicort Respules.  AUC0 -t and Cmax  
Secondary objective:  Secondary e ndpoint s: 
To determine and compare other PK 
parameters for budesonide delivered by 
[CONTACT_709412], tlast, t½ λz, λz, Clast , and AUC0 -inf (if 
feasible)  
Safety objective:  Safety e ndpoints:  
To assess the safety and tolerability of 
BDA MDI and Pulmicort Respules AEs/SAEs  
AE: adverse event; AUC 0-inf: area under the plasma concentration -time curve from time zero to infinity; AUC0 -t: area under 
the plasma concentration -time curve from time zero to time of last quantifiable concentration; BDA MDI: 
budesonide/albuterol sulfate metered -dose inhaler; Clast: d rug concentration at last observed timepoint; Cmax: maximum 
observed plasma concentration;  PK: pharmacokinetic; SAE: serious adverse event . tlast: time of last quantifiable plasma 
concentration; tmax: time to reach maximum observed plasma concentration; t½λz : half -life associated with terminal slope 
(λz) of a semi -logarithmic concentration -time curve. 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964522] (Treatment A) or reference 
product (Treatment B)  at Visits 2 and 3, which will be approximately 1 week apart. Visit 3 
will occur not less than 2 and no greater than 14 days after dosing on Visit 2  (ie, washout of 2 
to 14 days ). The overall study duration for the children will take approximately [ADDRESS_964523] s 
Treatment A (test product) a Treatment B (reference product) b 
Formulation: BDA MDI  Pulmicort Respules  
Supplier:  
Strength: 80/90 µ g (budesonide/albuterol) 1 mg  budesonide  
Dose:  2 inhalations 1 ampoule 
Route of 
administration: Oral inhalation  Oral inhalation  
Regimen:  Single dose – 2 inhalations  Single nebulization  dose 
Special handling requirements:  Prime per instructions.  
Contamination avoidance procedures. Nebulization until sputtering with nebulization cup as empty as possible 
Contamination avoidance procedures. 
BDA MDI: budesonide/albuterol sulfate metered- dose inhaler  
Note: The IMPs (test product and the reference product) will be manufactured by 
[CONTACT_709413] s creening (Visit 1)  and will 
be taken home for training as well . 
A saline ampoule for the reference product will be used for training purposes only during s creening (Visit 1). 
Pharmacokinetic assessments 
A total of 10 samples (~4 mL each) will be taken  for determination of budesonide in plasma 
per treatment visit at pre-dose and at 10, 20, 40, 60, 120, 240, 360, 480 and 720 min utes after 
dosing. 
Statistical methods  
Presentation and analysis of p harmacokinetic data: 
The PK analysis set will consist of all randomized children  for whom at least [ADDRESS_964524] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   6 of 63 A listing of PK blood sample collection times, and all reportable budesonide concentrations 
will be provided for all children. Budesonide concentrations will be summarized by [CONTACT_53846].  
Plasma samples will be analyzed using non- compartmental analysis (NCA) to determine the 
pharmacokinetics (AUC0 -t, Clast, Cmax, tmax, tlast, λ z, t½λz , and AUC0 -inf [ if feasible )]) of 
budesonide in plasma. 
This study is descriptive. There are no predefined statistical hypotheses and/or decision rules. 
The relative exposure of budesonide between BDA MDI versus Pulmicort Respules will be 
based on estimates of the AUC0-t and Cmax. 
The AUC0 -t and Cmax for budesonide will be compared between treatments using a 
multiplicative (ie, log -transformation) analysis of variance (ANOVA) model with treatment, 
sequence, period, and subject  within sequence as fixed factors. Geometric m ean treatment  
ratios and 90% confidence limits will be calculated from the model. Half -life and tmax  will be 
compared  by [CONTACT_64161].  
Presentation and analysis of safety and e ligibility data: 
The safety analysis set will include all children who received any amount of either IMP (BDA 
MDI or Pulmicort Respules , respectively) . Safety data will be presented in data listings. 
Continuous safety variables will be summarized using descriptive statistics (n, mean, standard 
deviation, minimum, median, maximum) by [CONTACT_3148]. Categorical variables will be summarized in frequency tables (frequency and proportion) by [CONTACT_3148]. The analysis of the 
safety variables will be based on the safety analysis set.  
Determination of s ample s ize 
For this study, no prospective calculations of statistical power have been made. Complete data 
from [ADDRESS_964525] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964526] OF ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITION OF TERMS  ............................................11  
1 INTRODUCTION  ................................................................................................13  
1.1 Background ...........................................................................................................13  
1.2 Rationale for study design, doses and control groups ...........................................13  
1.3 Benefit/risk and ethical assessment  .......................................................................[ADDRESS_964527] enrollment and randomization .................................................................20  
3.4 Procedures for handling incorrectly enrolled or randomized subjects ..................20  
3.5 Methods for assigning treatment groups ...............................................................21  
3.6 Methods to minimize bias: randomization and blinding .......................................[ADDRESS_964528] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964529] .........................................................................30  
4.11.2  Permitted asthma therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]  ...................................................................................30  
4.11.3  Prohibited medications ..........................................................................................30  
4.11.4  Food and beverage restrictions .............................................................................31  
5 STUDY PLAN AND TIMING OF PROCEDURES  ............................................31  
5.1 Screening period ...................................................................................................34  
5.1.1  Visit 1  ....................................................................................................................34  
5.2 Randomization/tr eatment period  ...........................................................................[ADDRESS_964530] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964531] data protection  ..........................................................................................53  
10.3  Ethics and regulatory review .................................................................................53  
10.4  Informed consent/assent ........................................................................................54  
10.5  Changes to the clinical study protocol and informed consent/assent ....................[ADDRESS_964532] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964533] OF TABLES  
Table 1:  Investigational medicinal product strength and dosage form ......................24  
Table 2:  Schedule of assessments  ..............................................................................32  
Table 3:  Treatment sequence  .....................................................................................35  
Table 4:  Laboratory variables  ....................................................................................37  
Table 5:  Total blood volume ......................................................................................[ADDRESS_964534] OF FIGURES  
Figure 1: Study Flow Chart......................................................................................................16  
Figure 2: How to Hold the Metered -dose Inhaler  ....................................................................25  
Figure 3: How to Use the Metered -dose Inhaler  ......................................................................[ADDRESS_964535] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964536] 
quantifiable concentratio n 
BDA  Budesonide/albuterol sulfate  
BDA MDI (PT027)  Budesonide/albuterol sulfate metered -dose inhaler  
BMI  Body mass index  
Clast  Drug concentration at last observed (quantifiable) concentration 
Cmax  Maximum observed plasma concentration  
CRF  Case report form  
CRO  Clinical research organization  
CSP Clinical study protocol  
CYP  Cytochrome P450  
DDI Drug -drug interaction  
EC Ethics Committee, synonymous to Institutional Review Board (IRB) and 
Independent Ethics Committee (IEC)  
eCRF  Electronic case report form  
EDC  Electronic data capture  
EU European Union  
FEV1  Forced expi[INVESTIGATOR_3741] 1  second  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
GINA Global  Initiative  for Asthma  
GMP  Good Manufacturing Practice  
HFA  Hydrofluoroalkane  
IB Investigator’s brochure  
ICF Informed consent form  
ICH International Council  for Harmonisation  
ICS Inhaled corticosteroid  
IMP Investigational  medicinal  product  
λz Terminal elimination rate constant 
LABA  Long-acting β2 -agonist  
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964537]  
MDI  Metered-dose inhaler  
MedDRA  Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities  
NCA  Non-compartmental analysis  
PK Pharmacokinetic(s)  
PRN  As-needed  
QID Four  times a day  
SABA  Short-acting β2 -agonist  
SAE  Serious adverse event  
SAMA  Short-acting muscarinic antagonist  
SAP Statistical analysis plan  
SOC  System Organ Class 
SULT1A3  Sulfotransferase 1A3  
TEAE  Treatment -emergent adverse event  
t½λz Half-life associated with terminal slope (λz) of a semi -logarithmic  
concentration -time curve  
tlast Time of last quantifiable plasma concentration  
tmax  Time to reach maximum observed plasma concentration  
TC Telephone call  
US [LOCATION_002]  
 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   13 of 63  1 INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Background  
Bond Avillion 2 Development LP (Sponsor) is developi[INVESTIGATOR_280797]/albuterol sulfate 
(PT027, a fixed -dose combination product; hereafter referred to as budesonide and albuterol 
sulfate metered -dose inhaler [BDA MDI]) pressurized inhalation suspension product in adults 
and children ( ≥4 years of age) with asthma. Please refer to the current  Investigator ’s Brochure 
(IB) for additional information ( 1). 
Albuterol is a short/rapid -acting β2-agonist (SABA), inducing airway smooth muscle 
relaxation and reducing or preventing bronchoconstriction. Albuterol is approved in many 
countries in multiple formulations for treatment or prevention of bronchoconstriction, and is also known under the generic name [CONTACT_652349] . In clinical practice, albuterol is used as 
reliever therapy on an as -needed ( PRN ) basis ( 2). 
Budesonide is a well-established anti- inflammatory corticosteroid that exhibits potent 
glucocorticoid and weak mineralocorticoid activity and is approved worldwide in inhaled formulations for the treatment of asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease both as a mono-product and in combination with a long- acting β2-agonist ( LABA), (ie , formoterol).  
Research  studies have demonstrated that inhaled corticosteroid (ICS) agents potentiate the 
effects of SABAs in reducing airway smooth muscle tone ( 3) and can reverse adrenergic 
receptor tolerance and desensitization ( 4). Clinically, similar functional potentiation with 
combined ICSs and albuterol has been observed in patients with asthma for functional 
measures of airway smooth muscle and airway blood flow ( 5). 
Combining albuterol with budesonide in the BDA MDI combination product should not only 
provide rapid bronchodilation, but also treat worsening airway inflammation by [CONTACT_280850]. Current treatment guidelines ( 2) recommend addition of low-
dose ICS to SABA used as reliever medication as early as in Global Initiative  for Asthma  
(GINA ) step 1 asthma (previously treated with SABA PRN  alone), broadening the range of 
asthma severity grades that would be treated by [CONTACT_280851] β2-agonist. Anti- inflammatory 
and bronchodilation components used PRN  in a fixed -dose combination are expected to result 
in overall better asthma control and decreased risk of experiencing asthma symptoms than 
bronchodilation alone. 
1.[ADDRESS_964538] 
crossover study to compare the pharmacokinetics (PK)  of budesonide delivered by [CONTACT_709414]® in children with asthma aged [ADDRESS_964539] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   14 of 63  4 years and older  in 2 ongoing Phase III pi[INVESTIGATOR_36491]: the MANDALA study, which 
investigates time to first severe exacerbation,  and the DENALI  study, which investigates 
change from baseline in forced expi[INVESTIGATOR_3741] 1 second ( FEV1 ) AUC0 -6 hours over 12 
weeks and change from baseline in trough FEV1 at 12 weeks.  
For BDA MDI, a single dose of 160/180 µg (given as 2 inhalations of 80/90 µg 
[budenoside/albuterol respectively]) will be administered.  The selection of dose is limited by 
[CONTACT_709415] a single dose and is chosen to be as high as possible for 
the budesonide component to ensure adequate PK  measurements. A dose of 160/180 µg is 
considered relevant for budesonide PK measurements and safe for albuterol  based on dosing 
recomm endations for Proventil in children ( 6). 
For Pulmicort Respules, a single dose of the highest recommended dose of 1 mg will be studied ( 7). This dose is known to be safe in this study’s age group and is adequate to measure 
PK parameters of budesonide after a single dose. 
Based on the known metabolic routes of budesonide and albuterol, the potential for a 
drug-drug interaction (DDI) between these 2 drugs is low. Budesonide is known to be a 
substrate of cytochrome P450 ( CYP ) 3A, and the effects of inhibitors of CYP3A on 
budesonide PK are well documented. Information available in the published literature 
indicates that the primary enzyme responsible for the metabolism of albuterol in humans is sulfotransferase 1A3 (SULT1A3); labelling for albuterol does not suggest any potential for 
metabolic DDI. The lack of a DDI between budesonide and albuterol was confirmed in Study 
D6930C00003, which was designed to demonstrate comparable systemic exposure between BDA MDI and the mono-components in healthy volunteers. This study also confirmed comparability of the formulation of the combination product BDA MDI versus the mono-products.
 
In the [LOCATION_002] (US)  development program for BDA MDI, Pulmicort Respules will be 
used as a reference product for the BDA MDI marketing application  for children ages [ADDRESS_964540]  and 
reference products  which can be obtained  by [CONTACT_709416] o f systemic 
budesonide exposure of both products . Avillion is proposing to enroll children 4 to 8 years of 
age with asthma in this study to facilitate the collection of  sufficient PK data to adequately 
bridge BDA MDI to Pulmicort Respules. 
1.3 Benefit/risk and ethical assessment  
To mitigate any potential risks, all children  will be closely monitored to ensure child  safety . 
At study visits, children  will only be discharged from the study center based on the 
Investigator ’s clinical judgment. 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   15 of 63  The study will be conducted in accordance with International Council for Harmonisation 
(ICH) guidelines. Permission from the research ethics committee (EC) will be sought a nd the 
study will start only after authorization . In the study, single- dose treatment and single-dose 
comparison with Pulmicort Respules is necessary to compare the systemic exposure in children between the ages of 4 to 8 years.  When considering and assessing all non- clinical and 
clinical data available for the investigational medicinal products ( IMPs ), the Sponsor 
considers the risk and benefit profiles of the BLANC  study to be acceptable. 
1.[ADDRESS_964541] crossover study. The 
Study Flow Chart is presented in Figure 1. The purpose of this study is to compare the systemic exposure of budesonide delivered by [CONTACT_709417] (BDA MDI) to  
Pulmicort Respules . 
To be eligible for the treatment period of th e study, children  with asthma will be required to 
meet all of the inclusion criteria  and none of the exclusion criteria . 
At Visit 2, the children  will be randomly assigned to a treatment sequence:  
A/B: BDA MDI at Visit 2 and Pulmicort Respules at Visit 3
 
OR 
B/A:  Pulmicort Respules at Visit 2 and BDA MDI at Visit 3  
 
The study will comprise: 
• Screening  (Visit 1): within 14 days prior to randomization. 
• Two treatment days:  
• Visit 2/Randomization visit: children will be dosed with a single dose of BDA MDI 
or Pulmicort Respules (A/B or B/A) and blood will be drawn for PK sampling for up to 12 hours after dosing in alignment with the sampling schedule. 
• Visit 3 will occur not les s than 2 and no greater than 14 days after dosing on Visit 2  
(ie, washout of 2 to 14 days) during which children will be dosed with a single dose of BDA MDI or Pulmicort Respules (A/B or B/A) and blood will be drawn for PK sampling for up to 12 hours after dosing in alignment with the sampling schedule.  
• A follow-up telephone call  (TC) will occur [ADDRESS_964542] dose (Visit 3) for 
safety follow-up (or early withdrawal, if applicable). 
 
The overall study duration for the children will take approximately 3 to 4 weeks.  
Safety will be monitored by [CONTACT_609851] (AEs)/serious AEs (SAEs) 
and physical examination findings. Vital signs (heart rate and blood pressure) will be assessed at the beginning and the end of each clinic visit to ensure the well -being of the children. 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   16 of 63  Figure 1: Study Flow Chart  
 
AE: adverse event; BDA  MDI: budesonide/albuterol  sulfate metered -dose inhaler ; PK: pharmacokinetic; SAE: 
serious adverse event;  TC: telephone call
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   17 of 63  2 STUDY OBJECTIVES  
2.1 Primary objective  
Primary objective:  Primary e ndpoint s: 
To determine and compare the systemic 
exposure of budesonide after single-dose 
administrations of BDA MDI and 
Pulmicort Respules.  AUC0 -t and Cma x 
 
2.2 Secondary objectives  
Secondary objective:  Secondary e ndpoint s: 
To determine and compare other PK parameters for budesonide delivered by [CONTACT_709418], tlast, t½λz , λz, Clast , and AUC0 -inf (if 
feasible)  
2.3 Safety objective  
Safety objective:  Safety e ndpoints:  
To assess the safety and tolerability of BDA MDI and Pulmicort Respules  AEs/SAEs  
AE: adverse event; AUC0 -inf: area under the plasma concentration -time curve from time zero to infinity; 
AUC0 -t: area under the plasma con centration -time curve from time zero to time of last quantifiable 
concentration; BDA MDI: budesonide/albuterol sulfate metered -dose inhaler; Clast: drug concentration at last 
observed timepoint; Cmax: maximum observed plasma concentration; PK: pharmacokine tic; SAE: serious 
adverse event. tlast: time of last quantifiable plasma concentration; tmax: time to reach maximum observed 
plasma concentration; t½λz: half -life associated with terminal slope (λz) of a semi -logarithmic 
concentration -time curve.  
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964543] meet all of the inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion criteria for this 
study. There can be no exceptions to this rule. 
3.1 Inclusion criteria  
For inclusion in the study, children  should fulfill the following criteria:  
1. Provision of informed consent prior to any study specific procedures. Children should 
provide assent to join the study, as applicable. The child’s parent (s) or legally authorized 
representative ( LAR ) must sign the informed consent form (ICF). The LAR must be aged 
≥18 years old. 
2. Male or f emale aged between 4 and 8 years inclusive (not having reached his/her 9th  
birthday by [CONTACT_604777] s creening ( [Visit 1 ]). 
3. Weigh at least  [ADDRESS_964544] 3 months 
5. Stable on treatment with albuterol PRN  and/or ICS  and/or leukotriene receptor antagonists 
(LTRAs ) for 2 weeks prior to screening; children taking budesonide in any form at Visit 1 
will be switched  to another corticosteroid  with a washout of budesonide of 3 to 7 days. 
6. Demonstrate ability to correctly use the nebulizer and metered -dose inhaler ( MDI ) device 
without a spacer  (according to the instructions in Section 4.2). 
7. Willingness  and ability of the child  and parent(s)/LAR to comply with the demands of the 
study as described in the informed consent/assent . 
3.2 Excl usion criteria  
Children should not enter the study if any of the following exclusion criteria are fulfilled: 
1. Inability to change from any budesonide therapy to another suitable corticosteroid . 
2. History of life -threatening asthma defined as any asthma epi[INVESTIGATOR_709392], intubation or admission to an intensive care unit. 
3. Unstable asthma as judged by [CONTACT_737] ( eg, any change in asthma therapy within 
2 weeks prior to screening or use of more than 2 occasions of rescue medication 
(albuterol) per day within 1 week prior to s creening  (potential for rescreen ). 
4. Children receiving regular maintenance treatment with prohibited anti -inflammatory or 
long-acting bronchodilator asthma medication  (inhaled, nebulized, oral, or systemic)  
within  1 month prior to Visit 1 . Note : During the treatment period, children are not 
allowed to use any asthma treatments/medications (of any class) other than the IMPs and 
their background treatment (ie, SABA PRN alone and/or ICS and/or LTRAs) that was 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   19 of 63  started before screening. No child  can be on other asthma maintenance therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. See 
Section  4.11.2 for details.  
5. More than 1 short course of oral/rectal/systemic corticosteroids within 6 months preceding 
screening ( Visit 1 ), or any oral/rectal/systemic corticosteroids within  30 days prior to 
Visit 1. 
6. Evidence of active concomitant pulmonary disease other than asthma (children with stable 
allergic rhinitis will be permitted, as long as, there are no changes in the treatment a nd the 
medications do not interfere with the analytical assay methods).  
7. Upper respi[INVESTIGATOR_709393] 14 days prior to Visit 1 . 
8. Children with a known or suspected hypersensitivity to albuterol/salbutamol, budesonide 
or any of the excipi[INVESTIGATOR_709394] . 
9. Having received any marketed (eg, omalizumab, mepolizumab, reslizumab, benralizumab, 
dupi[INVESTIGATOR_12458]) or investigational biologic within 3 months or 5 half- lives before Visit 1, 
whichever is longer. 
10. Systemic treatment with potent CY P3A4 inhibitors (eg, ketoconazole, itraconazole, and 
ritonavir).  
11. Receipt of any other prohibited medication as detailed in Section 4.11.3. 
12. Treatment  with an y investigational product within  the last 30 days (or 5 half-lives, 
whichever is longer) of Visit 1. 
13. Historical or current evidence of a clinically significant disease or congenital abnormality including, but not limited to the areas of  cardiovascular, hepatic, renal, hematological, 
neuropsychological, endocrine, or gastrointestinal. Significant is define d as any disease or 
condition that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_689], would put the safety of the child  at risk 
through study participation, or that could affect the PK  or safety analysis if the 
disease/condition exacerbated during the study. 
14. Cancer not in complete remission for at least 5 years before Visit 1 . 
15. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_652317] 1 year of Visit 1 . 
16. History of psychiatric disease, intellectual deficiency, or other conditions if their magnitude limits the ch ild’s capacity to assent to the study. 
17. Having a scheduled/planned hospi[INVESTIGATOR_16366]. 
18. Inability (and/or unwillingness) to abstain from protocol-defined prohibited medications 
during the study. 
19. Use of drugs with enzyme-inducing properties such as St. John’s Wort within [ADDRESS_964545] administration of the IMP.  
20. Use of any herbal products by [CONTACT_652341] 2 weeks of Visit 1 and/or the 
unwillingness to stop during the study duration. 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   20 of 63  21. Consumption of grapefruit or grapefruit juice, Seville oranges, quinine (e.g., tonic water) 
from 7 days prior to screening (Visit 1)  until after the follow-up TC. 
22. Current participation in any interventional study. 
23. Previous enrollment in the present study or randomizat ion in any other BDA MDI clinical 
study. 
24. Immediate family member of the Sponsor or study center staff. 
For p rocedures for withdrawal of incorrectly enro lled children , see Section 3.4. 
3.[ADDRESS_964546] enrollment and randomization  
Approximately 3 study centers in Bulgaria and the US  are anticipated to be included . 
Approximately 28 children  (4 to 8 years of age) will need to be screened, assuming an 
estimated screen failure rate of 50% prior to randomi zation  in order for [ADDRESS_964547] 4 children should be randomized in the age range of 4 -5 years. 
Children who do not complete both treatment s (Treatment A and Treatment B) may be 
replaced.  
Investigator(s) should keep a record, ie, the subject screening log, of children  who entered 
pre-study screening. 
Randomization codes will be assigned separately for the treatment sequence and entered by [CONTACT_709419] ( eCRF ). If a subject 
withdraws from participation in the study, then his/her enroll ment/randomization code cannot 
be reused.  
3.[ADDRESS_964548] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   21 of 63  3.5 Methods for assigning  treatment groups  
A randomiz ation schedule will be generated by a designated statistical representative 
performing statistical support for the study. This schedule will assign children  to a treatment 
sequence ( A/B [BDA MDI at Visit 2 and Pulmicort Respules at Visit 3]  or B/A  [Pulmicort 
Respules at Visit 2 and BDA MDI at Visit 3] ). This will be  prepared before the first child  is 
screened. The designated statistical representative will follow their established standard 
operating procedures regarding generation, security, and distribution of the randomization 
schedule.  
Upon screening, each child  will receive a screening number starting with the first child  and 
continuing sequentially as required. This will be specific for each study center. Children who  
drop out of the clinical study before randomization will retain their screening number. Randomiz ation will occur at Visit [ADDRESS_964549] generated for the study . 
Randomization numbers will encode the child’s treatment assignment (A/B or B/A). 
Randomiz ed children  who withdraw or are withdrawn from clinical study participation for any 
reason, regardless of whether IMP was administered or not, will retain their randomization number and the child  will not be allowed to re-enter the study. 
The Investigator or study ce nter staff design ee will enter the randomization number into the
 
electronic data capture system ( EDC ). Once it has been determined that a child  meets all 
eligibility criteria, the child’s information will be entered into the EDC system.  
3.6 Methods to minimize  bias: randomization and blinding  
This is an open- label study  and not blinded. At Visit 2, the children  will be randomly assigned 
to a treatment  sequence (A/B or B/A) . 
The Investigator(s) will: 
1. Obtain signed informed assent from the child  and informed consent from the child’s 
parent(s) or LAR  before any study- specific procedures are performed.  
2. Assign potential subject  a screening  number.  
3. Determine subject eligibility ( see Sections  3.1 and 3.2).  
4. Re-check eli gibility and subsequently randomize the child  at Visit 2. 
 
Children will not have a direct access to data recorded or reported by [CONTACT_80507]. 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   22 of 63  3.7 Restrictions  
Study restrictions ar e detailed in Section 4.11. 
3.8 Criteria for study withdrawal  
At any time, children  may withdraw from the study (ie, study procedures/vi sits) at their own 
request  or their parent/ LAR’s  request for any reason, without prejudice. Children may also be 
withdrawn from the study upon request of the Investigator, or by [CONTACT_709420]. Some reasons for study withdrawal  include: 
An AE or other unacceptable toxicity considered to jeopardiz e the safety of a child  
participating in the study. 
Children who suffer 1 severe exacerbation or worsening of asthma that in the Investigator’s 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_652318]- term disease course or the study assessments will be discontinued if 
the Sponsor and the Investiga tor decide that it is in the best interest of the child  to withdraw 
from  the study. 
General or specific change(s) in the child’s condition that render(s) him/her ineligible for 
further participation according to the inclusion/exclusion criteria. 
• Non-compliance: i n the opi[INVESTIGATOR_689], the child  is non- compliant with the 
requirements of the Clinical Study Protocol (CSP)  (eg, post-enroll ment eligibility 
violation). 
• Lost to Follow-up: t he child  is lost to follow-up and no alternative cont act information is 
available (this implies that at least [ADDRESS_964550] the 
child ). 
• Intercurrent illness: a condition, injury, or disease unrelated to the primary diagnosis that 
becomes apparent during treatment and necessitates the child’s termination from the 
study, eg , a symptomatic lower respi[INVESTIGATOR_709395]’s ability to carry out the required procedures. 
If a child  is withdrawn from the study for any reason, the study center  must immediately 
notify the medical monitor. The date and the reason for study withdrawa l must be recorded on 
the eCRF. The child  will be asked to complete the safety follow-up (or early withdrawal) TC. 
The TC will occur [ADDRESS_964551] study dose, as indicated in the Schedule of 
Assessments ( Table 2 ). 
Children who complete both visits will have a follow -up TC  and children  who withdraw 
between Visit [ADDRESS_964552] a withdrawal TC . 
In the event that a child  withdraws prematurely from the study because of an AE or S AE, the 
AE/SAE will be followed up until it resolves (returns to normal or baseline values) or stabilizes, or until it is judged by [CONTACT_80196]. 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   23 of 63  Once a child  is withdrawn from the study, the child  may not re-enter the study. If a child  
withdraws from participation in the study, then his/her enrollment/randomization code cannot 
be reused. Withdrawn children  will be replaced  if there are not enough evaluable PK samples . 
3.8.[ADDRESS_964553] the reason for study withdrawal 
recorded as “ Screen failure” (the potential child  who does not meet 1 or more criteria required 
for participation in a study, this reason for study withdrawal is only valid for non-randomiz ed 
children ). 
Children who are screen failures may be rescreened  once if temporary  reasons for the original 
screen failure ( eg, respi[INVESTIGATOR_18073] , asthma exacerb ation s, epi[INVESTIGATOR_709396]) 
have resolved . These should be at the Investigator’s discretion and in discussion with the 
medical monitor.  
3.9 Discontinuation of the study  
The study may be stopped if, in the judgment of the Sponsor, children in the study are placed at undue risk because of clinically significant findings that: 
• meet individual stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_652320] 
• are assessed as causally related to IMP 
• are not considered to be consistent with continuation of the study. 
 
Regardless of the reason for termination, all data available for the child  at the time of 
discontinuation of follow-up must be recorded in the e CRF . All reasons for discontinuation of 
treatment must be documented. 
In terminating the study, the Sponsor will ensure that adequate consideration is given to the 
protection of the children’s  interests.  
 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964554] and reference products 
The BDA MDI is formulated as both micronized budesonide and micronized albuterol 
co-suspended with spray-dried porous particles in a hydrofluoroalkane ( HFA) propellant 
(Table 1 ). The co -suspension formulation ensures that children  receive a consistent delivery of 
the drug from each actuation of the MDI. 
Pulmicort Respules is a sterile suspension for inhalation via jet nebulizer and contains the 
active ingredient budesonide (micronized) and the inactive ingredients disodium edetate, 
sodium chloride, sodium citrate, citric acid, polysorbate 80, and water for injection. Pulmicort Respules should be administered from jet nebulizers at adequate flow ra tes via mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_6928]  
(instructions for Pulmicort Respules will be provided separately). 
Table 1:  Investigational medicinal  product strength and dosage form 
 Investigational Medicinal Products  
 Treatment A (test product) a Treatment B (reference product) b 
Formulation: BDA MDI  Pulmicort Respules  
Supplier:     
Strength: 80/90 µ g (budesonide/albuterol) 1 mg budesonide 
Dose:  2 inhalations 1 ampoule 
Route of 
administration: Oral inhalation  Oral inhalation  
Regimen:  Single dose – 2 inhalations Single nebulization dose 
Special handling 
requirements:  Prime per instructions.  
Contamination avoidance procedures. Nebulization until sputtering with 
nebulization cup as empty as possible. 
Contamination avoidance procedures.  
BDA MDI: budesonide/albuterol sulfate metered- dose inhaler  
Note: The IMPs ( test product  and the reference product ) will be manufactured by  
a The placebo MDI for the test product will be used for training purposes only during s creening (Visit 1) and 
will be taken home for training as well.  
A saline ampoule for the reference product will be used for training purposes only during s creening (Visit 1). 
 
4.2 Nebulization inhalation and metered -dose inhaler  device  
technique  
A jet nebulizer (with mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_709397]) will be connected to a compressor 
and will be used to deliver Pulmicort Respules to each child. The brand of jet nebulizer will be 
standard across all study sites. Further details will be provided in the Site Manual. 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964555] nebulization inhalation technique will be  defined as  follows: 
As determined by [CONTACT_737]: 
• No pauses during nebulization 
• No leakage around the mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_13959] 
• No breathing through the nose (a nose clip will be used if the child  will accept it)  
• Calm and even breathing (tidal breathing) 
 
Nebulizer d evice and  inhalation training will be  conducted at s creen ing (Visit 1). The  children  
will receive placebo MDI for additional training at home. 
4.2.2 Metered -dose  inhalation technique  
Using the MDI  
1. The MDI should be held upright with the mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_301673]  2. 
Note: The patient  can be supported by [CONTACT_709421] (examples: 
shaking the MDI, actuating the MDI, etc). 
Figure 2: How to  Hold the Metered -dose Inhaler  
 
2. Shake the MDI for [ADDRESS_964556] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   26 of 63  3. Breathe out fully through your mouth, expelling as much air from your lungs as possible. 
Tilt your head back slightly, placing the mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_709398], holding the MDI with the mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_280821], and closing your lips around it, as presented in Figure 3. To 
allow the medication to enter your lungs, keep your tongue flat on the bottom of your mouth. 
Figure 3: How to U se the Metered -dose Inhaler  
 
 
4. While breathing in deeply and slowly through your mouth, fully depress the top of the 
actuation counter with your index finger. Immediately after the spray is delivered, release 
your finger from the canister. When you have breathed in fully, remove the MDI from your mouth and close your mouth. 
NOTE: an audible “click” may be heard which is advancement of the actuation counter and 
considered normal.  
5. Hold your breath as long as possible, up to 10 seconds, and then breathe normally. 
6. Repeat steps #2 to #[ADDRESS_964557] cap back onto the device.  
 
Training with the placebo MDI (Children ) 
Placebo MDI and inhalation training will be conducted at screening (Visit 1). 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964558] inhalation technique, the child  will receive placebo MDI for 
training at home. Children should use the placeb o MDI with an adult’s help, as instructed by 
[CONTACT_709422] . Children should practice with the placebo MDI as appropriate, with [ADDRESS_964559] (BDA MDI) will be supplied by  [CONTACT_709423] 
(Pulmicort Respules) will be supplied by  [CONTACT_709424] a 
study- specific label.  
Dispensing and retention of reserve samples of the test and reference produc ts will be 
performed in accordance with the Compliance Policy for the Quantity of Bioavailability and  
Bioequivalence Samples  Retained Under 21 CFR 320.38(c)  Guidance for Industry. 
4.4 Dose and treatment regimens  
At screening (Visit 1), assenting children  and consenting parents (or LAR) will be  assessed to 
ensure that the child  meets  eligibility criteria. At this visit, nebulizer device and  inhalation 
training will be  conducted. 
At Visit 2, eligible children  will be randomized to either the A/B or B/A treatment sequence. 
Handling instructions for the BDA MDI and Pulmicort Respules will be available for each study center throughout the study ( Sections 4.2 and 4.10).  
4.5 Labelling  
Labels will be prepared in accordance with Good Manufacturing Pr actice (GMP) and local 
regulatory guidelines. 
The labels will fulfill GMP Annex [ADDRESS_964560] ( BDA MDI ) labelling:  
Each kit will contain an MDI device, wrapped in a foil bag held within a carton. 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964561] under appropriate storage 
conditions. 
Due to regional differences in regulatory requirements and standards, each countries’ 
permitted storage conditions are detailed in the local language of the carton label.  
Test Product (BDA MDI 80/90 μg) should be stored as below:  
For US: Store between 20 ° to 25°C, excursions permitted up to 30°C (86°F) 
For European Union ( EU): Store between 15° to 25°C 
Reference Product  (Pulmicort Respules) should be stored as below: 
For US: Store at controlled room temperature 20° to 25°C (68° to 77°F [see USP]) 
For EU : Do not store above 30°C 
Temperature readings of the storage area (minimum/maximum) should be recorded on every working day at a minimum. 
4.[ADDRESS_964562] and reference products  will b e returned to the approved study returns vendor for 
destruction after accountability and reconciliation is complete.  
4.10 Metered -dose inhaler handling  
Detailed handling instructions will be provided to the study center in the form of a “Site 
Manual” document, which will cover all aspects of the study with regards to the test product. 
The importance of the device priming requirements should be emphasized. Priming of the test 
product MDI must occur.  
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964563]  
During the study, subjects are not allowed to use any asthma medication other than the IMPs 
and their background treatment (ie, SABA PRN alone and/or ICS and/or LTRA) that was 
started before screening (with the exception of budesonide) and continued as part of their asthma treatment ( see Section 3.1). Non- asthma medications which are necessary for the 
subject’s wellbei ng and which do not affect the participation or results of the study are 
allowed at the investigator’s discretion. All such medication should be recorded in the appropriate sections of the subject’s eCRF.  
4.11.2  Permitted asthma therapi[INVESTIGATOR_709399]- acting beta agonists taken PRN  and/or low- to-medium dose ICS and/or LTRAs  are the 
only permitted therapi[INVESTIGATOR_709400]-study as specified in Section 3.2. No child  can be on any other asthma maintenance therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014].  
During the study, children should maintain stable dosing of their maintenance and/or PRN  
therapy as presented at screening. Dose changes to maintenance therapy are discouraged unless clinically indicated. Investigators should notify the study medical monitors of any change to maintenance therapy for study subjects; considerations should be made to subject 
treatment  compliance and other factors in advance of making changes to maintenance therapy. 
4.11.[ADDRESS_964564] 1 month prior to the study include the following, with specified timeframes where needed : 
• Oral, parenteral, or rectal corticosteroids (except if required to treat severe asthma 
exacerbation)  during and at least 30 days prior to Visit 1 . 
• Any other asthma medication except Sponsor-provided test product or Pulmicort Respules during Visits 2 and/or 3 and the permitted SABA PRN alone and/or ICS 
and/or LTRA  treatment that  was started before screening and continued as part of 
maintenance treatment (see Section 3.1), regular SABA use (eg, four times a day 
[QID]) is not permitted . 
• Inhaled disodium cromoglycate or inhaled nedocromil sodium 
• 5-lipoxygenase inhibitors (ie, zileuton) 
• Inhaled short-acting anticholinergics (or short-acting muscarinic antagonists [SAMA], 
ie, ipratropi[INVESTIGATOR_1890]) 
• Inhaled long-acting muscarinic antagonists (LAMA)  
• Inhaled LABA  
• Phosphodiesterase-4 inhibitors (ie, roflumilast)  
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   31 of 63  • Xanthine and theophylline 
• Omalizumab, benralizumab, mepolizumab, reslizumab, dupi[INVESTIGATOR_12458], or any other 
monoclonal or polyclonal therapy for any reason during the study or within 3 months or 5 half- lives before Visit 1 , whichever is longer; (locally administered biologics, eg, 
intra-ocular, are allowed)  
• Beta-2-adrenergic blockers, including eye-drops ; (For the purpose of this study, 
metoprolol is considered to have beta-2- adrenergic receptor blocking ability.) 
• Drugs with enzyme-inducing properties such as St. John’s Wort within [ADDRESS_964565] administration of the IMP.  
• Systemic treatment with potent CY P3A4 inhibitors (eg, ketoconazole, itraconazole, 
and ritonavir). 
4.11.4  Food and beverage restrictions 
Children should abstain from consumption of grapefruit or grapefruit juice, Seville oranges, 
quinine (eg, tonic water) from [ADDRESS_964566] at home prior to the clinic visits.  
5 STUDY PLAN AND TIMING OF PROCEDURES  
Table 2  presents study assessments and procedures. 
General Considerations  
To ensure standardization, it is recommended that study centers review and remind /discuss the 
following with the child  on at least the day before a scheduled visit , as applicable: 
• Site personnel will remind/ instruct children  not to take any prohibited asthma 
medications during the study. Non-asthma medications which are necessary for the 
child’s well -being and which do not affect the participation in or results of the study, 
are allowed. All such medication should be recorded in the child’s eCRF.  
• Children must not ingest/consume xanthine and/or xanthine analogue (caffeine) -containing foods and beverages for at least 6 hours prior to each study visit 
and for the duration of each study visit. Examples of such products include coffee, tea, chocolate, and cola. Decaffeinated beverages are acceptable.  
• To minimize diurnal variance, study centers should make every effort to assess children  at the same time throughout the study. 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   32 of 63  Table 2: Schedule of assessments   
Screening  
Period Open -label Treatment 
Period Follow -up or early 
withdrawal  
Visit  1 2 3 4 - TC      
Day Starting from 
Day -14 0 2 to 14 days  
after V2  2 to 5 days after V3  
Informed consent/assent  X    
Eligibility criteria  X    
Re-check  eligibility  criteria   
X   
Randomization   X   
Routine clinical procedures      
Medical/surgical history  X    
Demography  X    
Physical examination  X    
Height , weight , and BMI  X    
Routine safety measurements      
Laboratory assessments  (including local laboratory clinical chemistry, 
hematology, and urinalysis) a X    
AEs and concomitant medications  X X X X 
Seated vital signs (blood pressure  and heart rate)  b X X X  
Placebo MDI  training  c X    
Nebulization training  X    
Randomized IMP   
X X  
Blood sampling for PK - Timepoints   
A total of [ADDRESS_964567] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   33 of 63  AE: adverse event ; BMI: body mass index; IMP: investigational medicinal product; MDI: metered -dose inhaler; min: minute; PK: pharmacokinetic; 
TC: telephone call; V : Visit. 
a Laboratory assessments (clinical chemistry, hematology and urinalysis) will be performed according to Section 6.3.1 . 
b Vital signs will be assessed at the beginning ( pre-dose)  and the end (post -last PK sample) of each study visit.  
c Training for placebo MDI will occur at Visit [ADDRESS_964568] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   34 of 63  5.1 Screening period  
Screening ( Visit 1 ) will take place within 14 days prior to Randomization. During screening, 
assenting children  and consenting parent(s) (or LAR ) are assessed to ensure that the child  
meets  eligibility criteria. Procedures will be performed according to study assessments and 
procedures presented in Table [ADDRESS_964569] demographic data and other characteristics will be recorded and will include age, 
gender, race, and ethnicity according to local regulations. 
If a child  has COVID -19 at Visit 1, the child  should not attend the visit. The study center 
should take adequate measures ( See Appendix D COVID-[ADDRESS_964570] Safety ). 
A standard medical, disease , and surgical history will be obtained with review of the inclusion 
and exclusion criteria with the child . Other study procedures carried out during this period w ill 
include physical examination ( with height, weight, and body mass index [ BMI ]), concomitant 
medications review, seated vital signs  (blood pressure and heart rate), training with placebo 
MDI and nebulization, AEs assessment/review, blood samples for hematology and clinical 
chemistry, and urine samples for urinalysis. See Section s 4.2, 6.3 and 6.4 for details on 
assessments.  
5.2 Randomization/treatment period  
Procedures will be performed according to study visit assessments presented in  Table 2 . The 
Open -label Treatment Period  consists of 2 visits (Visit 2 and  Visit 3). Children meeting all of 
the inclusion criteria and none of the exclusion criteria will be randomized at Visit 2. 
5.2.1 Visit 2 and 3 
At Visit 2, eligibility criteria will be re -checked. E ligible children  will then  be randomiz ed 
(1:1) to treatment sequence A /B or treatment sequence B /A at Visit 2 . Pharmacokinetic 
samples will be taken up to 12 hours after dosing in alignment with the sampling schedule. 
Other study procedures carried out during this period will include seated vital sign s (blood 
pressure and heart rate), AEs assessment/review, and concomitant medications review.  
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   35 of 63  Table 3: Treatment sequence  
Treatment 
sequence  Visit 2  Visit 3  
A/B BDA MDI 160/180 μg (given as 2 actuations of BDA MDI 80/90 μg)  1 mg Pulmicort Respule s 
B/A 1 mg Pulmicort Respules   BDA MDI 160/180 μg (given as 2 actuations of BDA MDI 80/90 μg [budesonide/albuterol] )  
BDA  MDI: budesonide/albuterol  sulfate metered -dose inhaler  
 
For the test product, after the BDA MDI is primed and ready for use, the Investigator will 
provide the test product to the child  (written instructions will be provided in the study 
manual ). The test product will be administered in the study center. 
For the reference product, one dose is removed from the foil envelope and added to the jet nebulizer to be ready for use. The reference treatment will then be provided to the child  in the 
study center. A manual with instructions on delivering the Pulmicort Respules will be 
provided. 
The exact date and start time of  BDA MDI and  Pulmicort Respules  will be recorded  in the 
eCRF  in addition to the exact date and time of PK sampling. 
In order to reduce the possibility of contamination of blood samples via hands, clothes, 
furniture, etc., precautions must be taken to avoid the possibility of contamination. BDA MDI 
activation and Pulmicort Respules nebulization must take place in a separ ate room from all 
other activities. The persons entering the room must wear appropriate protective gear (coats, gloves, caps, and shoes). Protective clothing must be discarded prior to leaving the room. 
Children must be instructed to wash their hands (soap and water) and faces (with at least two 
wet tissues (discard after washing), prior to leaving the room. The staff and parent(s) must remove/discard the face mask worn to protect the face and then wash their hands with soap and water. Cross contamination between multiple children  being dosed must be considered as 
well for study center staff and additional precautions taken per the study center’s normal 
practice.  
All handling of the nebulizers must be done in the nebulization room. 
Additionally, children mus t rinse their mouths twice with tap water directly after taking the 
BDA MDI or receiving nebulization. 
5.[ADDRESS_964571] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964572] measures to assess PK and safety apply during the study. For the single doses of 
BDA MDI and Pulmicort Respules, no safety issues are expected. 
For timing of assessments, refer to Table 2 . 
6.2 Pharmacokinetic Assessments  
Venous blood samples (~4 mL each) to determine plasma budesonide concentration will be 
collected at Visit 2 and Visit 3. A total of 10 samples will be collected  at each visit , the pre -
dose sample within 30 minutes prior to dose administration and then at 10, 20, 40, 60, 120, 240, 360, 480 and 720 minutes after dosing of the BDA MDI (Treatment A) and after the start 
of inhalation of the Pulmicort Respules  (Treatment B) . 
The blood samples will be collected, labeled, processed, stored, and shipped as detailed in the 
Laboratory Manual. The date and actual sampling times will be recorded on the appropriate eCRF.  
The reference time for blood sam pling will be at the start of inhalation  as captured in the 
eCRF . In total, [ADDRESS_964573] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   37 of 63  The clinical chemistry , hematology, and urinalysis assessments will be performed using a 
local  laboratory. Sample tubes and sample sizes may vary depending on laboratory method 
used and routine practice at each study center. 
The following laboratory variables in Table 4  will be measured:  
Table 4: Laboratory variables  
Hematology/Hemostasis (whole blood ) Clinical Chemistry (serum or plasma)  
Basophils (%)  Albumin  
Basophils Abs  Alanine transaminase  
Eosinophils (%)  Alkaline phosphatase  
Eosinophils Abs  Aspartate transaminase  
Hemoglobin  Bilirubin, total 
Hematocrit  Calcium, total 
Mean Corpuscular Hemoglobin Chloride  
Mean Corpuscular Hemoglobin Concentration  Cholesterol, total 
Mean Corpuscular Volume  Creatinine  
Monocytes (%)  Creatine kinase 
Monocytes Abs  Gamma -glutamyl transpeptidase  
Neutrophils (%)  Glucose (random)  
Neutrophils Abs  Magnesium  
Red blood cells (erythrocytes)  Phosphate  
White blood cells (leukocytes)  Potassium  
Platelet count Protein, total 
Lymphocytes Abs  Sodium  
Lymphocytes (%)  Triglycerides  
  
Urine *  
Urine blood   
Leukocyte esterase  
Urine protein   
Urine glucose   
Nitrite   
Abs: absolute  
*If leukocyte esterase is detected , the site should send the sample for culture. If abnormal levels  of blood or 
protein  are detected , the sample should be sent for microscopic examination.  
 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV0 06 Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   38 of 63  Table 5:  Total blood volume  
 Volume per 
Sample  Number of 
Samples  Total  
Clinical chemistry  ~0.5 mL  1 0.5 
Hematology ~0.5 mL  1 0.5 
Pharmacokinetics  ~4 mL 20 80 mL  
TOTAL   81 mL 
 
Approximately 20-30 mL urine per sample will be taken for urinalysis . 
6.3.2 Physical examination 
A complete physical examination will be performed at Visit 1 (if applicable) as indicated  in 
Table 2 . This will include an assessment of the following items: height in centimeters and 
weight (kilograms) and BMI (kg/m2) (at Visit 1 only), general appearance , respi[INVESTIGATOR_36517], 
cardiovascular system, abdomen, skin, head and neck (including ears, eyes, nose, and throat), 
lymph nodes, thyroid, musculoskeletal system (including spi[INVESTIGATOR_98243]), and neurological system. 
6.3.3 Vital signs 
Vital signs will include measurements of blood pressure (mmHg)  and heart rate (beats/min) , 
while the child  is seated . 
Blood pressure m easurements  (systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood pressure) should be 
taken in the sitting position after at least [ADDRESS_964574].  
Any clinically significant values in vital signs  should be recorded as an AE if applicable. 
6.3.4 Adverse event  assessments 
Adverse event s will be collected from time of signature [CONTACT_357925]/assent form through to the 
follow-up timepoint, as described in Section 7.3. 
6.[ADDRESS_964575] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964576] a causal relationship with this treatment. An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (eg, an abnormal laboratory finding), symptom (eg, nausea, chest pain), or disease temporally 
associated with the use of a medicinal product, whether or not considered related to the 
medicinal product. 
The term AE is used to include both serious and non-serious AEs and can include a 
deterioration of a pre-existing medical occurrence. An AE may occur at any time, including the screening  period, even if no IMP has been administered.  
7.2 Definition of serious adverse event  
An SAE  is an AE occurring during any study period (ie, after the signing of the ICF/assent  
form  through to the safety follow-up TC ), that fulfil ls 1 or more of the following criteria: 
• Results in death  
• Is immediately life -threatening 
• Requires in -patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081]  
• Results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity  
• Is a congenital abnormality or birth defect 
• Is an important medical event that may jeopardiz e the subject or may require medical 
intervention to prevent [ADDRESS_964577] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   40 of 63  7.3 Recording of adverse events  
7.3.1 Period for collection of adverse events  
Adverse events (including SAEs) will be collected from the time of signature [CONTACT_170817]/assent  form  through the safety follow-up TC . 
7.3.2 Follow-up of unresolved adverse events 
Any AEs that are unresolved at the child’s last assessment visit in the study are followed up 
by [CONTACT_96770], but without further recording in the eCRF.  and the Pharmacovigilance Department representative retains the right to 
request additional information for any child  with ongoing AE(s)/SAE(s) at the end of the 
study (after the child’s follow -up TC ) and capture that information in the eCRF, if judged 
necessary.  
7.3.3 Variables 
The following variables will be collected  for each AE : 
• Adverse event  (verbatim)  
• Dates when the AE started and stopped 
• Maximum severity  
• Seriousness 
• Investigator causality rating against the IMP (yes or no) 
• Action taken with regard to the IMP  
• Outcome 
In addition, the following variables will be collected for SAEs, when applicable: 
• Date AE met criteria for SAE 
• Date the Investigator became aware of S AE 
• Reason why the AE is considered serious 
• Treatment given for the SAE  
• Date of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1838]  
• Date of discharge  
• Probable cause of death  
• Date of death  
• Whether an autopsy is  performed  
• Causality assessment in relation to study procedure(s) 
• Causality assessment to other medication  
• Description of AE 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   41 of 63  It is important to distinguish between serious and severe AEs. Severity is a measure of 
intensity whereas seriousness is defined by [CONTACT_652343] 7.2. An AE of severe 
intensity need not necessarily be considered serious. For example, nausea that persists for 
several hours may be considered severe nausea, but not an SAE unless it meets the criteria 
shown in Section 7.2. On the other hand, a stroke that results in only a limited degree of disability may be considered a mild stroke but would be an SAE when it satisfies the criteria shown in Section 7.2. 
The severity of the event should be assessed as mild, moderate, or severe.  
7.3.4 Causality collection 
The Investigator and the Sponsor will assess causal relationship between the IMP and each 
AE, and answer “ yes” or “no” to the question “Do you consider that there is a reasonable 
possibility that the event may have been caused by [CONTACT_7198]?” 
For SAEs causal relationship will also be assessed for other medication and study procedures. 
Note that for SAEs that could be associated with any study procedure the causal relationship is 
implied as “ yes”. 
A guide to the interpretation of the causality question is found in Appendix C . 
7.3.5 Adverse events based on signs and symptoms 
All AEs spontaneously reported by [CONTACT_709425]: “ Have you/ your child had any health problems 
since the previous visit/you (or your chi ld) were last asked? ”, or revealed by [CONTACT_709426]. When collecting AEs, recording a diagnosi s is 
preferred (when possible) to the recording of a list of signs and symptoms. However, if a 
diagnosis is known and there are other signs or symptoms that are not generally part of the diagnosis, the diagnosis and each sign or symptom will be recorded separately. 
Asthma symptoms or signs, such as wheeze, cough, chest tightness, dyspnea, breathlessness, 
and phlegm, will be recorded as AEs only when: 
• The sign or symptom is serious 
• The child  discontinues the study because of  the sign or symptom 
• The sign or symptom is new to the child  or not consistent with the child’s pre -existing 
asthma history (defined as within 1 year of Visit 1) as judged by [CONTACT_737]. 
7.3.6 Adverse events  based on examinations and tests 
The results from the CSP  mandated  and repeat/unscheduled measurements for laboratory 
tests, vital signs  (ie, blood pressure and heart rate ) and other assessments  will be summariz ed 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   42 of 63  in the C linical Study R eport . Deterioration from  baseline in these parameters  should therefore 
only be reported as AEs if they fulfill any of the AE criteria or are the reason for 
discontinuation from the study or are conside red “clinically significant.” 
The criteria for determining whether the mandated laboratory tests, vital signs, and other assessments are clinically significant and should be reported as AEs are generally:  
• Test result is associated with accompanying symptoms or signs, and/or  
• Test result requires additional diagnostic testing or medical/surgical intervention, and/or  
• Test result leads to a change in study dosing or discontinuation from the study, significant 
additional concomitant drug treatment, or other therapy, and/or  
• Test result is considered to be an AE by [CONTACT_9304]. 
 
If deterioration in a laboratory value, vital sign , or other assessment is associated with clinical 
signs and symptoms, the sign or symptom will be reported as an AE and the associated 
parameter  will be considered as additional information. Wherever possible the reporting 
Investigator uses the clinical, rather than the laboratory term (eg, anemia versus low 
hemoglobin value). In the absence of clinical signs or symptoms, clinically relevant deteriorations in non-mandated parameters should be reported as AE(s). 
Any new or aggravated clinically relevant abnormal medical finding at a physical examination 
as compared with the baseline assessment will be reported as an AE . 
7.[ADDRESS_964578] to be reported, whether or not considered causally related to the IMP , or to the 
study procedure(s). All SAEs will be recorded in the eCRF.  
If any SAE occurs during the course of the study, then investigators or other study center personnel should inform the Clinical Research Organization ( CRO ) within 1 day ie, 
immediately but no later than 24 hours of when he/she becomes aware of it . 
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_709401] . All SAEs will be recorded from signing of the IC F/assent  
until the End-of-study Visit. Serious AEs occurring after the End-of- study V isit and coming to 
the attention of the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_709402] (in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_283232]) reasonable causal relationship with the IMP . 
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_709403]/ Sponsor of any 
SAE, whether deemed IMP-related or not, that a child  experiences during their participation in 
study within [ADDRESS_964579] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   43 of 63  As a minimum requirement, the initial notification should provide the following information: 
• Study number 
• Subject  number 
• Sex 
• Date of birth  
• Name [CONTACT_789] [INVESTIGATOR_709404]  
• Details of SAE  
• Criterion for classification as ‘serious’  
• The IMP name, or code if unblinded, and treatment start date 
• Date of SAE onset 
• Causality assessment (if sufficient information is available to make this classification) . 
 
The CRO/ Sponsor will request clarification of omitted or discrepant information from the 
initial notification. The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_709405]/ Sponsor within [ADDRESS_964580] be followed later with detailed descriptions, including clear 
photocopi[INVESTIGATOR_709406] (eg , hospi[INVESTIGATOR_73529], consultant reports, autopsy 
reports), with the child’s personal identifiers removed. All relevant information obtained by 
[CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_709407] [ADDRESS_964581] sign and date the form. The CRO/ Sponsor may also 
request additional information on the SAE, which the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_709408] [ADDRESS_964582] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964583] be reported as such as described below. 
An overdose with associated AEs is recorded as the AE diagnosis/symptoms on the relevant 
AE modules in the eCRF and on the Overdose/Medication Error eCRF module. An overdose without associated symptoms is only reported on the Overdose /Medication Error  eCRF 
module. 
The maximum daily dosage of IMP should not exceed 2 actuations per visit. If an overdose of 
IMP occurs in the course of the study which has an associated SAE , then the Investigator or 
other study center personnel will inform the CRO  immediately, or no later than 24 hours  of 
when he or she becomes aware of it.  
In the event of a suspected  overdose, the Investigator should: 
1. Contact [CONTACT_709427].  
2. Closely monitor the child  for AE/SAE and laboratory abnormalities until the IMP can no 
longer be detected systemically (at least 6 weeks).  
3. Obtain a plasma  sample for PK analysis within [ADDRESS_964584] dose of 
IMP if requested by [CONTACT_1689] (determined on a case-by- case basis).  
4. Document the quantity of the excess dose as well as the duration of the overdosing in the 
eCRF . 
Decisions regarding dose interruptions will be made by [CONTACT_709428] . 
For overdoses associated with an SAE, the standard SAE reporting timelines apply, see 
Section 7.4. 
7.7 Medication error  
For the purposes of this clinical study a medication error is an unintended failure or mistake in the treatment process for the Sponsor’s test product or the reference product that either causes 
harm to the child  or has the potential to cause harm to the child . 
A medication error is not lack of efficacy of the drug, but rather a human or process- related 
failure while the drug is in control of the study center  staff or child . 
A medication error includes situations where an error:  
• occurred  
• was identified and intercepted before the child  received the drug 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   45 of 63  • did not occur, but circumstances were recogniz ed that could have led to an error 
Examples of events to be reported in clinical studies as medication errors: 
• Drug name [CONTACT_2976] 
• Preparation error, eg, medication prepared incorrectly, even if it was not actually given 
to the child  
• Drug not administered as indicated, eg , wrong route or wrong site of administration 
• Drug not taken as indicated 
• Drug not stored as instructed, eg , kept in the refri gerator  when it should be at room 
temperature  
• Wrong child  received the medication (excluding data system  errors)  
• Wrong drug administered to child  (excluding data system  errors ) 
• Child  received the medication in the wrong order (excluding data system  errors ) 
Examples of events that do not  require reporting as medication errors in clinical studies: 
Errors related to or resulting from the data system  - including those which lead to [ADDRESS_964585] been a medication error  
Accidental overdose (will be captured as an overdose) 
Medication errors are not regarded as AEs , but AEs may occur as a consequence of the 
medication error.  
All medication errors must be recorded in the Overdose/Medication Error eCRF. Any 
associated AEs should also be recorded as the AE  diagnosis/symptoms on the relevant 
AE/SAE modules in the eCRF. 
If a medication error occurs dur ing the course of the study which has an associated SAE , then 
the Investigator or other study center personnel will inform the CRO  immediately , or no 
later than [ADDRESS_964586] SA E 
reporting timelines apply, ( see Section  7.4). 
7.[ADDRESS_964587] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964588] been made. Complete data  (evaluable dat a 
from both Treatment A and Treatment B) from [ADDRESS_964589] no major protocol deviations impacting PK. 
Children who do not provide evaluable data for both treatments ( Treatment  A and 
Treatment  B) will be excluded from the statistical analysis, which is the analysis of variance 
(ANOVA).  
Any excluded cases will be documented together with the reason for exclusion. 
8.3.[ADDRESS_964590] . Children will be classified on the basis of treatment they actually received  
within the treatment period . Occurrences  of safety events (ie, AE s and use of concomitant 
medication) will be summarized under the actual treatment corresponding to the treatment 
period of which the event occurred. All safety summaries will be based on the safety analysis set. 
8.3.3 All subjects enrolled  analysis set  
The al l subjects enrolled analysis set  will be defined as all children  who provide informed 
assent  and whose parent(s) or LAR(s) have provided informed consent. This analysis set  will 
be used for descriptive summaries of disposition.  
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964591] been 
randomized to a treatment sequence. This analysis set will be used for listings of demographic 
variables and listings and descriptive summaries of prior and concomitant medications. 
8.4 Violations and deviations  
Important protocol deviations will be listed and summarized by [CONTACT_21964]. 
All children  who failed any inclusion/exclusion criteria will be listed along with details of the 
failed criteria. This information will also be summarized in terms of the number and 
percentage of children  failing any of the inclusion/exclusion criteria and will be based on the 
full analysis set.  
8.[ADDRESS_964592] disposition will include the following information: Number of children  
enrolled, screen failed, randomized, number and percentage of randomized children  treated, 
not treated, who completed the study, and the number and percentage of randomized children  
who were withdrawn (including reasons for withdrawal). Disposition data will be presented by [CONTACT_709429] . 
Randomized children  who  are excluded from the analysis sets (as defined in Section 8.3) will 
be listed and will include the planned treatment sequence and reason for exclusion. 
8.6 Demographic and baseline characteristics  
Demographic variables (age, gender, race, ethnicity, height, weight, and BMI) will be listed by [CONTACT_374419] , for all randomized children . 
Demographic characteristics (age, gender, race, and ethnicity) and subject characteristics (height, weight, and BMI) will be summarized by [CONTACT_709430]. The denominator for percentages will be the number of 
children  in the safety analysis set.  
Medical history data will be listed by [CONTACT_709431], visit, 
description of the disease/procedure, Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA) System Organ Class (SOC), MedDRA Preferred Term, start date and stop date (or ongoing if applicable).  
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964593] dose of randomized 
treatment; all medications taken after first dose of randomized treatment are considered as 
concomitant (including medications that started prior to dosing and continued after). 
Prior and concomitant medication will be summarized s eparately by [CONTACT_709432] 
(according to the WHODrug  dictionary) and planned treatment sequence. Prior and 
concomitant medication will be listed by [CONTACT_709433]: 
planned treatment sequence, reported name, coded pr eferred term, the route of administration, 
dose, frequency, start date/time and indication. Descriptive summaries and listings of prior 
and concomitant medication will be based on the all subjects randomized analysis set.  
8.8 Pharmacokinetic analysis method s and parameters  
A listing of PK blood sample collection times, and all reportable budesonide concentrations 
will be provided for all children. Budesonide concentrations will be summarized by [CONTACT_110103].  
Plasma samples will be analyzed using non- compartmental analysis (NCA) to determine the 
PK (AUC0 -t, Clast , Cmax, tmax, tlast, λz, t½λz , and AUC0 -inf [ if feasible ]) of budesonide in 
plasma.  
This study is descriptive. There are no predefined statistical hypotheses and no predetermined tests or decision rules. The relative exposure of budesonide between BDA MDI versus 
Pulmicort Respules will be based on estimates of the AUC0 -t and Cmax . 
The AUC 0-t and Cmax for budesonide will be compared between treatments using a 
multiplicative (ie, log -transformation) ANOVA model with treatment sequence, period, and 
subject  within sequence as fixed effects. Geometric mean ratios between test (BDA MDI) and 
reference (Pulmicort Respules) treatments and 90% confidence limits will be calculated from 
the model. Half -life and tmax will be compared by [CONTACT_64161].  
A detailed PK  analysis plan will be prepared prior to database lock. 
8.9 Safety analysis 
Continuous safety variables will be summarized using descriptive statistics (n, mean, standard deviation, minimum, median,  maximum) by [CONTACT_3148].  Categorical variables will be 
summarized in frequency tables  (frequency and proportion) by [CONTACT_3148]. The analysis of the 
safety variables will be based on  the safety analysis set  and will be reported using the actual 
treatment associated with the observed data.  
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   49 of 63  8.9.1 Laboratory assessments 
The clinical chemistry, hematology, and urinalysis assessments will be listed by [CONTACT_709434]/unscheduled measurements. 
The listings will include the following information: test name, date of measurement, reference  
range, result and clinical significance, as determined by [CONTACT_737].  
8.9.2 Physical examination 
The results of the physical examination conducted at Visit 1 will be documented in medical 
history for each child . 
Any new or aggravated clinically relevant abnormal medical physical examination finding compared to the baseline assessment will be reported as an AE.  
Results of height, weight, and BMI will be listed by [CONTACT_374419] , treatment sequence and visit, and 
summarized with other demographics and baseline characteristics  data.  
8.9.3 Vital signs 
Vital signs of heart rate (beats/min), systolic blood pressure (mmHg) and diastolic blood pressure (mmHg) will be listed by [CONTACT_709435]/time of the 
assessment, and repeat/unscheduled measurements.  
Descriptive statistics of heart rate, systolic blood pressure and diastolic blood pressure collected at Visit 2 and 3 will be summarized by [CONTACT_135355] (pre -dose and 
post- last PK assessment ). 
8.9.4 Adverse events  
All AEs will be coded using the MedDRA dictionary and will be listed for each child  by 
[CONTACT_709436]. A treatment -emergent adverse event (TEAE) is defined as an AE 
with onset (start date/time) on or after the first dose of randomized IMP at Visit 2. Any AEs 
occurring in the washout between successive treatment periods will also be regarded as treatment -emergent and assigned to the treatment administered in the period prior to the 
washout. Additional details on assigning an AE to a treatment period based on AE start and 
end da tes will be further detailed in the statistical analysis plan (SAP).  
Adverse events will be summarized by [CONTACT_709437]. 
Furthermore,  children  with  SAEs , AEs  that led to death, and AEs  that led to withdrawal will 
be summarized and listed separately.  
Adverse events that occur before dosing will be reported separately . 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964594] child  is entered into the study, a designated  representative will review and 
discuss the requirements of the CSP  and related docu ments with the investigational staff and 
also train them in any study specific procedures and the EDC DataLabs system(s) utiliz ed. 
The Investigator (s) will ensure that appropriate training relevant to the study is given to all of 
these staff, and that any new information relevant to the performance of this study is 
forwarded to the staff involved. 
The Investigator (s) will maintain a record of all individuals involved in the study (medical, 
nursing, and other staff). The Investigator ensures the accuracy, completeness, and timeliness of the data recorded and 
of the provision of answers to data queries according to the Clinical Trial Agreement. The 
Investi gator will sign the completed eCRF s. A copy of the completed eCRFs will be archived 
at the study center . 
Hematology, chemistry, and urinalysis will be done by [CONTACT_5243]’s local lab oratory  and 
PK assessments will be done by a central laboratory. 
9.[ADDRESS_964595] regular contacts with 
the study center , including visits to: 
• Provide information and support to the Investigator(s). 
• Confirm that facilities remain acceptable. 
• Confirm that the investigational team is adhering to the CSP , that data are being 
accurately and timely recorded in the eCRFs, that biological samples are handled in 
accordance with the Laboratory Manual and that IMP accountability checks are b eing 
performed . 
• Perform source data verification (a comparison of the data in the eCRFs with the 
child’s medical records at the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_7117], and other records relevant to the 
study) including verification of informed consent /assent  of participatin g children . This 
will require direct access to all original records for each child  (eg, clinic charts) . 
• Ensure all SAEs and AEs have been captured and reported correctly, providing 
oversight of child  safety while on -study. 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   51 of 63  • Verify the correct storage, handling, administration , and return of all test and reference 
products. 
The designated  representative will be available between visits if the Investigator (s) or other 
staff at the center  needs information and advice about the study conduct. 
9.2.1 Source data  
Source documents provide evidence for the existence of the child  and substantiate the integrity 
of the data collected. Source documents are filed at the Investigator’s study center . 
Data entered in the eCRF that are transcribed fr om source documents must be consistent with 
the source documents or the discrepancies must be explained. The Investigator may need to 
request previous medical records or transfer records. Also, current medical records must be 
available.  
Definition of what constitutes source data can be found in the Source Data Agreement, agreed with each Investigator before site initiation.  
9.2.2 Study agreements  
The Investigator (s)/the  participating  center (s) should comply with all the terms, conditions, 
and obligations of the CSP  for this study. 
Clinical Trial Agreements with the Investigator (s)/the participating center (s) should be in 
place before any study- related procedures can take place, or children  are enrol led. 
9.2.3 Archiving of study documents 
The Investigator follows the principles outlined in the Clinical Trial  Agreement.  
9.3 Study timetable and end of study  
The end of the study is defined as “ the last visit of the last child  undergoing the study”. 
The study may be terminated at individual center s if the study procedures are not being 
performed according to GCP , or if recruitment is slow. The Sponsor may also terminate the 
entire study prematurely if concerns for safety arise within this study or in any other study with either the test or reference product . 
9.[ADDRESS_964596]  data relating to the study will be recorded in  eCRFs unless transmitted to the 
Sponsor or designee electronically (e.g., laboratory data). The Investigator is responsibl e for 
verifying that data entries are accurate and correct by [CONTACT_175064] ( CRF ). 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964597] access to source data documents. Monitoring details describing strategies, including definition of study critical data items and 
processes (eg, risk -based initiativ es in operations and quality such as risk management and 
mitigation strategies and analytical risk -based monitoring), methods, responsibilities and 
requirements, including handling of noncompliance issues and monitoring techniques (central, remote, or on-site monitoring) are provided in the Monitoring Plan. 
The Sponsor or designee is responsible for the data management of this study including quality checking of the data. 
The Sponsor assumes accountability for actions delegated to other individuals (eg, contract 
research organizations).  
Records and documents, including signed ICF /assent , pertaining to the conduct of this study 
must be retained by [CONTACT_13177] 15 years after study completion unless local 
regulations or institutional policies require a longer retention period. No records may be 
destroyed during the retention period without the written approval of the Sponsor. No records may be transferred to another location or party without written notification to the Sponsor. 
All data generat ed by [CONTACT_709438]. Data from external sources (such as laboratory data) may  be imported 
into the database. Once the eCRF clinical data have been submitted to the central server  at the 
independent data center, corrections to the data fields will be captured in an audit trail. The 
reason for change, the name [CONTACT_27501], together with the time and date will be logged to provide an audit trail. 
If additio nal corrections are needed, the responsible monitor or data manager will raise a 
query in the EDC application. The appropriate staff at the study center  will answer queries 
sent to the Investigator. The name [CONTACT_95904], and time and 
date stamp will be captured to provide an audit trail. Once all source data verification is 
complete and all queries are closed, the eCRF pages will be frozen.  
The specific procedures to be used for data entry and query resolution using the EDC 
system/eCRF will be provided to study centers  in a training manual. In addition, study center 
personnel will receive training on the EDC system/eCRF. 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964598] party data sources, to 
ensure external data is integrated in line with data standards , if applicable. 
Final database lock 
Database lock will occur once “the last visit of the last child  participating in the study has 
been completed” and all data have been coded, validated, signed, and locked, and clean file 
has been declared.  
[ADDRESS_964599] their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki and are consistent with ICH/ GCP , and applicable regulatory 
requirements.  
10.[ADDRESS_964600] data protection  
The ICF /assent  will incorporate (or, in some cases, be accompanied by a separate document) 
incorporating wording that complies with relevant data protection and privacy legislation. 
Children will be assigned a unique identifier by [CONTACT_1034]. Any subject records or datasets 
that are transferred to the Sponsor will contain the identifier only; subject names or any 
information which would make the child  identifiable will not be transferred. Children must be 
informed that his/her personal study-related data will be used by [CONTACT_9324] (s). The level of disclosure must also be explained to the child . 
Children must also be informed that his/her medical records may be examined by [CONTACT_396385], clinical quality assurance auditors, or other authorized personnel appointed by [CONTACT_429], by [CONTACT_304180], and by [CONTACT_6668]. 
10.3 Ethics and regulatory review  
An EC  should approve the final CSP , including the final version of the ICF /assent  and any 
other written information and/or materials to be provided to the children . The Investigator will 
ensure the distribution of these documents to the applicable EC , and to the study center  staff.  
The opi[INVESTIGATOR_153213]. The Investigator should submit the written approval to the Sponsor or designee before enrollment of any child  into the study. 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   54 of 63  The EC should approve all advertising used to recruit children  for the study. 
The Sponsor or designee should approve any modifications to the ICF /assent  that are needed 
to meet local requirements.  
If required by [CONTACT_427], the CSP  should be re-approved by [CONTACT_153295]. 
Before enrol lment of any child  into the study, the final CSP , including the final version of the 
ICF/assent , is approved by [CONTACT_76466] a notification to the national 
regulatory authority is done, according to local regulations. 
The Sponsor or designee will han dle the distribution of any of these documents to the national 
regulatory authorities. 
The Sponsor or designee will provide regulatory authorities, ECs and Investigator(s) with 
safety updates/reports according to local requirements. 
10.4 Informed consent/assent  
The Investigator(s) at each center  will:  
• Ensure each child  (and/or parent/ LAR  as applicable) is given full and adequate oral 
and written (or pi[INVESTIGATOR_709409]) information about the nature, purpose, possible risk(s) and 
benefit (s) of the study. 
• Ensure each child  (and/or parent/ LAR , as applicable) is notified that they are free to 
discontinue from the study at any time. 
• Ensure that each child  (and/or parent/ LAR , as applicable) is given the opportunity to 
ask questions and allowed time to consider the information provided. 
• Ensure each child  (and/or parent/ LAR , as applicable) provides signed and dated 
informed consent /assent  before conducting any procedure specifically for the study. 
• Ensure the original, signed ICF /assent (s) is/are stored in the Inve stigator’s Study File . 
• Ensure a copy of the signed ICF /assent  is given to the child  (and/or parent/ LAR  as 
applicable) . 
• Ensure that any incentives for children  who participate in the study as well as any 
provisions for children  harmed as a consequence of study participation are described in 
the ICF /assent  that is approved by [CONTACT_76467] . 
10.5 Changes to the clinical study protocol and informed consent/assent  
Study procedures will not be changed without the mutual agreement of the Principal 
Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_75534]. 
If there are any substantial changes to the CSP , then these changes will be documented in a 
new version of the CSP . 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   55 of 63  The new version of the CSP is to be approved by [CONTACT_709439], also the 
national regulatory authority, before implementation. Local requirements are to be followed 
for new versions of CSPs . 
The Sponsor will distribute any new versions of the CSP  to each investigator for distribution 
to the EC,  see Section 10.3. 
If a change to a CSP  requires a change to a center ’s ICF /assent , the Sponsor and the center ’s 
EC are to approve (or submit a notification to the national regulatory authority, where 
applicable for)  the revised ICF /assent  before the revised form is used. 
10.[ADDRESS_964601] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964602] OF REFERENCES 
1. Investigator Brochure Edition 2.0. Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate Pressurized Inhalation 
Suspension (BDA MDI, PT027); Budesonide Pressurized Inhalation Suspension (BD MDI, PT0 08); Albuterol Sulfate Pressurized Inhalation Suspension ( AS MDI, PT007), 
20 September 2019. 
2. Global Initiative for Asthma. Global strategy for asthma management and prevention. 2020. Available from: https://ginasthma.org/gina- reports/ . 
3. Mendes ES, Horvath G, Campos M, Wanner A. Rapid corticosteroid effect on β(2)- adrenergic airway and airway vascular reactivity in patients with mild asthma. 
J Allergy Clin Immunol. 2008;121(3):700-704. 
4. Cooper PR, Panettieri RA. Steroids completely reverse albuterol- induced β2- adrenergic 
receptor tolerance in human small airways. J A llergy Clin Immunol. 2008;122(4):734-
740. 
5. Mendes ES, Cadet L, Arana J, Wanner A. Acute effect of an inhaled glucocorticosteroid on albuterol-induced bronchodilation in patients with moderately severe asthma. Chest.  
2015;147(4):1037-1042. 
6.  Prescribing Information for Proventil HFA. 
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2012/020503s046lbl.pdf  
7.  Prescribing Information for Pulmicort Respules.  
https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2019/020929s052lbl.pdf  
 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA), AV006  Version 2.0, [ADDRESS_964603] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA) , AV006  2.0, [ADDRESS_964604] the study in accordance with the current protocol.  
   
Principal Investigator’s Name (print)    
   
Principal Investigator’s Signature   [CONTACT_280888] a copy to your local study 
monitor. 
 
  
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA) , AV006  2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   60 of 63  APPENDIX C ADDITIONAL SAFETY INFORMATION 
Further guidance on the d efinition of a Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  
Life-threatening  
“Life-threatening” means that the subject was at immediate risk of death from the AE as it 
occurred or it is suspected that use or continued use of the product would result in the 
subject’s death. “ Life-threatening” does not mean that had an AE occurred in a mor e severe 
form it might have caused death (eg, hepatitis that resolved without hepatic failure). 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_652336]-patient treatment in an emergency room is not in itself a n SAE, although the reasons for it 
may be (eg, bronchospasm, laryngeal edema). Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2144]/or surgical operations 
planned before or during a study are not considered AEs if the illness or disease existed before 
the subject was enrol led in the study, provided that it did not deteriorate in an unexpected way 
during the study. 
Important medical event or medical intervention  
Medical and scientific judgement should be exercised in deciding whether a case is serious in 
situations where important medical events may not be immediately life -threatening or result in 
death, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1838], disability or incapacity but may jeopardize the subject or may require 
medical intervention to prevent [ADDRESS_964605] drug does not mea n that it is an important medical event; medical 
judgement must be used. Examples of important medical events include but are not limited to: Angioedema not severe enough to require intubation but requiring intravenous hydrocortisone 
treatment  
Hepatotoxicity caused by [CONTACT_76475] (acetaminophen) overdose requiring treatment with N-acetylcysteine  
Intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home for allergic bronchospasm 
Blood dyscrasias (eg, neutropenia or anemia requiring blood transfusion, etc.) or convulsions 
that do not result in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_709410]  A guide to i nterpreting the causality q uestion  
When making an assessment of causality , consider the following factors when deciding if 
there is a “ reasonable possibility”  that an AE may have been caused by [CONTACT_33641]. 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study Protocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA) , AV006  2.0, [ADDRESS_964606] drug? 
Did the AE occur in a reasonable temporal relationship to the administration of the suspect drug? 
Consistency with known drug profile. Was the AE consistent with the previous knowledge of 
the suspect drug (pharmacology and toxicology) or drugs of the same pharmacological class? Or could the AE be anticipated from its pharmacological properties? 
No alternative cau se. The AE cannot be reasonably explained by [CONTACT_5748]/ etiology such 
as, the underlying disease, other drugs, and other host or environmental factors. 
Laboratory tests. A specific laboratory investigation (if performed) has confirmed the 
relationship . 
In difficult cases, other factors could be considered such as: 
Is this a recognized  feature of overdose of the drug? 
Is there a known mechanism? 
Causality of “related” is made if following a review of the relevant data, there is evidence for 
a “reasonable possibility”  of a causal relationship for the individual case. The expression 
“reasonable possibility” of a  causal relationship is meant to convey, in general, that there are 
facts (evidence) or arguments  to suggest a causal relationship. 
The causality assessment is performed on the basis of the available data including enough information to make an informed judgment. With limited or insufficient information in the 
case,  it is highly encouraged for the reporting investigator to express his/her clinical opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649]. 
If (despi[INVESTIGATOR_321510]) the causality assessment cannot be made, these SAEs will be considered 
to be “ related .” 
Causal relationship in cases where the disease und er study has deteriorated because of  lack of 
effect should be classified as “no reasonable possibility.” 
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study P rotocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA) , AV006  2.0, [ADDRESS_964607] safety in the event that infection rates return to levels requiring the return of government or local restrictions on movement of people and goods. 
COVID-19 tests for subjects or caregiver/ parent may be conducted proactively prior to 
inclusion or site visits at any point throughout the study in accordance with local and national guidance. This will be documented as an unscheduled procedure w ith a positive result 
recorded as an AE. Any patients  that undergo COVID- [ADDRESS_964608] the results recorded via the AE process. 
Any procedure performed outside the protocol specified requirements will be docum ented as a 
protocol deviation. 
Visit Management:  
Delayed Visits  •Out of window visits should be considered if it is necessary to
safeguard the health of the subject  and study center staff or
enables an on -site subject visit.
•If a return to lockdown is announced or the study center is on
lockdown and cannot process a visit, if possible, visits should
be rescheduled  to earlier/later as required to safeguard subjects
and study center staff.
•Randomization: If a subject is in s creenin g and cannot
complete the randomiz ation visit within 14 days due to local
COVID-19 lockdown restrictions, the screening period may be
extended to a maximum of 6 weeks. In the event of anextension to the screening period >14 days due to COVID-19,the follo wing safety measurements should be repeated in
advance of randomiz ation: safety laboratory assessments, vital
signs, concomitant medications, and medical/surgical history.
Subject 
Discontinuation •Refer to Section 3.9.
REDACTED COPY 
This document must not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application
Clinical Study P rotocol  Bond Avillion 2 Development LP  
Budesonide/Albuterol Sulfate (BDA) , AV006  2.0, 19 March 2021 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   63 of 63 Subjects with 
Confirmed 
COVID-19 Infection •If a subject  has confirmed COVID -19 this is to be reported as
an AE/SAE . It should be discussed with the medical monitor
prior to determining if/when to withdraw the subject.
•The Investigator should continue to reassess the benefit- risk of
continued study involvement for a study subject infected withCOVID-19. In -clinic visits for this subject should only
re-commence [ADDRESS_964609] .
•For new subjects previously identified as COVID -[ADDRESS_964610] be performed after resolution of symptoms (if
present). The subject can only be considered for enrollment
[ADDRESS_964611] not be used to support any marketing authorization application or any variation or extension of such application