Protocol 
Title: A Non-pharmacological Intervention for Patients With Alzheimer's Disease and Family 
Caregivers (Care Partners Program) 
NCT#: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Date: December 10, 2020 
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -2020  
Page  1 of 19  
 1) Protocol  Title  
Care  Partners  Program  – CP Program  
2) Objectives*  
This study  protocol  describes  the study  that is sponsored  by [CONTACT_459871]/National Institute on Aging. Both entities provide support for the 
design, conduct, and data analysis of the study.  
 
This study  will evaluate  the efficacy  and feasibility  of an innovative  dyadic  non-pharmacological  
intervention (DT)  that is delivered through an interactive state -of-the-art technolog y that includes an 
evidenced -based caregiver component modeled after REACH II (Belle et al., 2006) augmented by [CONTACT_459872] -based cognitive and functional training component for the individual with AD (care 
recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]) (Acevedo & Loewenstein, 2007; Loewenstein et al., 2004, 2006). The program is designed  
to: be synergistic; emp hasize issues important to caregivers in the earlier stages of caregiving; help the 
caregiver prepare for caregiving transitions; and engage the caregiver as a therapy extender. The 
program will be tailored for the  CG using a  risk appraisal approach (Czaja et. al., 2009) and for the  CR. 
It will also be culturally tailored and based on a community -based and stage -model approach to 
intervention development. The DT intervention will be compared to a control condition (CC) that 
includes non -specific mental stim ulation for the CR and a nutrition intervention for the CG (we chose 
this for equivalent contact [CONTACT_5586]). Two hundred and forty dyads will be randomly assigned to the DT or 
CC conditions. The  proposed  DT intervention  builds  on: the findings  of our group  that specific  cognitive 
training techniques can result in improvement and maintenance of gains in cognitive and functional 
performance in mild stage AD patients (e.g., Acevedo & Loewenstein, 2007); our evidenced caregiver 
interventions (e.g., Belle et al., 2006); our te chnology -based interventions (e.g. Eisdorfer, Czaja et al., 
2003; Czaja et al., 2013) and our on -going technology -based caregiver intervention program  (Caring  for 
the Caregiver Network). The specific aims of this project are to:  
1) Evaluate  the efficacy  of the DT intervention  on CG outcomes.  
Hypothesis  1.1: CGs assigned  to the DT condition  will demonstrate  decreased  distress  and burden 
relative to CGs assigned to the CC condition.  
Hypothesis 1.2 : CGs assigned to the DT condition will experience greater improvements in quality of 
life, mutuality  (quality  of the  caregiver -patient  relationship), and  caregiving  efficacy  relative  to CGs in 
the CC condition.  
2) Evaluate the efficacy the DT condition on outcomes for individuals with mild stage AD (CRs). 
Hypothesis  2.1: CRs  assigned to the DT condition  will demonstrate greater  improvements  in cognitive 
and functional performance  and quality of  life and less distress  than CRs  assigned to the  CC condition.  
Given our access to diverse populations, we will gather preliminary information on ethnic 
differences in response to the intervention and the cost and sustainability of the DT intervention. The 
study will provide critical information for a future  larger scale multi -site effectiveness trial.  Our goal is 
to develop  a program  that is flexible, easily  accessible  for diverse  populations  of CGs/CRs  and improves 
outcomes for both members of the dyad, which could ultimately yield significant savings for families 
and society.  
 
 
3) Background*  
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -[ADDRESS_587272]  that this number will  increase  to 16 million  by 2050.  In the state of 
[LOCATION_012] alone there are 500,000 individuals living  with AD and it is anticipated that this number with 
increase to 720,000 by 2025 ([LOCATION_012] Department of Elder Affairs, 2015; Alzheimer’s Association, 
2015). [LOCATION_012] has more patients with  AD than any  other state except [LOCATION_004]. Alzheimer’s Disease is 
a devastating disease that erodes the quality of life  and functioning of the patient, generates high levels 
of stress and burden on family caregivers, and resul ts in substantial economic burdens to society. AD is 
also a principal cause of physical disability and institutionalization among older adults. In the U.S. 
Medicare and Medicaid paid about $170 billion for care of AD patients in 2014, and by 2050, experts 
estimate these costs will rise to $800 billion a year (Alzheimer’s Association, 2015).  
There is a pressing need to identify interventions that decrease the cognitive/ functional and 
behavioral manifestations of the disease in the patient, and the distress and health -related consequences 
experienced  by [CONTACT_459873].  In this regard,  vast resources  have been  directed  towards  interventions 
to prevent or cure AD. To date, most of these approaches have been pharmacological and to date most 
have limited efficacy. While it is imperative to continue these efforts it is also important to explore t he 
efficacy of non -pharmacological approaches to help mitigate the symptoms of the illness. There is an 
emerging body of research indicating that secondary prevention intervention methods such as cognitive 
training interventions are effective in patients w ith mild AD (e.g., Loewenstein et al., 2004; Acevedo & 
Loewenstein, 2007). To date, most cognitive training programs have focused solely on component 
cognitive abilities (e.g., processing speed), which shows limited transfer to everyday activities.  
Interventions such as these can be broadened to include functional training (e.g. how to training); 
procedural memory is generally in tact in the early  stages of the disease (e.g., Hirono, Mori, Ikejiri, 
Imamura, Shimomura, Ikeda, et al., 1997). For example, it is feasible to reinforce previously learned 
procedural tasks or teach new ones such as how to maintain and check a memory notebook. Evidence 
also indicates that early stage patients can benefit from receiving  information  regarding  their illness and 
available resources as it enables them to participate in decision -making regarding care choices, which 
alleviates distress for both themselves and their caregiver. Thus intervening in the early stages of the 
disease represents “a window of opportunity” for the individual with AD. There have also been a broad 
range of intervention studies aimed at the caregiver that have shown significant effects in reducing 
burden, lowering  depression, and  delaying  the placement  of patients  (Brodaty,  Green  & Koschera, 2003; 
Schulz, Martire & Klinger, 2005).  
However, there are limitations with current intervention programs for both AD patients and 
caregivers. For example, existing cognitive training interventions for patients a) typi[INVESTIGATOR_459833] - based  training,  creating  logistic  barriers  for patients  and families, b) involve 
considerable interventionist cost, and c) do not provide the optimal intensity and dosage of treatment.  
Proven caregiver intervention programs also typi[INVESTIGATOR_459834] -based therapi[INVESTIGATOR_459835] (e.g., Belle et 
al., 2006) and  many  have  been evaluated  on caregivers  of patients  in the moderate  or severe  stages  of the 
disease. Our work and that of others (e.g., Acevedo & Loewenstein, 2007; Blieszner & Roberto, 2010) 
has shown that caregivers of patients with mild cognitive impairments also experience distress, have 
limited knowledge about dementia and memory impa irments, and caregiving. Further, caregiver 
prepare dness in managing the patient’s condition is linked to caregiver distress (e.g., Schumacher, 
Stewart, & Archbold, 2007).  
The vast majority  of intervention  efforts  have  also targeted  only one member of the  dyad. We 
believe that there are important synergies to be gained by [CONTACT_459874]:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -[ADDRESS_587273] shown that there is a 
reciprocal interaction between the well -being of the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459836] (e.g., 
Lyketsos  et al., 2003;  Schulz  et al., 2008;  Terri  et al., 1997;  Schumacher  et al., 2007),  and studies  have 
shown that reducing patient distress can reduce caregiver burden (Lyketsos et al., 2003; Terri et al., 
1997). In addition, recent data indicates that degree of mutuality (quality of the patient -caregive r 
relationship) and  shared  involvement  in illness -related  care by [CONTACT_459875] (Schumacher et al., 2006, 2007; Berg & Upchurch, 2007). We recently found 
(Schulz, Czaja, Lustig, Zdaniuk, Martire, & Perdomo, 2009) that an intervention that focused on both 
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_459837] a caregiver only condition and a control condition. To our knowledge, 
there has been a paucity of research in the dementia caregiver literature that uses an integrated 
intervention approach.  
In the proposed study, we attempt to address limitations of previous  research by [CONTACT_12780][INVESTIGATOR_459838] (caregiver and AD patient), of a dyadic  integrated 
innovative technology -based intervention (DT) designed to improve the cognitive and functional status 
and quality of life of the patient and to reduce burden and distress in the caregiver and improve their 
quality of life and caregiving self -efficacy. The intervention is also designed to improve the mutuality 
between the caregiver and patient. The overall paradigm is grounded in theory (e.g, Pearlin et al., 1990; 
Given, Collins, & Given, 1988, Schumacher et al., 2007), and modeled after a Dual Ta rget intervention 
developed and implemented by [CONTACT_459876] (Schulz, Czaja et al., 2009) for older spi[INVESTIGATOR_459839]  (SCI Connect) and  our previous  research  with caregivers  and 
AD patients. Our intervention approach is also consistent with theoretical views that among couples, 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_459840] a dyadic process (e.g., Berg & Upchurch, 2007) and findings that among 
couples dealing with illnesses, greater collabora tive involvement in dealing with problem s is related to 
greater well -being for  both members of  the dyad  (Meegan & Goedderis, 2006).  Specifically, the dyadic 
intervention (DT) represents an integrated dementia management program in which the AD patient will 
receive cognitive/functional training that is based on an empi[INVESTIGATOR_3675] -derived program developed by [CONTACT_459877] (UM) and the caregiver will receive a comprehensive intervention 
package based on the evidenced -based intervention modeled after the REACH  II program and modifi ed 
and implemented in the VideoCare project  (Czaja, Loewenstein, Schulz, Nair, & Perdomo, 2013) and 
the on -going Caring for the Caregiver Network study (See Preliminary  Studies). The  paradigm will also 
actively engage the caregiver as a therapy extender (deliver the cognitive/functional training) and is 
designed to promote a collaborative care pattern where the patient and the caregiver work together on 
strategies to manage the symptom s of the illness (e.g., Schumacher et al., 2007).  
The program  is synergistic  and will be designed  so that the caregiver and  patient  components  are 
mutually reinforcing. We believe that for individuals with an illness or disability and  their caregivers,  it 
is important to consider the reciprocal impact that providers and care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459841] (Bookwala & Schulz, 1996; Schulz  et al., 2008) (Figure 1). Thus we believe  that an intervention 
that simultaneously targets the caregiver and the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459842]. We  also believe  that the  active  involvement of  the caregiver  as a therapy  extender 
for the patient will increase their knowledge of the disease and of the patient’s experiences. This will 
help reinforce information they receive in the caregiver component of the intervention regarding the 
symptoms of the illness. Further, the knowledge the caregiver gains in the caregiver component of the 
intervention relating to communication skills will enable them to deliver the therapy more effectively 
and allow the patient to feel more supported. This should facilitate the patient’s involvement in the  
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -2020  
Page  4 of 19  
 
  
 
adaptive  capacities  
demands  
Stressors:  Care  recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459843],  distress, 
cognitive/behavioral 
problems  cognitive training sessions and encourages practice of the exercises between sessions, which enhances 
the likelihood of a positive cognitive outcome. The caregiver’s active involvement in the intervention 
will also increase the caregiver’s perception that they are engaging in activities, which can actually 
benefit the patient as opposed to just engaging in symptom management. The interaction between the 
caregiver and patient in  the cognitive therapy process will also enhance feelings of mutuality, which  has 
an influence on perceived burden and caregiver distress (e.g., Schumacher et al., 2007). Improving the 
skills  of the patient  may also lessen care demands  which will have a  positive influence on  both caregiver 
and patient outcomes. A  further benefit of the integrated approach is that having the caregiver trained in 
the provision of the therapy allows for regular and continuous treatment without the need of an outside 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]. This is cost effective, increases adherence, and maximizes  dosage effects. Final ly, we believe 
the caregiver’s active involvement in therapy will increase the caregiver’s perceptions of positive  
aspects  of care  provision  which  is turn linked  to level  of caregiver  distress  and patient  placement  (Schulz 
et al., 2004).  
Figure  1. Conceptual  model  of stress -health process applied to the  care-recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]/patient  (left panel)  and 
caregiver (right panel) showing interactive nature of  care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459844] (Adapted from Schulz 
et al. 2009)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The cognitive  component  of the intervention  (Loewenstein,  Acevedo,  Czaja,  & Dura,  2004)  will 
employ a multi -modal approach to train both cognitive and functional skills in mild -stage AD patients. 
The model focuses on by[CONTACT_459878][INVESTIGATOR_459845]  (Camp  1989;  Camp  & Stevens, 1990),  dual cognitive  support  at acquisition  and 
retrieval (Bird & Kinsella, 1996; Lipi[INVESTIGATOR_87463] & Backman, 1997), implicit memory/motor learning 
(Acevedo & Loewenstein , 2007; Farina et al., 2002), and employs compensatory techniques such as a 
memory -notebook system. An unique aspect is a focus on training on procedural and functional skills 
that have real world relevance (Loewenstein & Acevedo, 2006; Loewenstein & Mogos ky, 1999).  
stress  
morbidities  
Emotional/  Behavioral 
responses  
 
morbidities  
Emotional/  Behavioral 
responses  
Appraisal  of demands  and 
adaptive  capacities  (e.g., 
knowledge,  skills,  copi[INVESTIGATOR_90357])  
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -2020  
Page  5 of 19  
 The caregiver component  of the intervention  is guided by [CONTACT_459879] (SPM) of caregiving 
(Pearlin  et al.,1990),  which  views  the consequences  of caregiving  as resulting  from  the interrelationships 
among several factors including the socio -economic characteristics (e.g., relationship, race/ethnicity)  
and resources (e.g., social support) of the caregiver, primary (e.g., level of patient impairment) and 
secondary  stressors  (e.g., job  and relationship  difficulties) to  which  they are exposed, and  the caregiver’s 
appraisal of these stressors. It is also guided by [CONTACT_459880] (e.g., Schumacher et 
al., 2006), which include a focus on caregivers and patients as individuals as well as the transactiona l 
nature of the relationship between the patient and caregiver.  The intervention is also based on a multi - 
component approach to caregiver interventions and a structured but tailored intervention approach 
whereby [CONTACT_459881] (Belle et al., 2006; Czaja 
et al.,  2009, Czaja et al., 2013). The intervention is designed to enhance the caregiver’s skills and 
preparedness for the caregiver role, resources available to the caregiver (e.g., social support; knowledge 
of community resources) and reduce known areas of caregiver risk (e.g., burden, emotional distress).  
The integrated intervention  approach will  also incorporate innovative  technology and use 
state-of-the-art computer tablets as a mechanism for intervention delivery. Use of technology in 
the context of caregiving with older adults has been found to be feasible, acceptable, and cost - 
effective across heterogeneous patient and caregiver populations including White Caucasians, 
African -Americans and individuals of Latino background (Czaja & Rubert, 2002; Eisdorfer, 
Czaja  et al., 2003;  Bank et al.,  2006; Nichols  et al., 2008;  Czaja  et al., 2013).  Technology offers 
several advantages over traditional intervention approaches. For example, the  use of technology 
allows a “without walls” approach and increases access to information and support. Further, the 
use of technology offers unparalleled flexibility in the presentation of information. Healthcare 
professionals can also use technology to moni tor the status of the caregiver or the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459846] a cost-effective  fashion  (Czaja,  Eisdorf er & Schulz,  2000;  Czaja  et 
al., 2013).  
BIBLIOGRAPHY  & REFERENCES  CITED  
 
Acevedo, A.,  & Loewenstein,  D. (2007).  Non-pharmacological  cognitive  interventions  in aging  and dementia.  
Journal  of Geriatric  Psychiatry  and Neurology,  20, 239-249. 
Alzheimer’s  Association  (2015). 2015  Alzheimer’s  Disease  Facts  and Figures:  Includes  a special  report  on 
disclosing a diagnosis of Alzheimer’s disease. Available online at 
https:// www.alz.org/facts/downloads/facts_figures_2015.pdf  
Archbold,  P. G., Stewart,  B. J., Greenlick, M.  R., & Harvath, T.  (1990).  Mutuality  and preparedness  as predictors 
of caregiver role strain. Research in Nursing and health, 13 , 375 -384. 
Ball, K., Berch, D.B., Helmers, K.F., Jobe, J.B., Leveck, M.D., Marsiske , M., Morris, J.N., Rebok, G.W., Smith, 
D.M., Tennstedt,  S.L., Unverzagt,  F.W., &  Willis,  S.L. (2002). Effects  of cognitive  training  interventions 
with older adults: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 288, 
2271 -2281.  
Ball,  K., Edwards,  J.D. & Ross,  L.A. (2007).  The impact of  speed  of processing  training  on cognitive  and 
everyday functions. Journal of Gerontology Series, B, 62B, 19-31. 
Ball, K., Owsley, C., Sloane, M. E., Roenker, D. L., & Bruni, J. R. (1993). Visual attention problems as a 
predictor  of vehicle  crashes  in older  drivers.  Investigative  Ophthalmology  and Visual  Science, 34  (11), 
3110 -3123.  
Bank, A. L.,  Arguelles,  S., Rubert,  M., Eisdorfer, C.,  & Czaja,  S. J. (2006). The  value  of telephone  support  groups 
among ethically diverse caregivers of persons with dementia. Gerontologist, 46, 134-138. 
Bedard, M.,  Molloy,  D. W., Squire,  L., Dubois,  S., Lever, J.  A., & O’Donnell,  M. (2001).  The Zarit  Burden 
Interview: A new short version and screening version.  The Gerontologist, 41, 652-657. 
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -2020  
Page  6 of 19  
 Belle, S. H., Burgio, L., Burns, R., Coon, D., Czaja, S. J., Gallagher -Thompson, D., et al. (2006) Enhancing the 
quality  of life of dementia  caregivers  from  different  ethnic  or racial  groups.  Annals  of Internal  Medicine, 
145, 727-738. 
Benedict, R. H. B., Schretlen, D., Groninger, L., & Brandt, J. (1998). Hopkins Verbal Learning Test - Revised: 
Normative  data and analysis  of inter-form  and test-retest  reliability.  The Clinical  Neuropsychologist,  12, 
43-55. 
Berg, C.A.,  & Upchurch,  R. (2007). A  developmental -contextual  model  of couples  copi[INVESTIGATOR_459847]. Psychological Bulletin, 133, 902-954. 
Bird,  M., & Kinsella,  G. (1996).  Long -term cued  recall of  tasks  in senile  dementia.  Psychology  and Aging,  11, 
45-56. 
Bliezner  R., & Roberto,  K. A. (2010).  Care  partner  responses to  the onset of  mild cognitive  impairment.  The 
Gerontologist, 50 , 11-22. 
Bookwala,  J., &  Schulz,  R. (1996).  Spousal  similarity  in subjective  well-being:  the Cardiovascular  health  study.  
Psychology  and Aging,  11, 582-590. 
Bracy, O.  L. (1994).  PSS Cognitive  Rehabilitation  Technical  Manual . Indianapolis:  Psychological  Software 
Services.  
Brodaty, H.,  Green, A.,  & Koschera, A.  (2003).  Meta -analysis  of psycho -social  interventions  for caregivers  of 
people with dementia. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 51, 657-664. 
Camp, C. J. (1989).  Facilitation of new learning in Alzheimer’s disease. In G. Gilmore, P. Whitehouse, & M. 
Wykle  (Eds.),  Memory  and aging:  Theory, research,  and practice  (pp. 212 -225).  New  York:  Springer.  
Camp,  C. J.,  & Stevens, A.  B. (1990).  Spaced -retrieval:  A memory  intervention  for dementia  of the Alzheimer’s 
type (DAT).  Clinical Gerontologist, 10 , 58-60. 
Conners,  C. K. (1992).  Conners’  Continuous  Performance  Test user’s  manual.  Toronto,  Canada:  Multi -Health 
Systems.  
Czaja, S. J. (2014). Discovery Exchange: Families and Dementia Care: Community Implementation of an 
Intervention  Program  for Caregivers  of Alzheimer’s  Patients.  Gerontological  Society  of America  Annual 
Meeting. Washington D.C., November.  
Czaja, S.  J., Eisdorfer, C.,  & Schulz,  R. (2000).  Future  directions  in caregiving:  Implications  for intervention 
research.  In R. Schulz  (Ed.),  Handbook  on dementia  caregiving  (pp. 283-319).  New  York:  Springer.  
Czaja, S. J., Gitlin, L.N., Schulz, R., Zhang, S., Burgio, L. D., Stevens, A.B., Nichols, L. O., & Gallangher - 
Thompson, D. (2009). Development of the risk appraisal measure: A brief screen to identify risk areas 
and guide  interventions  for dementia  caregivers.  Journal  of American  Geriatric  Society,  57, 1064 -1072.  
Czaja  S. J., Loewenstein, D., Schulz, R., Nair, S. N., & Perdomo, D. (2013). A videophone psychosocial 
intervention  for dementia  caregivers.  The American  Journal  of Geriatric  Psychiatry, 21,  1071 -1082.  
Czaja, S.  J., & Rubert,  M. P. (2002). Telecommunication  technology  as an aid to family  caregivers  of persons 
with dementia. Psychosomatic Medicine, 64, 469-476. 
Eisdorfer, C.,  Czaja,  S. J., Loewenstein,  D. A., Rubert,  M. P., Argüelles,  S., Mitrani, V.,  et al. (2003).  The effect 
of a family therapy and technology -based intervention on caregiver depression. The Gerontologist, 43 , 
521-531. 
[LOCATION_012]  Department  of Elder  Affairs  (2015).  Alzheimer’s  Disease  Initiative . Available  online  at: 
http://elderaffairs.state.fl.us/doea/alz.php  
Folstein,  M., Folstein,  S., & McHugh  P. (1975).  Mini -mental state.  A practical  method for  grading  the cognitive 
state of patients for the physician. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 12 , 189 -198. 
Farina, E., Fioravanti, R., Chiavari, L., Imbornone, E.,  Alberoni, M., Pomati, S., et  al. (2002). Comparing two 
programs of  cognitive  training  in Alzheimer’s disease:  A pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  Acta Neurologica  Scandinavica, 
105, [ADDRESS_587274], M.  B., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], R. L.,  Gibbon,  M., & Williams,  J. B. W. (2001).  Structured  clinical  interview for  DSM -IV 
Axis I disorders . Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press.  
Fisk, A.D.,  Rogers,  W., Charness,  N., Czaja,  S.J., & Sharit, J. (2009). Designing  for Older  Adults:  Principles  and 
Creative Human Factors Approach (2nd. Ed). London: CRC Associates.  
Frisch, M.B.  (2008).  Quality  of Life Inventory.  Pearson  Educational Inc. 
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -2020  
Page  7 of 19  
 Given,  C. W., Collins,  C. E.,  & Given,  B. A. (1988).  Sources  of stress  among  families  caring  for relatives  with 
Alzheimer’s disease. Nursing of Clinical North America, 23 (1) , 69-82. 
Gitlin, L. N.,  Winter,  L., Dennis,  M. P., Corcoran, M.,  Schinfeld,  S., & Hauck,  W. W. (2002).  Strategies used  by 
[CONTACT_459882]’s disease and related disorders: Psychometric 
analysis of the task management strategy index (TMSI). The Gerontologist, 42 (1) , 61-69. 
Golden,  C.J., 1978.  Stroop  color  and word  test manual,  Stoelting,  Chicago.  
Gunther, V.K., Schafer, P., Holzner, B.J., & Kemmler, G.W. (2003). Long -term improvements, in cognitive 
performance  through computer -assisted cognitive  training: a  pi[INVESTIGATOR_62848] a residential  home  for older 
people. Aging and Mental Health, 7 (3):200 -6. 
Hindmarch, I., Lehfeld,  H., de Jongh,  P., & Erzigkeit,  H. (1998).  The Bayer  Activities  of Daily  Living  Scale  (B- 
ADL). Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 9 (Suppl. 2),  20-26. 
Hirono, N.,  Mori, E.,  Ikejiri,  Y., Imamura, T.,  Shimomura, T., Ikeda,  M., et  al., (1997).  Procedural  memory  in 
patients with mild Alzheimer’s disease. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 8, 210-216. 
Jorm, A. F.,  & Jacob,  P. A. (1989).  The informant questionnaire  on cognitive  decline  in the elderly  (IQCODE): 
Sociodemographic correlates, reliability, validity and some norms. Psychological Medicine, 19 , 1015 - 
1022.  
Lipi[INVESTIGATOR_87463],  B., & Backman,  L. (1997).  Encoding -retrieval interactions  in mild Alzheimer’s disease:  The role of 
access to categorical information. Brain and Cognition, 34 , 274 -286. 
Loewenstein, D. A., & Acevedo, A. (2006). Training of cognitive and functionally relevant skills in mild 
Alzheimer’s  disease:  An integrated  approach. In  D. K.  Attix  & K. A.,  Welsh -Bohmer  (Eds.),  Geriatric 
Neuropsychological Assessment and Intervention (pp. 261 -274). [LOCATION_001], London:  Guilford Press.  
Loewenstein, D.A.,  Acevedo, A.,  Agron,  J. & Duara  (2007).Vulnerability  To Proactive  Semantic  Interference 
and Progression to Dementia Older Adults with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI)  Dementia and 
Geriatric Cognitive Disorders.  
Loewenstein, D. A., Acevedo, A., Czaja, S. J., & Duara, R. (2004). Cognitive rehabilitation  of mildly  impaired 
Alzheimer’s disease  patients  to cholinesterase  inhibitors. American  Journal  of Geriatric  Psychiatry,  12, 
395-402. 
Loewenstein, D.  A., Acevedo,  A., Agron, J.,  Isaacson,  R., Stauman,  S., Crocco,  E., Barker, W.  W., and Duara,  R. 
(2006). Cognitive profiles in Alzheimer’s disease and in mild cognitive impairment of differentia 
etiologies. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, 21: 301 -315. 
Loewenstein, D. A., & Mogosky, B. (1999). The functional assessment of the older adult patient. In P. 
Lichtenberg  (Ed.), Handbook  of Assessment  in Clinical  Gerontology  (pp. 529-554).  New  York:  Wiley.  
Logsdon,  R. G.,  Gibbons,  L. E., McCurry,  S. M., & Teri, L.  (1999).  Quality  of life in Alzheimer’s disease: 
Patient and caregiver reports . Journal of Mental Health and Aging, 5 , 21-32. 
Lyketsos,  C. G.,  Del Campo,  L., Steinberg,  M., Miles,  Q., Steele,  C. D.,  Munro  C., et al. (2003).  Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 60, 737-746. 
Meegan, S.P.  & Goedereis, E.A.  (2006).  Life task appraisals, spouse  involvement  in strategies, and  daily  affect 
among short - and long -term married couples. Journal of Family Psychology, 20, 319-327. 
Monsch, A. U., Bondi, M. W., Butters, N., Salmon, D. P., Katzman, R., & Thal, L. J. (1992). Comparisons, of 
verbal fluency tasks in  the detection of  dementia  of the Alzheimer  type.  Archives of  Neurology,  49, 1253 - 
1258.  
Nichols,  L.O.,  Chang, C., Lummus, A.,  Burns,  R., Martindale -Adams, J.,  Graney, M.J.,  Coon, D.W.,  Czaja,  S. J. 
(2008)  The Cost Effectiveness of a Behavior Intervention with Caregivers of Alzheimer's Patients.  
Journal  of American  Geriatric  Society,  Vol. 56, No. 3  (389-592) 
Owsley,  C., Sloane,  M., McGwin G.,  Jr., &  Ball,  K. (2002). Timed instrumental activities  of daily  living  tasks: 
relationship  to cognitive  function  and everyday  performance  assessments  in older  adults.  Gerontology: 
Behavioral Science, 48 , 254 -265 
Pearlin, L.I., Mullin,  J.T., Semple,  S.J., & Skaff, M.M.  (1990). Caregiving  and the stress  process:  An overview  of 
concepts and their measures. The Gerontologist, 43, 583-594. 
Radloff, L. (1977). The  Center  for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_459848] -Depression  Scale:  A self-report  depression  scale  for 
research in the general population. Applied Psychological Measurements, 3, 385-401. 
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -2020  
Page  8 of 19  
 Reitan,  R. M. & Wolfson, D. (1985).  The Halstead -Reitan  neuropsychological  test battery:  Theory  and clinical 
interpretation. Tucson, AZ: Neuropsychology Press.  
Rockwood,  K., Fay,  S., Gorman,  M. (2009).  The ADAS -cog and clinically  meaningful  change  in the VISTA 
clinical trial of galantamine for Alzheimer's disease. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 
Retrieved June 30, 2009, from http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/cgi - 
bin/fulltext/122462480/PDFSTART  
Rosen,  W. G., Mohs,  R. C., & Davis,  K. L. (1984).  A new rating  scale  for Alzheimer’s  disease.  American  
Journal  of Psychiatry,  141, 1356 -1364.  
Schulz,  R., Czaja,  S. J., Lustig,  A., Zdaniuk,  B., Martire, L.  M., & Perdomo, D. (2009). Improving  the quality  of 
life of caregivers of persons with spi[INVESTIGATOR_1828]: A randomized controlled trial.  Rehabilitation 
Psychology, 1, 1-15. 
Schulz,  R. & Matire,  L. M. (2004). Family  caregiving  of persons  with dementia:  prevalence, health  effects, and 
support strategies. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 12, 240-249. 
Schulz,  R., Matire, L.,  & Klinger,  J. (2005). Evidenced -based  caregiver  interventions  in geriatric  psychiatry.  
Psychiatry  Clinics of  North  America,  28, 1007 -1038.  
Schulz, R., McGinnis, K. A., Zhang, S., Martire, L. M., Hebert, R. S., Beach, S. R., et al. (2008). Dementia 
patient  suffering  and caregiver  depression.  Alzheimer  Disease  and Associated  Disorders,  22, 170-176. 
Schumacher, K.  L., Beidler,  S. M., Beeber, A.  S., & Gambino,  P. (2006). A  transactional  model of  cancer  family 
caregiving skill. Advances in Nursing Science, 29 , 271 -286. 
Schumacher, K.  L., Stewart,  B. J., & Archbold,  P. G. (2007). Mutuality  and preparedness  moderate  the effects  of 
caregiving demand on cancer family caregiver outcomes. Nursing Research, 56 , 425 -433. 
Sorensen,  S., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_6051],  M., & Duberstein,  P. (2002). How  effective  are interventions  with caregivers? An  updated 
meta -analysis. The Gerontologist, 42, 356-372. 
Steffen, A.  M., McKibbin,  C., Zeiss,  A. M., Gallagher -Thompson, D.,  & Bandura, A. (2002). The  revised  scale 
for caregiving self -efficacy: Reliability and validity studies. Journal of Gerontology: Psychological 
Sciences, 57B , P74 -P86. 
Tarlow,  B. J., Wisniewski,  S. R., Belle,  S. H., Rubert,  M., Ory, M. G., & Gallagher -Thompson,  D. (2004).  
Positive  aspects of  caregiving:  Contributions of  the REACH  project to  the development of  new measures 
for Alzheimer’s caregiving. Research on Aging, 26 , 429 -453. 
Teri, L., Logsdon, R. G., Uomoto, J., McCurry, S. M. (1997). Behavioral treatment of  depression in  dementia 
patients:  a controlled  clinical  trial. The Journals  of Gerontology.  Series  B, Psychological  Sciences  and 
Social Sciences, 52, 159-166. 
Ware, J. H. (1985). Linear  models  for the analysis  of longitudinal  studies.  The American  Statistician, 39, 95 -101. 
Wechsler, D. (1997).  The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale -Third Edition . The PsychologicalCorporation, San  
Antonio, TX. 
Weyer, G.,  Erzigkeit,  H., Kanowski,  S., Ihl, R., &Hadler, D.  (1997).  Alzheimer’s  Disease  Assessment  Scale: 
reliability and validity in an multicenter clinical trial. International Psychogeriatrics, 9, 123-138. 
Wimo,  A., Witthaus,  E., Rother,  M., & Winblad,  B. (1998). Economic  impact  of introducing  propentofylline  for 
the treatment of dementia in Sweden. Clinical Therapeutics, 20, 552-566. 
Zarit,  S. H., Orr, N. K., & Zarit,  J. M. (1985).  The hidden  victims  of Alzheimer’s  disease:  Families  under  stress.  
New  York:  New  York  University  Press.  
 
4) Inclusion  and Exclusion  Criteria*  
 
Care  Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]  (Patient)  Inclusion  Criteria:  
• MMSE  17 – 25 (with  Mungus  age and education  correction)* ; 
o If the CR scores  16 – consult PI  [INVESTIGATOR_459849]  
• Needs  help with higher  level  of IADLs  (e.g.,  managing  finances, helpi[INVESTIGATOR_459850], handling medications)  
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -2020  
Page  9 of 19  
 • Shows  memory  problems  (e.g.,  repetitive  questioning, forgetting  what  day it is, losing  or 
misplacing things)  
 
* Care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459851] 
(CDR). The  criteria  for inclusion of  these participants  is having a CDR  of 0.5 or 1.0; for subjects  unable 
to participate  in in-person  visits, a  telehealth  version  of the  MMSE will  be given  using  the same  age and 
education corrected cutoffs.  
 
Caregiver  Inclusion  Criteria:  
• MMSE  ≥ 26 (with  Mungus  age and education correction)*  
• Providing care  for a friend or relative  with AD  for a minimum  of eight  hours  per week  for at  least 
the past six months  
• Being over  the age of  21 years  
• Living with  or nearby  [CONTACT_102]  
• Having  a telephone  
• Planning to stay  in the study  geographic  area for the duration of  the study  
 
* For subjects  unable  to participate  in in-person  visits, a  telehealth  version  of the  MMSE  will be given 
using the same age and education corrected cutoffs.  
 
 
Exclusion  Criteria  for Caregiver  and Care  Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459852]:  1) Presence  of significant  sensory  or motor deficits  (e.g.,  visual 
or hearing  loss, paralysis) in  the patient or caregiver that are  judged to  preclude  completion  of the study 
measures; 2) Patient or  caregiver  is in active  treatment for  cancer; 3)  Patient or caregiver  has a terminal 
illness with a life expectancy of 6 months or less; 4) Patient is in the late stage of the disease, is bed - 
bound, or nursing home admission planned within 4 months;  
 
5) Procedures  Involved*  
The study population will include White non -Hispanic, Black/African American and 
Hispanic  caregivers  and their loved  ones. We  anticipate  to screen  a maximum  of [ADDRESS_587275] 240 participants (caregiver and care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]) to complete the study.  
The study will be conducted in English or Spanish. We will recruit and randomly assign 
participants; following a baseline assessment, 240 participants will be enrolled and randomly 
assigned to one of two groups: 1) Caregiving Condition or 2) Health Promotion (Nutrition) 
Condition. The entire study is home -based. The intervention will be delivered over 6 months 
using  computer tablet  technology  in Spanish  or English. Assessments  will occur  in the beginning 
of the study, 6 months, and 12 months (after completion of the intervention).  
Interested participants (caregivers) can contact [CONTACT_459883]. One of our 
research  associates  (RA) will  provide  more  information  about  the study  to potential  participants. 
An approved script including verbal consent obtained from the potential participant in order to 
ask them questions to determine their eligibility criteria. If the participant is eligible for the 
study, an appointment will be  provided, and one  of our interventionists will visit the participant 
and conduct the baseline assessment at the participants’ homes in their preferred language 
(Spanish or English). This assessment with the caregiver will last between 2 and 3 hours. And  
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -[ADDRESS_587276] the assessment using a 
telehealth  platform.  These  virtual  visits  can be broken  up into two or more  visits  if requested  by 
[CONTACT_3038]. We will use paper -based forms and/or REDCap to  administer the assessments.  
The baseline assessment with the caregiver consists of a series of questionnaires 
assessing the help provided by [CONTACT_459884][INVESTIGATOR_841] (e.g., ADLs/AIDLs), the level of 
burden, stress, and depression perceived by [CONTACT_459885], the amount of 
social  support  available  to the CG, and  the preparedness  of the  CG to provide  continuing  care to 
their loved ones. The assessment with the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459853], 
executive functioning (Trails A & B), working memory (Le tters and Number set, digit span), 
processing speed (digit symbol), and verbal fluency (category fluency). In instances where the 
assessment is conducted virtually, certain measures may be excluded (e.g., Trails A & B, Digit 
Symbol). The assessment with th e caregiver and care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459854]. The study protocol allows multiple visits to complete the assessments.  
During the baseline home visit, the interventionist will go over the written informed 
consent with the participants (caregiver and care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]). For virtual visits, participants will 
review an electronic consent form; if participats do not have a device  to provide e -consent, a 
copy of the consent form will be mailed to the participant for signature.The assessment will not 
begin  unless  the participant  has a full understanding  of the  informed  consent  form  and has signed 
the form. In the  event the care  recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459855]’t comprehend or give  consent to the  assessment, the 
interventionist will get the assent from the caregiver. Some assessments (randomly) will be 
recorded for quality assurance purposes.  
Upon the completion of the baseline, participants will be notified by [CONTACT_459886]:  Caregiving  or Health  Promotion 
condition. During first intervention session, all participants will receive a computer tablet 
equipped  with WiFi  access. The  interventionist  will provide  a brief tutorial  on the usage  of the 
computer tablet before starting the activities of the intervention. It is one computer tablet per 
dyad.  
 
The Caregiving condition will have  a component for the  caregiver and a component for 
their loved  ones (the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]).  The care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459856] a series  of cognitive 
training tasks. The care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459857] a weekly basis. The 
interventionist will train the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459858]/practice sessions. The caregiver has a total o f 12 one -on-one sessions throughout the 
6 months of the intervention period. Some of these sessions will be joint sessions with the care 
recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]. The 12 sessions will cov er topi[INVESTIGATOR_459859] -being; self - 
care and healthy behaviors; strategies for communication; strategies for mood and stress 
management; and strategies for management of behavioral /cognitive problems. The first, the 
third, and the  last sessions will be at the participant’s home when possible. The other sessions 
will be conducted via the computer tablet using videoconference program. The caregivers will 
also be part of [ADDRESS_587277] of the part, the caregivers don’t have sessions with the 
interventionist while the  care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459860]. Although, there  will be  sessions that will be 
conducted with both of them together because of the nature of the topic/conversation.  
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -[ADDRESS_587278] access to basic educational information from Alzheimer’s 
Association on tips for dealing with the cognitive loss and available community resou rces. 
Similar to  participants  of the  caregiving  condition,  the caregivers  of the Health  Promotion 
condition will also have [ADDRESS_587279] some joint sessions throu ghout the intervention period of 6 months.  
 
In certain cases, we may be unable to visit in the participant’s home. In these cases, we 
will conduct any sessions, trainings or assessments needed over the telephone and/or secure 
videoconferencing. Care  recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459861].  
 
We will obtain  participant  written  consent  for audio/video  recording  when  we go over the 
Informed Consent Form during the baseline assessment visit. Since participants can withdraw 
their consent anytime during the  study, we will verbally obtain the  consent to audio/video  record 
before the actually recording. Participant’s agreement to be recorded will become part of the 
recording.  
We will be administering  [ADDRESS_587280] session 1 (regardless of when the 6 -month visit occurs).  
Participants  can choose  to keep the computer tablet  at the end of the study  – 12 months  if 
they complete participation.  
 
6) Data  and Specimen  Banking*  
The study does  not collect  specimens.  
All the data will be stored and secured using the procedure implemented by [CONTACT_459887].  The access  to 
records and participants data will be allowed only to the study personnel. The data will not 
contain any identifying information.  
Study data request goes through a web -based check -in and check -out procedure 
implemented by [CONTACT_459888]. The 
Data  Manager  of the Center  or designee  monitors  the logs.  Upon  granting  of the approval,  the 
requester will either get the  hard copy  of the data or link  to access the electronic data. All the 
data will not contain any identifying information.  
 
7) Data  Management*  
Preliminary  Analyses  
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -[ADDRESS_587281] 
missing data and outliers for outliers that are deemed to be legitimate values, two types of analyses will 
be performed and the results compared and reported: the first analysis will include the outliers, and the 
second will exclude them. Transforma tions, such as logarithmic or square root transformations will be 
used for variables with skewed distributions, prior to their inclusion in any analyses that require 
normality or approximate normality.  If normality cannot be achieved through transformations, then  
non-parametric techniques will be used. Bivariate  analyses (e.g., chi -square tests, t tests) will be used to 
assess patterns of association of factors potentially associated with outcome measures. Appropriate 
correlational analyses will be performed for each of the independent variables as well as with th e 
outcome variables to identify factors related to outcomes or that are likely to be confounders. Factors 
that will be  considered as potential confounders are those observed to have moderate  associations (u sing 
a liberal size for preliminary  tests of association such as a=0.25) with appointment adherence as well as 
with independent  variables  specified  in the hypotheses. These  variables  will be controlled  for in analyses 
for specific hypotheses, as appropriate.  
Primary  Analytic  Strategy  
Our plan for the main analyses is to use the General Mixed Model (Ware, 1985), which is an 
analytic strategy that can be employed for the hypotheses under each specific aim.  This model is 
suitable for analysis of unbalanced data, does not require the assumption of normality of the dependent 
variable  (in fact it can be used when  the response  of interest  is a binary  variable  or a count  variable),  can 
incorporate account for missing data in statistical models and is implemented in different analytical 
software packages such as the Proc MIXED in SAS. In addition to the longitudinal analysis, the model 
also permits cross -sectional analyses (comparing outc omes by [CONTACT_3004]), which we will perform at 
baseline, and at the post intervention follow -up. In addition, to the cross -sectional analyses comparing 
the main effect of treatment we will also examine main effects for race/ethnicity and treatment by [CONTACT_459889]. We have specified primary outcome variables for both the caregiver (e.g., CESD) and 
patient (e.g., HVLT -R). However, as the intervention targets a number of different areas related to 
patient and caregiver outcomes there are a number of seconda ry measures. When possible, we will 
examine and employ a multivariate approach. Using a set of measures that are included in our outcome 
battery, Schulz  et al (2009) created a multivariate  outcome and we will employ a similar approach.  For 
the cognitive va riables, composite  measures will be created using principal  axis factoring approaches or 
selecting measures that load most highly on derived factors representative of a particular domain (e.g., 
memory).  
For each hypothesis, we will consider models that incorporate covariates and interactions in 
order to  examine  the effects  of potential mediator  and moderator variables  on outcomes.  For example, a 
potential mediator of caregiver outcomes is improvement in both cognitive and functional status of the 
patient, which will be incorporated in longitudinal models of change. Similarly, training dosage and 
adherence to homework assignments cap tured in real time on the tablet will be examined in relation to 
outcomes. We are aware  that given  the relatively  modest  sample  size available  for some  of the analyses, 
careful consideration must be given to potential problems such as over parameterization; thus, only a 
limited number of covariates will be included in each model.  
All the study personnel who handle the data completed the CITI course. All the 
identifying information is removed from the rest of the data as soon as it reaches the Center on 
Aging  and the Center  on Aging  and Behavioral  Research.  Only  the study  coordinator  or designee 
has access to the password protected identifying information of the participant. The signed 
informed consent forms are stored in a separate double locked room. E -mail encryption is  
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -2020  
Page  13 of 19  
 required  when  emailing  any sensitive  data. During  transmission  of large  data files, we  will use 
Weill Cornell’s secure file transfer.  
 
8) Risks  to Subjects*  
The main objective of the study is to develop and test the efficacy and feasibility of an 
integrated, dyadic -based intervention program (Caregiving Condition ), delivered through 
technology that will include cognitive/ functional training for the AD patient and engage the 
caregiver (CG) as  a therapy extender. The  participants  will be  answering a  series  questions  and 
working  with an interventionist  in learning  skills  in helpi[INVESTIGATOR_459862].  
This intervention is a psycho -behavioral based program and the material that are derived 
from  successful  caregiving  studies.  Participants  will not be exposed  to any kind of risk. Based  on 
our previous experience, participants might feel tired and experience boredom while completing 
the assessments. They are not exposed to any other risk while participating in this study.  
We believe this  is a not  greater  than minimal  risk study.  
9) Potential  Benefits  to Subjects*  
Participants  can practice  the skills  learned  in the study  in their caregiving  activities.  Their 
participation in the study can help investigators in refining future technology -based caregiving 
intervention program(s) to help diverse caregivers of individuals with Alzheimer’s disease or 
memory problems.  
10) Vulnerable  Populations*  
The study  involves  Normal, healthy  volunteers  who are capable  of providing  consent  to 
participate in the study.  
The research team will not use undue influence or manipulation in order to recruit study 
participants. Our team has extensive experience in recruiting this population and is aware of the 
ethical conduct necessary to protect human subjects in research. Ther e are regular meeting to 
monitor  recruitment activities  to discuss  and review  our recruitment practices  and efforts. During 
recruitment activities and presentations in community events, the research team provides and 
explains  the content  of the flyer to  potential  participants, and  answers  and clarifies  any questions/ 
concerns  that potential  participant  may have.  Interested  participants  are instructed  and directed  to 
call the phone number or send an email to the address display in the flyer.  
11) Setting  
The study takes place at the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine Center on 
Aging and the Weill Cornell Medicine Center on  Aging and Behavioral Research and in the 
participants’ homes. The intervention is technology -based, thus facilitating the communication 
and interaction  between  RAs and participants.  Only  study  assessments  (baseline,  6th month,  and 
12th month) and select sessions may take place at the participant’s home.  
 
In cases  where  a participant  is unable  to complete  a follow -up assessment  in-person,  a 
subset  of the assessments  will be done  by [CONTACT_459890].  
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -2020  
Page  14 of 19  
 12) Resources  Available  
All the study personnel have their CITI certificate. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_459863]. At the same time, 
there are weekly meetings  on data management and recruitment  of participants.  There is  also a 
weekly  clinical  team  meeting  of assessors  who are working  one-on-one with the participants  to 
monitor and review the progress of the participants.  
The Center on Aging and the Weill Cornell Medicine Center on Aging and Behavioral 
Research  lead by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Sara J. Czaja  has extensive  experience  conducting  research  studies.  Most  of 
the members of this study are involved in other on -going studies at the Center. The Center has a 
computer dedicated to store and process the data. It also has secure room and cabinets to store 
study -related documentation. In addition, the study team con tains assessors who are fully bi - 
lingual. They are fluent in both English and S panish, thus capable of implementing the study in 
either language.  
13) Prior  Approvals  
NA 
14) Recruitment  Methods  
 
After IRB approval the research team will contact [CONTACT_459891]. These sites will be provided with IRB approved promotional materials 
(flyer)  for recruitment.  At the same  time,  the WCM  PR department  will be informed  and notified 
of the ongoing research. The PR  department will be provided with the promotional materials for 
the study. WCM sites such as those that make regular postings and newsletters will also be 
contact[CONTACT_459892]. The CITI 
certified staff members within the project plan to also attend health fairs and /or senior centers 
and events and have flyers available at various community centers so that potential participants 
can learn of the study. The WCM approved ad will also be post ed in non -WCM newsletters and 
advertisement sections. Promotional material used in this study are: flyer, radio ad and 
advertisement blurb.  
IRB-approved  letters  may be sent to designated  patients  from  WCM/NYPH  clinics  with 
IRB approval.  
Once  potential  participants  learn  of the study,  they will phone the  recruitment  phone line. 
A brief  telephone  interview  will be conducted. If these  participants  are eligible  for the  study, 
they will then be scheduled for the baseline assessment.  
Participants will not  have any  financial liabilities  for participating  in the  study. The study 
provides financial compensation for their time/effort in completing the assessment. Eligible 
caregiver participants will receive $30 for each completed assessment, for a total of $90 ($30 at 
baseline, 6 -month,12 -month visits). Eligible car e recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459864] $20 for each 
completed  assessment, for a  total of $60  ($20 at baseline, 6 -month  and 12-month  visits).  $10 will 
be provided to those that do need meet eligibility.  
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -2020  
Page  15 of 19  
 15) Local  Number  of Subjects  
We anticipate  to screen  a maximum  of [ADDRESS_587282]  240 participants  (120 
dyads) to complete the study. 80 participants will be from University of Miami and 160 will be 
from the Weill Cornell Medicine Center on Aging and Behavioral Research.  
16) Confidentiality  
This study does not collect specimens. The data are questionnaire based and participants 
will be completing them on paper or online using a secure and unique log. All the data will be 
stored and secured using the procedure implemented by [CONTACT_87137] o f Center on Aging 
and the Weill  Cornell  Medicine  Center  on Aging  and Behavioral  Research.  The access  to records 
and participants data will be allowed only to the study personnel. The data will not contain any 
identifying information.  
The hard copy data will be stored in a double locked office at the Center on Aging and 
the Weill Cornell Medicine Center on Aging and Behavioral Research in the Mental Health 
building.  The electronic  and audio  recorded  data/interview  will be kept in server computer  at the 
Center on Aging and the Weill Cornell Medicine Center on Aging and Behavioral Research as 
well. The data will be backed -up on a regular basis by [CONTACT_459893][INVESTIGATOR_459865] a double  locked office at  the Center on  Aging and the Weill  Cornell Medicine Center on 
Aging and Behavioral Research. Only study -related staff (listed in the IRB protocol) will have 
access to the data.  
 
The online  data will be collected  on REDCap  (WCM  has approved  this survey/data 
collection service and has a subscription to it). Connections to the server are encrypted.  
Minimum  levels  of password  complexity  will be enforced.  The Tablet  will be locked  down, 
requiring a 4 -digit PIN.  
 
17) Provisions  to Protect  the Privacy  Interests  of Subjects  
During  the informed  consent  process, participants  are made  aware  of who will have  access  to the 
study data (see section of Confidentiality). The participants are instructed to sign the Informed 
Consent Form only when he/she is completely satisfied with the information in the ICF, and all 
his/her questions  are answered  fully.  We will not release  participant  information  to anybody  who 
is not listed in the Confidentiality section of the ICF.  
18) Consent  Process  
The research team will  not use  undue  influence  or manipulation in order to  recruit study 
participants. Our  team  has extensive  experience  in recruiting  this population  and is aware  of the 
ethical conduct necessary to protect human subjects in research. They are all CITI certified.  
There are regular meetings to monitor recruitment activities to discuss and review our 
recruitment  practices  and efforts.  Most  of the  members  of the  research  team  who have  an active 
role in the conduct of the study (screening, assessment, and conducting the study) will also be 
involved in the recruitment and consent process.  
During recruitment activities and presentations in community events, the research team 
provides and explains the content of the  flyer to potential participants, and  answers and clarifies 
any questions/  concerns  that potential  participant  may have.  Interested  participants  are instructed 
and directed to call the phone number or send an email to the address displayed in the flyer.  
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -[ADDRESS_587283]  the capacity  to consent. These  potential  participants 
are able to  read and comprehend the information written in the Informed Consent Form and 
HIPAA authorization. Questions will be answered and addressed accordingly. Therefore no 
additional process will be used to obtain consent from them. Care Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459866].  
When a person (caregiver), who is interested in the study contacts us via telephone or 
email to request information, a trained and certified screener/assessor will call the participant 
back and explain the basics of the study. Then they will ask the partic ipant's permission to 
proceed with the telephone  screening questionnaire that would lead us to make  a decision as to 
whether or not he or she might be an appropriate candidate for the study or basically would 
qualify for the  study. This process is a prelim inary  screening done over the telephone, which is 
not feasible to do by [CONTACT_7661] a written consent. If and only when a person 1) has agreed to be 
screened over the phone; 2) understands that this study represents research; and 3) understands 
their participation is  voluntary and that they can withdraw their consent at any time, will the 
screening process proceed. We will not obtain a written consent form for the phone screening 
process  as this research  presents  no more  than minimal  risk of harm  to subjects  and involves  no 
procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research context (45 
CFR  46.117  (c) (2).  It is not possible  to have  written  consent  from  each potential  participant  for 
practical as well as cost reasons.  
Upon  the completion  of the  telephone  screening  and if the participant  appears  eligible  for 
the study, a home or virtual visit by [CONTACT_352718] (CITI certified) will be 
scheduled. A written informed consent form will be obtained by [CONTACT_459894] -certified and protocol 
trained RA during the first visit. Before any additional study -specific information is obtained, 
participants will  be asked to read the IRB -approved consent form. The potential participant is 
asked to read the consent form and, if agreeable to  participate, sign it in the presence of an 
assessor. If consenting virtually, the participant will follow the IRB -approved met hod. 
During  the phone  screening  process  and other  screening  steps  and after the  potential 
participant verbally consents to participating in the study, they will be scheduled for an 
appointment for a baseline assessment.  
 
19) Process  to Document  Consent  in Writing  
The RA (CITI certified) will obtain a written Informed Consent Form or electronic 
informed consent from the caregiver and the care -recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459867]. For visits that 
cannot  take place  in person  and where  the participants  do not have access  to an electronic  device, 
a consent form will be mailed to the participant for signature [CONTACT_459896]. The  same  process  to document consent in  writing is  implemented for  both, the  caregiver 
and the care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841]. Additionally, care recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459868].  
Upon  the arrival  the participant’s  home  or at the start of the virtual  visit and prior to  engaging  in 
any study -related activities, the RA must obtain the signed ICFs and complete Feedback Tool.  
The Informed Consent Process can be done in English or Spanish depending on the 
language of preference of the participant. The participant is asked to read the ICF and ask 
questions. If the  RA detects  the participant  is having  difficulty  reading  the ICF, the  RA will read 
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -2020  
Page  17 of 19  
 with the participant alternating paragraphs. In order to  assess whether the participant 
comprehends  the ICF, the RA will ask the participant  to paraphrase  the content  of the ICF. 
Participant  will sign and date the ICF in the presence  of the  RA once all his/her  questions 
and concerns have been answered. The ICF will be stored in a separate location from the rest of 
the study data.  
We have  provided  the Informed  Consent  Form  for the caregiver and  that of the care 
recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841].  
20) External  Co-Investigators  
First Name:  [CONTACT_459897]:  Loewenstein  
Degree:  PhD 
Institution:  University of  Miami  
Email:  [EMAIL_8822]  
Role(s):  Co-Investigator 
Contact [CONTACT_459895]:  (954)  224-6457  
Responsibilities:  [CONTACT_459898] acts  as the site PI [INVESTIGATOR_459869].  
 
All data is shared in  it’s de-identified  state.  
* DUA/MTA  language  between  the University  of Miami  and WCM  is embedded  in the subcontract  language  
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -2020  
Page  18 of 19  
 Appendix  A: 
CP Program  Telephone  Follow -Up Assessment  
 
Measure  # of Items  
Caregiver   
ADL/IADL  Modified  11 
Caregiving  Medical  Nursing  Tasks  15 
*Burden  Interview  12 
Positive  Aspects  of Caregiving  11 
*CESD  11 
Social  Support  12 
Use of Formal  Care  and Services  Only items: 
1,2, 5 -8 
Quality  of Life 1 
Caregiver  Preparedness  6 
Caregiving  Self-efficacy  9 
Caregiver  Self Health  Rating  Only items: 
1,2 
Loneliness  20 
CP/Nutrition  Evaluation  21 
*Cognitive  Decline  of CR Scale  Change  stem 
as compared 
to the last 
six months  
and ask 
items:  1 -6 
Care  Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_459870]  (items  1 – 6) Please 
ask the CG the following question:  
• 
“Compared  to six months  ago has your partner’s  (Care  recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841])  cognition:  
Gotten Much Worse, (2) Gotten Slightly Worse, (3) Stayed the Same, (4) Gotten Slightly Better  (5) 
Gotten Much Better?  
At the end of the Evaluation  for CP ask the CG in the CP condition  the following  questions: 
To what extent did your partner use the organizational tool?  
(1) Very frequently  (2) Frequently  (3) Occasionally  (4) Rarely  (5) Never  
IRB Study  Number:  [PHONE_9639]  
Version:  2.3 – 10-December -2020  
Page  19 of 19  
  
How often  did your partner  do the computer  exercises?  
(1) Very frequently  (2) Frequently  (3) Occasionally  (4) Rarely  (5) Never 
I found the organizational tool valuable?  
(1) Strongly  agree  (2) Agree  (3) Neither  agree  or disagree  (4) Disagree  (5) Strongly 
Disagree  
The computer  exercises  were  beneficial  for my partner  
(1) Strongly  agree  (2) Agree  (3) Neither  agree  or disagree  (4) Disagree  (5) Strongly  
(2) Disagree  
At the end of the Evaluation  for CP ask the CG in the Nutrition  condition  the following 
questions:  
How often  did your partner  do the computer  exercises?  
(2) Very frequently  (2) Frequently  (3) Occasionally  (4) Rarely  (5) Never  
 
The computer  exercises  were  beneficial  for my partner  
(3) Strongly  agree  (2) Agree  (3) Neither  agree  or disagree  (4) Disagree  (5) Strongly 
Disagree  