Protocol Version 4/2/[ADDRESS_342693]#- not yet assigned  Research Protocol  
 
Title:  Does Use of a Facemask Reduce the Risk of Aerosolization During Anesthesia Assisted Upper 
Endoscopic Procedures: A Randomized Controlled Pi[INVESTIGATOR_280910]: John Vargo MD , MPH  
 
Co-Investigators: Hassieb Din MD,  Ruishen Lyu, MS, Gregory Zuccaro, Jr., MD, MS,  Tyler Stevens, 
MD, MS, Madhu Sanaka, MD, Sunguk Jang, MD, Prabhleen Chahal, MD, Amit Bhatt, MD, Hassan 
Sidikki, MD, Kenneth Cummings, MD, Joseph Foss, MD.  
 
Introduction    
 
There  is little evidence describing t he aerosolizatio n of potentially infectious particles during 
gastrointestinal endoscopy. Such a phenomenon could potentially place medical staff and patients alike at 
exposure risk despi[INVESTIGATOR_280911], micro scopic water 
droplets could remain suspended in the air for hours and represent a potential risk of spread of infectious 
agents.  We propose a randomized c ontrolled pi[INVESTIGATOR_280912] k to reduce the risk of viral transmission.  
 
Background and Significance  
 
Unfortunately there is a lack of data regarding infectious risk posed to healthcare providers by [CONTACT_280918]. Furthermore, the current COVID -[ADDRESS_342694] our hypothesis. If an 
endoscopic facemask significantly reduces aerosolization it could be used to decrease infectious risk to 
providers while posing minimal risk to the patient and without significantly altering the endos copic 
procedure.  
 
 
Methods  
 
Study Design : Prospective r andomized control led trial  
 
Protocol Version 4/2/[ADDRESS_342695]#- not yet assigned  Sample  Population  
• All patients presenting for an elective upper endoscop ic procedure  with monitored anesthesia 
care 
• For the pi[INVESTIGATOR_280913] 50 total patients, 25 patients in the control arm without  a 
procedural facemask  and receiving 2 -4 L/min of oxygen via nasal cannula  and 25 with  a 
specially designed facemask . An additional 10 patients will be enrolled to account for subjec t 
dropout as necessary.  Sample size calculation  was conducted for the purpose of estimating 
population variability with a 0.05 level of significance and 0. 8 power level. This was do ne 
with the assistance of the Department of Quantitative Health Sciences a t the Cleveland Clinic  
• Inclusion Criteria;  
• All patients undergoing elective  upper endoscopic procedure s  (upper endoscopy, ERCP, 
endoscopic ultrasound) with monitored anesthesia care  at main campus Cleveland Clinic 
Q3 inpatient endoscopy unit.  
• Exclusion C riteria:  
• Any patient re quiring endotracheal intubation  
• Pregnant patients  
• Emergency procedures  
• Patient s who require use of a  facemask before or during the procedure due to medical 
necessity  
• Patients  under the age of 18  
• Non-English speaking individuals  
• Patients unable to provide consent.  
• Any procedure done outside the designated procedure room.  
• If in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_280914], a subject who was randomized to the control arm 
requires placement of the procedural mask to augment oxyge nation, the subject will be 
removed from the study  
 
 
Research Procedure : 
• All patients undergoing an upper endoscopic procedure in the designated procedure room with 
monitored anesthesia care will be eligible for recruitment into the study once exclusion cr iteria are 
applied  
 
• Patients will be randomized to receive an endoscopic procedural facemask or to undergo endoscopy 
without one at the time of enrollment in the pre -procedure  holding area. Control subjects will receive 
supplemental oxygen (2 -4 L/min) via nasal cannula as per our standard protocol. Use of this mask will 
not affect the risk of the procedure nor change the nature of the patient’s endoscopy in any way. An 
example of this  commerc ially avail able facemask is pi[INVESTIGATOR_280915]. The mask is currently used in the 
inpatient endoscopy unit at the main campus of the Cleveland Clinic is selected patients for oxygen 
delivery.  
 
Protocol Version 4/2/[ADDRESS_342696]#- not yet assigned   
 
• In order to collect particle aerosolization data, use of a Met O ne GT -526S Handheld Particle Counter 
will be used. This device  can detect particles of six different sizes  (0.3μm, 0.5μm, 1μm, 2 μm, 5μm and 
10μm) . This data can be directly downloaded  from the device  using  the associated  Comet software. 
Device pi[INVESTIGATOR_280916]: 
 
 
 
 
• Endoscopy  will be performed in accordance with standard procedures  at the Main Campus Cleveland 
Clinic  by [CONTACT_5640] a  staff gastroenterologist or a gastroenterology fellow trainee under direct supervision 
by a staff gastroenterologist.  

Protocol Version 4/2/[ADDRESS_342697]#- not yet assigned  • The device will be placed in a standardized position [ADDRESS_342698] by [CONTACT_77147], nursing or gastroenterology 
staff.  
 
Data Collecti on: 
• Data collected  before the patient enters the procedure  room : 
o Patient Demographics   (age, gender)  
o BMI  
o Upper Endoscopic Procedure  Type  (ex: esophagogastroduodenosco py, endoscopic 
ultrasoun d, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography)  
o Patient Mallamp ati Score  
• Data collected in the procedure room prior to start of endoscopy:  
o Patient vitals including BMI and oxygen saturation  
o Patient positioning  (left lateral decubitus , supi[INVESTIGATOR_050], prone).  
o Oxygen flow rate being administered by [CONTACT_280919]  
o Number of individuals in the room  
o Peak and mean aerosolized particle counts for 5 minutes prior to endoscopy start  
• Data collected during the procedure  
o Any change in supplemental oxygen requirement  
o Any intra -procedural manipulation of the patient’s head and neck  (ie. head tilt, jaw thrust)  
o Any removal and reinsertion of the endoscope  
o Any opening of the designated procedure room door  
o Any use of the endoscope working channel  
o Peak and mean aerosolized particle counts . This will be obtained during three intervals  for 
six different sizes (0.3μm, 0.5μm, 1μm, 2 μm, 5μm and 10μm) . The three intervals are: A. 
A 5-minute baseline period before initiation of sedation. B. Intra -procedurally and C. Post 
procedurally for 5 minutes, which is defined  as beginning after the endoscope is removed.  
• Data collected post -procedurally  
o Total procedure duration  
o Total dosage of medications utilized for sedation  
o Use of any reversal agents  
o Peak and mean aerosolized particle counts for 5 minutes after endoscopy com pleted  
• After the patient exits the procedure room no further patient data will be collected  
• Post-procedurally patients will follow standard post endoscopy monitoring prior to discharge.  
 
 
Sample Size Calculation and Data Analysis  
 
Sample size calculation  was conducted for the purpose of estimating population variability with a 0.05 
level of significance and 0. 8 power level. This was done with the assistance of the Department of 
Quantitative Health Sc iences at the Cleveland Clinic.  
 
Data will be described using mean s (standard deviations ) for normally di stributed continuous variables, 
median s [quartiles ] for non -normally distributed continuous variables, and frequency (percentage) for 
categor ical variables. Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_2152] -Wilks tes t will be conducted for continuou s variables to assess normality . 
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) or the non -parametric Kruskal -Wallis tests will be used to assess 
differences in continuous variables. The chi -square test and Fisher’s exact tes t will be used to compare 
categorical variables a s appropriate. A linear mixed model will be used to assess the association between 
the clinical factors and concentration level of each particl e. The mixed model will be used to account for 
Protocol Version 4/2/[ADDRESS_342699]#- not yet assigned  within subject correlation. All tests will be two -tailed and perfo rmed at a significance level of 0.05. 
Analyse s will be performed using R software  
 
Particle concentrations for the six sizes measured by [CONTACT_8121] (0.3μm, 0.5μm, 1μm, 2 μm, 5μm and 
10μm)  will be assessed during three intervals: (1) 5 minute baseline prior to the procedure (2) during the 
procedure and (3) 5 minutes after endoscope removal. The primary endpoint for the study will be the 
mean / median concentration of each particle for the t hree measurement intervals. Our hypothesis is that 
use of the facemask will significantly decrease aerosolization of all particle sizes during the procedure  
when compared to controls.  
 
Demographic, procedural and particle concentration data will be placed into a RedCap database, by [CONTACT_6283]. 
Vargo and Din. Additional access to the database will be granted to Ruishen Lyu, MS from the 
department of Quantitative Health  Sciences who will be conducting the statistical analysis.  
 
 
Adverse Events and Data Monitoring Committee  (DMC)  
 
This is a minimal risk study. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_280917]. Literature review as well as review of the MAUDE database failed to reveal any 
instances of complication s stemming from  the use of this facemask.  
 
Consent  
 
Consent will be obtained by [CONTACT_280920] -procedure area  of the endoscopy suite . 
Patients will be given the option clearly to not participate in the research study while still partic ipating in 
their planned endoscopic procedure. Subjects deemed not able to consent for the procedure themselves 
will not be included within the research study. Attached is the proposed consent document.  
 
 