[ADDRESS_800860] Stimulation for the Treatment of  Major Depressive Disorder  
Clinical trials.gov registration: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Latest University of Cincinnati IRB approval date: 09/26/2023  
 
Principal Investigator:         [INVESTIGATOR_604682] -Nava MD, PhD  
Co-Investigators:        Susan L. McElroy, MD  
     Brian E. Martens, LSW, MS, CCRC  
     Leah Casu to, MD   
     Caleb M. Adler, MD  
                     Oluwole O. Awosika, MD  
     Robert K. McNamara, PhD  
                     Anna Guerdjikova, PhD  
                                                Nicole Mori, RN, MSN, APRN -BC 
                                               Georgi Georgiev, MSW  
        Melissa P. DelBello, MD, MS  
    Jeffrey Welge, PhD  
       Rodrigo Patino, MD, MS  
 
Correspondence:        Francisco Romo -Nava, MD, PhD  
           [ADDRESS_800861]. Suite A164  
         Mason, OH [ZIP_CODE]  
         Telephone number: (513) 536 -0725  
         Email: [EMAIL_11522]  
   
            
[ADDRESS_800862] Summary (Abstract):  
Major depressive disorder  (MDD)  is a recurrent and chronic mood disorder that affects 14% of the adult population during 
their lifetime. Current treatment options are partially effective and the neurobiology of MDD is largely  unknown. Recent 
evidence points to an important role of brain -body communication in the integration of mood and therefore in depression. 
Information travelling from the body to the brain through the dorsal horns in th e spi[INVESTIGATOR_604683] a process called interoceptive awareness. This information is then used by [CONTACT_604733]. Increased sympathetic activity and somatic 
symptoms have been documented in MDD and suggest disturbed brain -body communication. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_54185] 
(SCS) has been used in the past to decrease sympathetic activity and  modulate spi[INVESTIGATOR_604684]. I ndirect evidence 
suggests that SCS might have antidepressant effect s. Transcutaneous  spi[INVESTIGATOR_604685] (tsDCS ) devices 
represent an effective, non -invasive, low cost alternative to surgically implanted SCS  devices . We believe that extant data 
support our overar ching HYPOTHESIS that an altered sensory input to the brain through the dorsal horns of the spi[INVESTIGATOR_604686] a nd restoring metabolic function. Thus, we aim to 1) determine the efficacy and safety of 
tsDCS  in adult patients with MDD and 2) investigate interocepti ve awareness, somatic symptoms , autonomic and 
metabolic regulation as potential mediators of antidepressant response to tsDCS . We predict that 1) Active tsDCS  
treatment will result in a greater decrease in depressive symptom severity compared to Sham  tsDCS  in adult patients with 
MDD, 2) active tsDCS  will be safe and well tolerated in adult patients with MDD and 3) change in interoceptive awareness, 
somatic symptoms, and autonomic and metabolic parameters will be associated with change in depressive symptom 
severity.  To a ccomplish these ai ms, we will conduct  an 8 -week, double blinded, randomized, sham controlled, parallel 
group, pi[INVESTIGATOR_604687]. A total of 20 adult antidepressant -free MDD patients will be randomized to receive  
Active (n=10) or Sham (n=10) tsDCS  protocols f or 8 weeks in a 1:[ADDRESS_800863] of our hypothesis, we will combine 
the use of a tsDCS  device, psychometric instruments to diagnose MDD (M.I.N.I.), and measure s of depressive symptom 
severity (MADRS and PHQ -9), somatic symptoms (4DSQ), interoc eptive awareness (MAIA), autonomic function (blood 
pressure, heart rate) , and po tential  metabolic markers (cortisol , LCn-[ADDRESS_800864] growth factor -21) known to be regulated by [CONTACT_604734] s of response. This will be the first 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_604688]. It is anticipated 
that the results of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_604689] a larger future trial that will additionally 
incorporate neuroimaging to investigate central mechanisms.  
 
3 
  
 
A. SPECIFIC AIMS  AND HYPOTHESIS :  
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a recurrent and often chronic mood disorder that affects 14 % of the adult 
population during their lifetime  (1). MDD seriously undermines an ind ividual’s potential by [CONTACT_604735], quality of life, increasing suicide risk, morbidity, mortality , and health related cost  (2). Current therapeutic 
options used to treat MDD are effective in onl y a portion of patients and new treatment alternatives are urgently 
needed.  
Mood can be viewed as the subjective experience that results from the integration of corporeal sensory input travelling 
through the spi[INVESTIGATOR_1831] (lamina I) and the vagus  nerve   which convey spi[INVESTIGATOR_604690] , 
respectively (3) to the nucleus of the tractus solitarius (NTS)  in the brainstem . This informa tion is then relayed to the 
thalamus and finally to the insula, where it is interpreted in a process called interoceptive awareness (4). This process 
allows human awareness of homeostasis and a cinemascopic version of emotional experience (5, 6) . Thus, interoceptive 
awareness is an essential part of mood and seems to play an important role in MDD (7).  
The brain uses the information gathered from the body to adjust corporeal function  through hypot halamic and 
autonomic outputs (8). During a depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865], patients experience autonomic dysregulation suggesting that the 
sensory input to the brain might be disturbed and play a r ole in the pathogenesis of MDD (9). Specifically,  increased 
sympathetic tone is ass ociated with  depression (10), and there is evidence that a sympathetic block (11) or drugs which 
affect sensory input to the brain have an antidepressant effect (12). Currently invasive and non -invasive 
neuromodulation treatments for depression exist in the form of transcranial magnetic stimulati on (TMS) (13), 
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) (14), deep brain stimulation (DBS) and vagal nerve stimulation  (15). 
However, their effectiveness, risk,  cost and limited device portability limit their widespread clinical application.   
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_54185] (SCS) has been safely and effectively used to treat pain syndromes for decades (16). Because of 
its sympatholytic effect, SCS has been widely used  to treat peripheral vascular disease (17) and angina (18). Clinical trials 
of SCS in these conditions provide  preliminary evidence for benefits of SCS in depressive symptom outcome s (19-23); an 
effect that has been shown to occur independent of pain reduction (22, 23) . However , in these  trials depression and 
psychopathology were exclusionary and the potential antidepressant effects of SCS have not yet been systematically 
studied in MDD patients (24, 25) . There is therefore a significant knowledge gap regarding the efficacy of SCS for the 
treatment of MDD, and addressing this gap may provide an innovative approach for treating MDD.  
Anodal transc utaneous spi[INVESTIGATOR_604685]  (tsDCS ) devices are available  for investigational use and 
represent a low cost, non -invasive alternative to surgically implanted spi[INVESTIGATOR_54210]. We therefore believe that 
extant data support our overarching  HYPOTHESIS  that an altered sensory input to the br ain through the dorsal horns of 
the spi[INVESTIGATOR_604691] 
[ADDRESS_800865] of our hypothesis, we will combine the use of a tsDCS  device, psychometric 
instru ments to diagnose MDD , and measure s of depressive sy mptom severity, anxiety and somatic symptoms , 
interoceptive aware ness , autonomic function , and possible  metabolic markers known to be regulated by [CONTACT_604736]. Additionally, adverse events will be documented to evaluate safety and tolerability.  
Specific Aim 1:  To determine the efficacy and safety of tsDCS  in patients diagnosed with MDD. Prediction 1 : Active tsDCS  
treatment will result in a greater decrease in depressive symptom severity (MADRS) compared to sham  tsDCS  in adult 
patients with MDD. Prediction 2:  Active tsDCS will be safe and well tolerated in adult patients with MDD.  
Specific Aim 2: To investigate interoceptive awareness, anxiety and somatic symptoms , autonomic and metabolic 
regulation as potential mediators of antidepressant response to tsDCS .  Predictio n 3: Change in interoceptive awareness, 
somatic symptoms, and autonomic and metabolic parameters will be associated with change in depressive symptom 
severity.  Prediction 4:  Active tsDCS treatment will result in a greater decrease in depressive symptom sub -components, 
interoceptive awareness, anxi ety and somatic symptoms , autonomic and meta bolic parameters.    
To accomplish these aims, we will randomize 20 adult antidepressant -free MDD patients to active (n=10) or sham (n=10) 
tsDCS  protocols for 8 weeks in a double blind 1:[ADDRESS_800866] 8 -
week, double blinded, randomized, s ham controlled, parallel group pi[INVESTIGATOR_604692]. It is anticipated that the results of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_604693] a larger future trial that will additionally incorporate neuroimaging to investigate central mech anisms.  
 
B. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE :  
B.1 Public Health Significance:  
Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a highly prevalent and recurrent neuropsychiatric disorder that affects millions of 
people worldwide (26). In the [LOCATION_002], it is estimated that 14% of the population will suffer MDD during their 
lifetime (1). Mental disorders represent a leading cause of years lived with disability worldwide and depressive disorders 
account for 40% of disability adjusted  life years caused by [CONTACT_604737]  (26). MDD impairs  ability to function  and 
increases suffering, suici de risk, metabolic comorbidity, cardiovascular risk, morbidity/mortality and health care costs  (2, 
27, 28) .  Current antidepressant medication effectiveness is variable and benefits only a portion of patients with small to 
moderate effect sizes  and  low response and remission rates (29-32). Other available treatments for depression , such as 
adjunctive  medications  (33, 34)  and invasive or non -invasive neuromodulation  (14), also show limited efficacy. Of note, 
current antidepressant strategies differ in their putative mechanism of action, but overla p in their targeted central 
neuropathological processes  (antidepressant response) . The neurobiological origin of depression and thus the targets 
for specific treatment remain elusive. It is estimated that  treatment  with currently available antidepressants  alleviates  
less than half the burden of MDD (35). Hence, MDD is a significant public health problem and there is an urgent need to 
[ADDRESS_800867] that bi -directional brain -body communication is 
an essential component of emotional experience (3-5, 36 -38). However, we still lack an integrative model that includes 
this knowledge  in the cont ext of mental health and the treatment of psychiatric disorders.  
Our brain communicates with the body through neural and non -neural mechanisms that form a self -regulating circuit . 
For example, the hypothalamus is a complex neurological entity that represe nts just 0.3% (4cm3) of the adult brain, but 
is a key region to understand brain output to the body. It controls systems essential in many physiological, endocrine 
and behavioral processes , including, among others, sleep/wake  cycles, reproductive behavior,  metabolic and 
cardiovascular regulation (39). These processes are tightly linked to higher cortical functions such as emotional 
regulation, fear responses, executive function, memory  and pain and sen sory perception that allow brain -body 
organization. The hypothalamus  uses several  pathways to communicate  with  the body through  the outgoing hormonal 
and autonomic signals  that need to be adequately synchronized in order to maintain homeostasis. Autonomic signals 
prepare the organs of the body for the coming horm ones associated with the  time of the day, moment for the 
reproduction cycl e, feeding status and  temperature. The hypothalamus not only modulates pre -autonomic neuronal 
systems connected to sympathet ic and parasympathetic motor nuclei in brain stem and spi[INVESTIGATOR_1831], it also has hormonal 
'motor' neurons able to release their content in the circulation. In addition, the hypothalamus receives information from 
the body about the level of metabolites and ho rmones, blood pressure and the physiological state of organs and is richly 
connected to the cortex. Via these elaborate pathways, the hypothalamus maintains a balance for optimal functioning of 
brain and body and deleterious consequences  occur if this bal ance is lost or changed (8). 
The communication between hypothalamus and body is bidirectional in order to maintain physiological balance (5, 40, 
41). Somatic and sensory visceral information  travels through the spi[INVESTIGATOR_100984] (lamina I) and nucleus of the tractus 
solitarius (NTS), which convey spi[INVESTIGATOR_604694] (3). The thalamus 
sends the relevant information to cortical areas including the insula, providing consciousness of the corporal situation in 
a pro cess called “interoceptive awareness” (4). At this level, the organization of information appears to be asymmetrical, 
with parasympathetic fibers signaling the left posterior insula, and spi[INVESTIGATOR_604695] (3). Although 
evidence regarding how the information is gathered and lateralized from the body and sent to the insula in “emotions” 
is currently limited, insular activity lateralization in emotional processing has been confirmed (42). Information next 
travels to the medial insula where the process of interoceptive awareness takes place and forms a cinemascopic version 
of emotional experience; this is essenti al for emotional processing and regulation as well as other cognitive processes 
such as mot ivational behavior and decision -making (5, 43) . The NTS information is also sent directly to the hypothalamus 
[ADDRESS_800868] or adapt bodil y functions, and also sends and receives information to and from the 
prefrontal cortex (44). (Figure 1)  This complex neuronal crosstalk between body and brain is es sential for emotions , fear 
responses,  circadian organization, fe eding and sexual behavior, blood pressure and  temperature regulation , as well as  
energy metabolism (8). 
We view mood as the subjective experience that results from the integration of corporeal sensory input travelling 
through the spi[INVESTIGATOR_604696]; which allows 
human awareness of home ostasis and the cinemascopic version of emotional experience (4, 5) . Under physiological 
conditions, signaling from the body to the brain would result in harmonious feedback to the hypothalamus and 
appropriate modulation of bodily functions via th e autonomic nervous system and contribute to a euthymic mood. 
Consequently, disturbed signaling from the body to the brain or from the  brain to the body could alter physiology and 
influence mood.  
 
Figure 1. Shows brain -body communication pathways.   Light /dark 
cycles  and food are among the biological signals that synchronize our 
brain and body physiology in activity / rest and digest periods 
corresponding to day/ night demands. The biological clock in the 
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus s ignals the pre -
autonomic neurons in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) to adjust the 
physiology through the parasympathetic branch of the autonomic 
nervous system via the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMV) and 
the sympathetic branch through the interme diolateral column (IML) to 
target organs. Visceral and somatic information travels back to the brain 
through the vagus and nucleus of the tractus solitarius (NTS), the 
lamina I in the dorsal horn of the spi[INVESTIGATOR_604697] (R)  and/or Left (L) insula. Continuous arrows show efferent 
pathways; dashed arrows show afferents . .Another feedback between 
body and brain is through  hormonal and humoral factors  (green) .  
 
B.3 Disturbed brain -body communication in MDD : MDD is strongly asso ciated with stress, circadian rhythm disruption 
(45) and other environmental and genetic factors. It is characterized by a cluster of symptoms that include not only a 
low, sad or irritable moo d, but also decreased attention and motivation, self –defeat ing and suicidal thoughts , and 
disturbance of other cognitive domains, sleep, appetite and sexual interest (46). Additionally, anxiety, pain and other 
somatic complaints are present in more than half of patients experie ncing MDD (47). MDD is often recurrent  (48) and/or 
chronic  (49). To date, maybe the most consistent evidence of brai n-body communication disruption  in MDD has been 
reported in the form of direct or indirect measurements that indicate autonomic disturbance . 
PVNR. Insula 
Thalamus
DMV DMVNTS
BodyCortex
IML
Thoracic
Abdominal
MuscularSCN
Rest/digest
SympatheticPara -
sympatheticActivityHormones
Humoral Factors
L. Insula 
(i.e; Cortisol, Adiponectin, Leptin, LCn-3, FGF -21)Hypothalamus
Dorsal HornCommercially
Available
tsDCS
[ADDRESS_800869] antial body of evidence 
showing  disturbed autonomic nervous system function in MDD. The evidence shows that the stress response system 
involving the hypothalamic -pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -adrenal axis and the sympatho -medullary system is hyperactive before, during and 
after depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] (50). Evidence of such hyperactivity can be observed in the form of increased cortisol (51) and 
leptin (52), as well as decreased adiponectin (53) levels in patients  with MDD. Cortisol, adiponectin, leptin and fibroblast  
growth factor -21 (FGF -21) levels are a reflection of the autonomic output from the brain to the body; particularly 
sympathetic tone (54), which is also regulated by [CONTACT_604738] (8, 55 -57). LCn-3 fatty acids  also play an important role in brain -body communication and are i nvolved in 
regulating circadian, and  autonomic function  (58, 59) . LCn-[ADDRESS_800870] been implicated in the pathophysiology and 
antidepressant treatment response of MDD  (60). It has also been reported recently that the metabolic hormone FGF-21, 
which is mainly produced by [CONTACT_4852], is an important s ignal for biological clock  regulation  (55) and it is largely driven  by 
[CONTACT_604739] (61). It is unknown whether FGF -21 levels are changed during a depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_604698] -body communication in MDD. Circadian cortisol release by [CONTACT_604740]  (57). This could 
help explain why the dexamethasone s uppression test failed as a diagnostic tool and as a reliable predictor of treatment 
response for MDD patients (62). Increased cortisol level in MDD is often interpreted as a cause of MDD (63), but instead 
could be a consequence of other phenomenon such as a disturbed brain -body communication , such as  increased 
sympathetic tone. Increased sympathetic activity has also been documented in MDD patients in the form of decreased 
heart rate variability (64, 65) , which is inversely correlated with depressive symptom severity (66, 67) . It is therefore not 
surprising that MDD patients show increased comorbidity with obesity  (68), metabolic syndrome  (69) and diabetes  (70), 
all of which are associated with  increased sympathetic tone (71). Taken t ogether, this evidence suggests an important 
role of the autonomic nervous syst em and disturbed brain -body communication in the pathophysiology of MDD that 
could also explain the increased cardiovascular risk of this disorder  (28, 72) . It further  suggests the possibility that levels 
of metabolic marker s such as cortisol, adiponectin , leptin, and FGF -[ADDRESS_800871], decreasing sympathetic activity would be anticipated to reduce depressive 
symptoms, as well as  to “normalize”  metabolic risk biomarkers.  
B.3.2. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_54185]  (SCS) , depressive symptoms and metabolism . Given its sympatholytic effect, SCS has 
been used to treat a variety of conditions associated with increased sympathetic tone, including peripheral vascular 
disease (17) and angina (18), but has not been directly studied for MDD treatment. The most widely used SC S 
application is chronic pain (73), a condition frequently comorbid with  depression (47). Among the trials published on SCS 
as an effective treatment for pain, a few report on depr essive symptom change.  Interestingly, SCS trials that report 
specific depression outcomes show an improvement in depressive symptom severity (21-23, 74) . At least two trials have 
shown no correlation between the effect of SCS in pain and depressive symptom improvement (22, 23) . Of note, a 
decre ase in depressive symptom se verity was observed even when severity  was mild. This is important , as clinical 
8 
 depression  in the form of MDD  was usually an exclusion criterion  for participat ion in such trials. Remarkably, a study on 
the effects of thoracic sympathetic block also showed a decrease in depressive symptom sever ity (11). Recently, 
although applied  at a cerv ical level, SCS was successfully used to decrease weight in morbidly obese patients by 
[CONTACT_604741] (75). A recent study in rodents recently showed 
that spi[INVESTIGATOR_604699] a long lasting depressive and anxious phenotype, underscoring the potential role of spi[INVESTIGATOR_604700]  (76). 
In ou r view, these results suggest a role for brain -body communication in the pathophysiology of MDD and an  unexplored 
antidepressant effect of SCS that is independent from the effect in pain. Such  antidepressant effect could be mediated 
through a decrease in spi[INVESTIGATOR_604701] (via the dorsal horn) and/or from brain sympathetic 
output to the body (via the intermediolateral column).  Additionally, SCS could improve , cardio vascular and metabolic 
function through its  sympatholytic effects .   (Table 1)  
Table 1. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_604702].  
Author  Year  SCS (protocol)  Design (n)  Reported outcome  
Burchiel KJ  1995  SCSQx  Prospective 3 month 
follow up (40)  BDI Pre>Post. No correlation % Change in 
pain and BDI change  
Burchiel KJ  1996  SCSQx  Prospective 1 year follow 
up (70)  BDI Pre>Post. No correlation % Change in 
pain and BDI change  
Jamison RN  2008  SCSQx  Cross -sectional (273)  HADS SCS<No SCS.  
Wolter T  2013  SCSQx (SCS for average 
4.8 yrs) Most 
Thoracolumbar  Retrospective (60)  HADS. Dep Pre>Post.  
Kumar K  2008  SCS Qx  Prospective 2 year follow 
up (42)  Mental health and QoL improved  
De Oliveira 
Rocha R  2014  Thoracic Sympathetic 
block  Prospective 1 year follow 
up (29)  HADS. Dep Pre>Post.  
          Beck Depression Inventory (BDI); Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_604703] e (HADS); Quality of Life (QoL)  
B.3.3. Transcutaneous spi[INVESTIGATOR_604704] ( tsDCS ) as a non -invasive neuromodulation alternative for 
surgically implanted spi[INVESTIGATOR_54210]. SCS studies have focused on an invasive SCS modality using a dev ice that is 
implanted surgically. This is an effective, but invasive and expensive option for spi[INVESTIGATOR_54185]. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_604705], safely and at a lower cost through tsDCS  (77). Prelimi nary data shows  that 
tsDCS  promotes locomotor learning with long lasting 
effects after only three SCS sessions  (Awosika O, 
personal communication ). (Figure 2)  Anodal tsDCS  can 
inhibit ascending (78-80) and descending (81) spi[INVESTIGATOR_604706].  This is consistent with the evidence 
showing that SCS decreases sympathetic to ne, which 
could be explained  by [CONTACT_604742]  (IML) or at  ascending  spi[INVESTIGATOR_604707].                              
Figure 2. Shows tsDCS  effects in locomotor training.  
9 
 A resting state fMRI study with a double blind and cross -over design, recently showed that anodal tsDCS  at the T11 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_604708]  2.5 milliampere ( mA) for 20 min resulted in a decreased connectivity between the 
primary somatosensory cor tex and the ipsilateral posterior insula for both left and right hemispheres. Anodal tsDCS  also 
induced decreased thalamic connectivity with the anterior cingulate cortex and increased connectivity between the 
primary somatosensory  cortex and the thalamus (82). We interpret these results as evidence of supraspi[INVESTIGATOR_604709].  
Neuromodulation through tsDCS  is still an emerging technology. Several stimulation protocols have been studied to 
date. For example, at the cervical level  and using an anterior -posterior anodal stimulation , tsDCS  at [ADDRESS_800872] (83). This suggests that tsDCS , even at the cervical level,  is 
safe and does not affect motor pathways  at an intensity of up to 3.0mA .                    
B.[ADDRESS_800873] for the development of neuromodulation strategies to treat other ment al disorders such as bipolar disorder, 
anxiety disorders, ADHD and their non -psychiatric medical comorbidities for which the proposed mechanisms may also 
be involved.  Within the framework of Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) the present proposal entails the perception and 
understanding of Self in the sub -construct of Agency , as well as the domains of Arousal/Regulatory systems and 
Circadian Rhythms . Our proposal also responds to the Strategic Plan for Research set for by [CONTACT_941] N ational Institute of 
Mental Health objective 1)  Define the mechanism of complex behaviors in its  priority for strategy  1.1.D.2: Investigating 
10 
 the role of coordinated neural activity in normal cognitive, affective and social processes, and aberrant functions in 
mental illnesses ; and object ive 3 ) Strive for prevention and cures, in its priority for strategy 3.1.A.2: Developi[INVESTIGATOR_604710] f or strategy 3.1.C.2: Developi[INVESTIGATOR_604711] -modal assessments in outcomes research.  
 
D. APPROACH  
D.1 Study Overview.  
This is a study with a double -blind ed, randomized, parallel group, sham controlled  pi[INVESTIGATOR_604712] . The protocol 
will be submitted to the Institutional Review Boards of the University of Cincinnati  for review and approval . This is a joint  
effort  among  basic and clinical researchers at the Lindner Center of Hope  (a University of Cincinnati College of Medicine 
affiliate) , the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neuroscience and the Department of Neurology and 
Rehabilitation Medicine at the University of Cincinnati College of Medici ne.  
Participants . Subjects will be recruited from the community  and from  the Lindner Center of Hope  through advertising 
and word of mouth.  Location:  All study procedures involving participants will be conducted at the Lindner Center of 
HOPE. Inclusion criteria : 1) age 18 -55 yrs., inclusive ; 2) f emale or male; 3) BMI 18.5 to 3 5 kg/mts2, inclusive ; 4) current 
MDD epi[INVESTIGATOR_604713] (MINI) 5.0 wit h a duration of ≥1 
month and ≤ 24 months; 5) m oderate MDD  symptoms  according to Montgomery -Asberg Depression Rating Scale  
(MADRS) score ≥ 20 to ≤35; 6) n o current or recent (past month) antidepressant pharma cological treatment; 7) GAD and 
other anxiety symptoms will be permitted ; 8) using an effective contraceptive method  (all participants of childbearing 
potential) . Exclusion criteria : 1) Current or lifetime MDD epi[INVESTIGATOR_466541] -respons ive to two or more antidepr essant 
treatments at adequate doses and time  (including ECT);  2) Current or lifetime bipolar disorder  or schizophrenia  
diagnosis ; 3) current (past month):  PTSD , psychotic or substance use disorder (nicotine  and caffeine  allowed); 4) 
significant risk of suicide according to CSSRS or clinical judgment , or suicidal behavior in the past year : 5) current chronic  
severe  pain conditions; 6) current chronic use of : opi[INVESTIGATOR_604714] , medications that affect blood pressure or drugs 
with  signif icant  autonomic effe cts (stimulants and antipsychotics allowed if dose stable for 1 month) ; 7) n eurological, 
endocrinological, cardiovascular  (including diagnosed hypertension)  or other clinically significant medical conditions  as 
judged by [CONTACT_15370] ; 8) skin lesions on electrode placement region; 9) implanted electrical medical devices; 10) 
Pregnancy ; 11) suspected IQ<80, and 12) any other clinically relevant reason as judged by [CONTACT_15370].  
D.1.1. Psychometric evaluations. The Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview 5.0 ( MINI )(84) will be used to 
confirm the diagnosis  of current MDD  and evaluate the presence of comor bid psychiatric disorders . The Montgomery -
Asberg Depression Rating Scale  (MADRS )(85) will be used to evaluate depressive symptom severity and the Columbia 
Suicide Severity Rating Scale (CSSRS) (86) will be used to evaluate suicidality. The clinical global impression - severity (CGI -
S) and the clinical global impression -improvement (CGI -I) scales will be  used to evaluate the overall clinical severity and 
11 
 improvement of the illness (87).   Participants will also complete self -report instruments including the Patient Health 
Questionare -9 (PHQ -9) as a n additional  measure  of depressive symptom severity (88). The Four -Dimensional Symptom 
Questionnaire (4DSQ) (89) to measure distress, somatization and anxiety symptoms, the Binge Eating Scale (BES)  to 
measure eating behaviors and aspects of body perception (90) and the multidimensional assessment of interoceptive 
awareness (MAIA)  as a quantitative measure of interoceptive awareness (91). Participants will complete an electronic 
version of the emotion recognition task (92, 93)  and the stop signal task  (94, 95)  prior to tsDCS  (offline)  and during tsDCS 
(online) in order to obtain preliminary data on the effect of tsDCS on emotion recognition and cognitive function. A 
paper , electronic  and/or a REDcap electronic version of the inst ruments may be used to complete the psychometric 
evaluations.  
D.1.2. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_604715]. The 2x2 Soterix® Medical transcutaneous spi[INVESTIGATOR_604716] [ADDRESS_800874]. 
Awosika has extensive experience  and will provide appropriate training to the study team.  This device will be 
appropriately labeled as an “Investigatio nal Device. Federal (Law) limits  device to investigational use ”. The device will be 
kept in a secured area inside the LCOH Research Institute and will be made available only to trained personnel of the 
study team. This device allows a nodal stimulation to b e delivered at 2.5mA per 20-minute  session or sham sessio n 
consisting of short pulses  (of the desired intensity)  at the beginn ing and end of the sessions. This protocol of a nodal 
stimulation has been reported to be effective in inhibiting ascending pathway s with a lasting effect, to be safe and well 
under the threshold for tissue damage (77, 79) . If stimulation intensity  (in active or sham protocols)  is not tolerable  at 
2.5mA , the clinician may decide  to decrease intensity to 2.[ADDRESS_800875] has tolerated a stimulation intensity of less than 
2.5mA, the study clinician may  attempt to increase the dose to 2.0mA or 2.5mA when considered clinically appropriate. 
An anode electrode (5x10cm) will be placed at the level of the 10th vertebrae spi[INVESTIGATOR_604717]. At this level, the current is 
expected to spread longitudinally through th e spi[INVESTIGATOR_604718] (96). The cathode 
(5x7cm) electrode will be place d on the right shoulder  over the deltoid area  (78, 79, 97) . Participants will be scheduled 
to receive sham or active tsDCS  sessions three times/week. Subjects will be randomized in a 1:1 ratio using a simple 
allocation method to one of two experimental groups: 1) sham or 2) stimulation protocol. Randomization will be double -
blinded. An independent operator  (trained personnel from the research team)  will prepare the tsDCS device parameters 
for each session, but will not participate in the rest of th e assessments. Patients  and raters will remain blinded to SCS 
protocol assigned to each participant throughout the s tudy. During the session, subjects will remain in a calm and 
relaxing environment. All participants will be scheduled for the same procedures and number of  scheduled  visits during 
the eight -week follow -up period.  (Table 2 ) 
D.1.3. Blood and urine samples.  General : Blood samples  (approximately 20ml per occasion)  will be obtain ed on visit 0 
and 6 for a)  Hematology:  Complete blood count (CBC) ; b) electrolytes ; c) liver panel;  d) kidney panel ; e) lipid panel; f)  
other: glucose  and TSH.   A urine sample for urinalysis  will be collected at screening . A serum human chorionic 
12 
 gonadotrophin (HCG) determination (blood pregnancy test)  will be conducted at visit 0 , visit 4 and 6  (if applicable).  Blood 
sample  processing for these tests  and urinalysis  will be  performed at Quest Diagnostics . Special focus  metabolic markers : 
Blood sample  (approximately 5ml per occasion)  will be obtained on visit 1 , 4 and 6 for: Adiponectin, leptin , cortisol , 
insulin and FGF -21 levels . Samples  will be processed using ELISA assays at the Biochemistry Core Laboratory from the 
Schubert Research Clinic at Cincinnati Children’ s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] . A blood sample  (approximately 5 ml per occasion) will be 
obtained for Fatty acid analyses: Patients (N=20) will ha ve their blood fatty acid composition determined by [CONTACT_604743] 1, visit 4, and visit [ADDRESS_800876]. 
McNamara (Co -Investigator).   
D.1.4. Cardiovascular measurements.  Blood pressure will be obtained before and after SCS sessions through the 
auscultatory technique using a standard mercury sphygmomanometer in a sitting position after [ADDRESS_800877] and  abdominal circumference  and 
Body Mass Index (BMI)  will be measured on  visits 0, 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6 . 
D.2. Protocol visits.  
Visit 0 ( Screening ). Subjects will be informed about  study procedures and given a written informed consent to sign 
voluntarily before any study procedure is initiated  (See Informed consent form attached to this protocol) . Then, the 
clinical staff will evaluate the participant in order to obtain a psychiatri c and medical history. The MINI will be used to 
confirm MDD diagnosis, the MADRS to evaluate depressive symptom severi ty and  the CSSRS for suicidality . The clinical 
research team will perform a  full neurological and physical evaluation, ECG, cardiovascular  measurements, laboratory 
tests, urinalysis, urine  drug test , and a blood  pregnancy test (if applicable) . After eligibility is confirmed, a baseline visit 
will be scheduled.  
Visit 1  (Baseline ). After verification of eligibility, subjects will be randomize d to a n “active” or to a “sham” ts DCS 
protocol.  Treatmen t allocation will remain double -blinded throughout the study to raters  and study physician s. A 
MADRS,  CGI-S, CSSRS, PHQ -9, 4DSQ , BES  and MAIA w ill be completed. BMI , waist and abdominal circumference , vital 
signs, blood sample and ECG will be obtained.  A physical and neurological evaluation will be conducted.  Participants will 
complete the ERT and SST prior and during the SCS protocol. Each participant will receive the assigned SCS protoc ol.  
SCS sessions (1 -24): Three tsD CS sessio ns per week will be scheduled. A CSSRS will be completed before each SCS 
session. Blood pressure and heart rate  will be evaluated prior  and after each tsD CS sessi on. AE’s will be assessed  after 
each session through open -ended questions .  
Full visits 2, 3, 4, and 5 : A MADRS, CSSRS, CGI-S, CGI -I, PHQ -9, 4DSQ , BES  and MAIA sc ales will be completed. 
Anthropometric measures  (Visit 3, 4, 5), vital signs, and ECG  (Visit 4) will be obtained. A blood sample (visit 4), u rine drug 
test (Visit 4) and pregnancy test will be performed if applicable (visit 4). A physical and neurological evaluation will be 
13 
 conducted (Visit 3, 4, and 6). Participants will complete the ERT and SST pri or and during the SCS protocol (Visit 4). Each 
participa nt will receive the respective tsD CS protocol. AE ’s will be recorded after each tsD CS session.  
Full Visit 6  (Final visit) : A MADRS, CSSRS, CGI-S, CGI -I, PHQ -9, 4DSQ , BES  and MAIA  scales will be compl eted. 
Anthropometric measures , vital signs, blood sample , pregnancy test  and ECG  will be obtained.  A drug urine test will be 
performed. Participants will complete the ERT and SST prior and during the SCS protocol. Each participant will receive 
the respecti ve tsDCS protocol. A physical and neurological evaluation will be conducted. AE’s will be recorded after each 
tsDCS session.  
 
Menstrual phase will be documented at each full visit.  Partic ipants will be referred for aftercare after study completion 
with their primary care physician (PCP) or will receive referral information for a psychiatrist or other mental healthcare 
professional. Particip ants will be compensated with  a total of up to $25 0 ($10 per visit ) for their time and effort  through 
a prepaid debit card . Subjects are expected to attend to  the Lindner Center of Hope a total of 25 times. Free parking is 
provided. Additional unscheduled visits may be arranged if needed. Full visits may be scheduled with a window of +/ - 4 
days. A participant may not be allowed to continue on the study if the participant misses more than 6 consecutive tsDCS 
sessions or has missed more than 8 tsDCS sessions on separate occasions.   
D.3. Participation of hum an subjects.  
This study will be performed in complianc e with International Conference of Harmonization (ICH) Good Clinical Practice 
(GCP) and corresponding local regulations. Participation will be voluntary;  subjects will be informed in detail about the Table 2. Schedule of events  
 Screen  
Visit 0  
(Day -14 +/ - 
7) 
 Baseline  
Visit 1  
(Day 0)   
Visit 2  
Day 7 +/ -4)  
Visit 3  
(Day 14 +/- 4) 
  
Visit 4  
(Day 28 +/ - 4) 
  
Visit 5  
(Day 46 +/ - 4) Final Visit  
Visit 6  
(Day 56 +/ -
4) 
MINI  X       
MADRS  X X X X X X X 
PHQ -9,   X X X X X X 
CGI-S & CGI -I, 4DSQ , BES  
and MAIA.   X X X X X X 
ERT and SST   X   X  X 
CBC, LFT, Renal, Lipid , 
Glucose and TSH . X      X 
Urinalysis  X      X 
Serum HCG  X X   X  X 
Drug Urine test.  X    X  X 
Adiponectin, FGF -21, 
Leptin , LCn-3, Insulin,  
Cortisol   X   X  X 
Anthropometric 
measurements  X X  X X X X 
EKG  X X   X  X 
Physical and Neurological 
Evaluation  X X  X X  X 
        
 Screen  Baseline  Week 1  Week 2  Week 3  Week 4  Week 5  Week 6  Week 7  Final Visit  
tsDCS  sessions   X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
CSSRS  X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Blood Pressure*, HR*   X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Adverse Events   X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
Complete Blood Co unt (CBC) ; Liver Function Test (LFT);  Thyroid stimulant hormone (TSH);  Fibroblast Growth Factor -21 (FGF -21), Long Chain fatty acids (LCn -3), Heart 
Rate (HR) , Electrocardiogram (EKG) . Emotion recognition task (ERT) and the stop signal task (SST) to be completed prior and during the corresponding tsDCS sessio ns. 
*Measured pre and post tsDCS session.  
14 
 study, including potential risks and benefits of participating and will agree to partici pate by [CONTACT_604744]  (See informed consent form attached to this protocol) . The informed consent form will be written in a 
language that is understandable for potential participants. The study team will be available to answer any  questions before 
the potential participant decides to sign the informed consent form.  All required study documentation will be  confidential 
and archived as required by [CONTACT_12721].  Data and Safety Monitoring Plan : This plan will include monitor ing of 
efficacy and safety data by [CONTACT_139809] (DSMB) that will meet every six months and will 
provide oversight and monitoring to ensure the safety of participants and the validity and integrity of the data. Detailed 
inform ation on the  Data and Safety Monitoring plan and  DSMB is contained in  Protection of Human Subjects section of  
this protocol . 
 
E. OUTCOMES  
Primary Outcome: Difference in change from baseline to week 8 (or last available observation) in MADRS scores between 
active and sham tsDCS groups. Secondary Outcome:  a) differences in AE’s frequency between active and sham tsDCS 
groups, b) association between change from baseline to week 8 (or last available observation) in MADRS scores, and 
clinical  (CGI -I, CGI -S, PHQ -9, MAIA, BES and 4DSQ) , autonomic  (BP, HR ) and metabolic (anthropometric , adiponectin, 
leptin, cortisol , FGF-21 and LCn -3) parameter change f rom baseline to week 8 (or last available observation) , and c) MADRS  
sub-component (98) scores , clinical parameters (CGI -I, CGI -S, PHQ -9, MAIA, BES and 4DSQ), autonomic  (BP, HR ), and 
metabolic  (anthropometric , adiponectin, leptin, cortisol , insulin, FGF-21 and LCn -3) parameters  change from baseline to 
week 8 (or last available observation) differen ce betw een Active and Sham  tsDCS  groups.  Exploratory outcome measures:  
a) difference in change from baseline to week 8 (or last available observation) in  offline  ERT and Stop signal task scores  
between active and sham tsDCS groups ; and b) difference in cha nge from baseline to week 8 (or last ava ilable observation) 
in offline and online change ERT and s top signal task scores  between active and sham tsDCS groups  
F. SAFETY MEASURES   
Potential Risks.  Safety evaluation will consist in recording all laboratory test s, vital signs and ECG results, suicidality 
monitoring  (each SCS session) , physical and neurological examinations and any adverse events (AE). As mentioned above, 
literature suggests that current density below 25 mA/cm2 induces no tissue dam age (99). Findings will be r ecorded as AEs 
at the discretion  of the inv estigator.  Known side effects to tsDCS  are paresthesia, redness, itch, or pai n in stimulated area. 
If they occur , these side effects tend to disappear within minutes to hours after stimulation.  To our knowledge, n o serious 
adverse effects have been reported with the use of transcutaneous direct current stimulation protocols using 2.5mA/cm2 
(100) .   
Risk/Benefit Assessment.  Participants will be informed that there are other FDA approved treatment alternatives for 
major depressive disorder and that their participation in this study is voluntary. Therapeutic options include 
antidepressant medications, psychotherapy, invasive and non -invasive neuromodulation tools. Participants will also be 
[ADDRESS_800878] and/or safety of the subject. If at any po int 
during the study a patient has a MADRS suicide item score > one point higher than their visit 1 ( baseline ) score  for any 
one week, or a score of > 4 ; or active suicidal behavior on the C -SSRS; or appears to the investigator to pose a risk of self -
harm or harm to others,  the patient  may  be withdrawn from the study. Additionally, patients will be withd rawn from the 
study (and referred for treatment  as clinically indicated) if there is a worsening of symptoms at visit 2  or later, as indicated 
by a CGI -I score of ≥ 6 or more at a ny time during the study or a minimal  worsening of symptoms at visit 3  or later as 
indicated by a CGI -I score of ≥ 5 at 2 consecutive visits, starting at visit 2 ; or a 50% increase over baseline in total MAD RS 
rating and a total MADRS> [ADDRESS_800879] exhibits active suicidal or 
homicidal ideation during study participation that, in the judgment of a clinical study investigator, cannot be managed on 
an outpatient basis, he/she will be  withdrawn from the study and  referred fo r inpatient psychiatric care. Patien ts with 
active suicidal behavior may  be removed from the study based on C -SSRS criteria, as noted above. All subjects who 
discontinue stu dy participation prior to visit [ADDRESS_800880] 
their study physician 24 hours/day, 7 days/week in between visits should suicidal or homicidal ideation or an y other 
emergency situation occur. If a participant becomes pregnant during the study, participation will be stopped, and the 
event will be documented as a serious adverse event. The participant will be referred for appropriate medical treatment 
and follow  up with primary care physician and followed by [CONTACT_604745]. We have successfully followed this protocol in our prior 
16 
 outcome and clinical trials stu dies. A study physician will work with the patient to arrange admission i n the event that it is 
determined that a study participant needs psychia tric or medical hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  
G. SAMPLE SIZE.  
This is an exploratory pi[INVESTIGATOR_604719] 60 (including screen fails) participants will be screened in an effort 
to recruit  20 participants that will  receive either sham (n=10) or active treatment (n=10)  for 8 weeks .  Recruitment efforts 
will be aimed at a 2 patient/month rate . The explorat ory nature of the study precludes a sample size that w ould enable 
detection of small  but still clinically relevant effects at convent ional significance thresholds. However, estimates of effect 
sizes with confidence intervals will be useful as inputs to lar ger confirmatory studies if these effects fall in an appropriate 
range (i.e., at least moderate sample effect sizes of approximately 0.[ADDRESS_800881] deviations), even if the conventional 
significance is not achieved.  
H. FEASIBILI TY OF RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION  
Resources and Infrastructure: The University of Cincinnati (UC) College of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry was 
founded in [ADDRESS_800882] of sustained research support related to mood, eating, and impulse control 
disorders and pharmacological treatments.   
The Lindner Center of HOPE (LCOH) is a nonprofit 91,820 square foot Mental Health facility affiliated with the University 
of Cincinnati and located in Mason, Ohio. LCOH provides comprehensive mental health, substance abuse, and dual 
diagnosis services. The Center was a founding member of the National Network of Depression Centers (NNDC), de facto 
recognition as a center of excellence in the treatment and research of mood disorders. The facility is located on 36 acres 
and is easily accessible to the T ri-state  area (Ohio, Kentucky and Indiana). LCOH has 48 inpatient beds with separate units 
for adolescents, adults and elderly patients. The annual capacity is 1,400 inpatients and 29,000 outpatients. The facility 
treats patients with public and private health ins urance. Onsite assets include: pharmacy, dining room, faith center, library, 
gymnasium, and exercise room.  LCOH is accredited by [CONTACT_604746][INVESTIGATOR_604720], 
licensed  as a Private Psychiatric Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_604721].  
The LCOH Research Institute located onsite is dedicated to conducting clinical, outcomes, and genetics research. The 
Research Institute has conducted numerous cli nical trials of pharmacological treatments for mood, eating, and anxiety 
disorders. The Research Institute is staffed by [ADDRESS_800883] with extensive experience on tsDCS in the context of neurological rehabilitation and will provide additional  
training to study staff on the use of the tsDCS device and any other associated technical aspects. The Clinical Staff at the 
LCOH Research Institute are trained in conducting num erous assessments including Structured  and semi -structured 
clinical Interview s for DSM -IV and DSM -5 Axis I Disorders and Axis II Disorders, MINI  and other psychometric instruments.  
The staff employed at the LCOH Research Institute has over 20 years’ experience conducting research and recruiting study 
participants from the local environment (prior to LCOH opening the staff were part of the Clifton campus of the UC 
Department of Psych iatry).  
Recruitment: The LCOH Research Program has access to a full -time marketing staff, which, in turn coordinates television, 
radio and newspaper advertisements after appropriate approval by [CONTACT_421718]. In addition to advertising, subjects are 
recruited  from clinician referral and the LCOH intake department, and by [CONTACT_604747]. UC and LCOH 
also have excellent technical resources (e.g., personal computers and software) for the analysis of data and preparation 
of manuscripts. Both PC and M acintosh computers are available and the Information Management staff at LCOH is 
experienced in a variety of database programming languages including Stata, SAS, and SPSS. LCOH has integrated cutting -
edge technology including an electronic medical record; wifi that integrates computers, telephones and voicemail; and 
state -of-the-art protection of patient -identified electronic data. The LCOH IT staff has expertise in web development and 
already manages the LCOH website (www.lindnercenter.org) in coordination  with the marketing department.  
I. DATA MANAGEMENT AND ANALYSIS.  
Data management and  analyses will be organized and performed by [CONTACT_941] r esearch team under the guidance  of [CONTACT_604757], Director of the Division of Biostatistics in the Department of Psychia try at the University of Cincinnati, who has 
participated in the development of this analytic plan. Data will be collected via  Case Report Forms. The research 
coordinator will be responsible for managing the study flow, maintaining case report forms, and e ntry data into a 
password -protected  database  on REDcap .  
Data Analysis. Specific Aim 1 : Prediction 1 ) Active tsDCS  treatment will result in a greater decrease in depressive symptom 
severity (MADRS) compared to Sham in adult patients diagnosed with MDD. Efficacy:  Longitudinal effect of tsDCS will be 
assessed by [CONTACT_604748] 8  (or last available observation) . To take maximum 
advantage of intermediate observations while avoiding assumptions about the trajectory of change over time, we will use 
a repeated -measures ANOVA model (i.e., with time as a categorical variable), and the pri mary hypothesis test will be a 
planned contrast of the baseline -week 8 differences between groups. Prediction 2)  Active tsDCS  is safe and well tolerated 
in adult patients diagnosed with MDD. Safety : A similar analysis as used for efficacy data will be perf ormed for laboratory 
assays, vital signs, anthropometric, clinical, autonomic and metabolic variables. Frequencies of AE’s will be compared 
between groups using comparative analysis. Specific Aim 2 : Prediction 3 ) Baseline and change in interoceptive awaren ess, 
18 
 somatic symptoms, clinical, autonomic and metabolic parameters will be associated with change in depressi ve symptom 
severity. A correlation  analysis will be used to evaluate  the association between treatment and depressive  symptom 
severity, both total  and in components (items) . Correlation analysis will also be performed  by [CONTACT_547],  autonomic and 
metabolic parameters. Prediction 4) Active tsDCS treatment w ill result in a greater change  in interoceptive awareness, 
anxiety and soma tic symptoms , clinical, autonomic and metabolic parameters.  Longitudinal effect of tsDCS will be 
assessed by [CONTACT_604749] -component scores, clinical parameters (CGI -I, CGI -S, PHQ -9, BES, MAIA, and 4DSQ), 
autonomic,  and metabolic parameters change from baseline to week 8 (or last available observation) difference between 
Active and Sham groups using a repeated -measures ANOVA as described above. Throughout, tests and confidence 
intervals for effect sizes will be two -sided, α=0.05.  
J. PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS.  
The data and safety monitoring plan for the proposed study will include monitoring of efficacy data by [CONTACT_604750] (DSMB) and monitoring of tolerability data, including adverse eve nts and serious adverse 
events, by [CONTACT_604751] t DSMB  and the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine 
Institutional Review Board (IRB). The DSMB will consist of non -study related  faculty  with relevant research expe rience.  
Data Safety Monitoring Board. In order to maximize the safety of the study participants, in addition to adverse event 
monitoring by [CONTACT_2792], the proposed study will also have a Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB). The DSMB 
will consist  of non -study related faculty with research related experience and will include a psychiatrist with expertise in 
clinical research and mood disorders (Fabbiano Neri, MD , PhD ), a psychiatrist or neurologist with experience in non -
invasive neuromodulation  (Jonathan Cole, DO ), and a researcher with experience in biostatistics or a biostatistician 
(Thomas Blom , MS ). The DSMB  members will not have a potential conflict of interest in study related outcomes. The 
DSMB will meet a minimum of every 6 months during the course of the study and will review tolerability, safety and 
efficacy data. The DSMB will also review all SAEs at t he time of their occurrence and provide recommendations based on 
this review (e.g., that the study may continue or they may recommend modifications, including additional tolerability 
and efficacy measures). Every six months the DSMB will formally review al l adverse events as well as all efficacy and 
tolerability data. [CONTACT_604758] -Nava will be responsible for providing updated efficacy and tolerability data to the DSMB 
every six months and the person with the blinded information will provide information on trea tment group assignment 
without breaking the blind. The DSMB will assess the risks and benefits of study participation to all subjects and based 
on this assessment the DSMB will provide a written report of their analyses and recommendation as to whether the  
study should continue, modifications to the study are needed or if the study should be terminated. [CONTACT_604758] -Nava in 
conjunction with the DSMB, will be responsible for making certain that the DSMB files their report to the IRB and/or 
other authorities as r equired. The DSMB will also provide the investigator with a summary of their report that will 
include their recommendations.  
[ADDRESS_800884] current  stimulation for neurological rehabilitation. They 
also will be responsible for evalu ating and documenting all adverse events during study visits or more frequently as 
necessary. Additionally, a study -related physician will be accessible by [CONTACT_604752] 24 hours/day, 7 days/week 
during study participation. [CONTACT_604759] o-Nava and designated  clinical researchers  will be responsible for reviewing all 
laboratory and safety measures from all subjects following each visit. An adverse event (AE) is any unexpected medical 
occurrence in a patient or clinical investigation subject who is administered  a product and which does not necessarily 
have a causal relationship with the treatment. This includes any clinical or laboratory change that occurs at any time 
following consent that does not typi[INVESTIGATOR_604722]. The frequency and 
severity of all observed or volunteered AEs regardless of treatment group or suspected causal relationship to the study 
treatment will be recorded throughout the study. [CONTACT_604758] -Nava and designated clinicians will also be respo nsible for 
determining causal relationships between the study treatment and all AEs. Withdrawal from the study as a result of an 
AE or because of therapeutic measures taken to treat an AE will be at the discretion of the PI. If a subject withdraws or 
is wi thdrawn from the study for any reason, a study physician will monitor subjects with any ongoing AE until the AE is 
resolved or determined to be stable. All AEs (including those present during screening) will be reported. However, for 
analytics purposes, on ly post -baseline (randomization) AEs (or AEs that are present at visit 1/ baseline but have 
increased in severity or frequency post -baseline) will be considered for calculating treatment group differences in AEs. 
All AEs will be reported to the study DSMB,  and the IRB at the time of progress reports.  
A serious adverse event (SAE) is any adverse experience occurring during study participation that results in any of the 
following outcomes: death; a life threatening adverse drug experience; inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_604723]; a persistent or significant disability/incapacity; or a congenital anomaly/birth defect. Important 
medical events that may not result in death, be life -threatening, or require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_604724], based on appropriate medical judgment of the study physician, they may jeopardize the patient 
or subject and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes in this definition. The 
judgment of whether a particular AE meets the above criteria for an SAE for the proposed study will be determined by 
[CONTACT_978], in conjunction with the proposed Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB). It will also be the PIs responsibility to 
manage all SAEs and to make ref errals for appropriate care, as necessary. All SAEs will be reported to the University of 
Cincinnati Institutional Review Board and the study DSMB within [ADDRESS_800885]. A person with the blinded 
information will be available 24 hours/day, 7 days/week if it is necessary to break the blind in an emergency situation. 
All subject information will be de -identified when reporting serious ad verse events. All AEs and SAEs will be double 
entered  into two separate databases (and checked for accuracy) that are de -identified and password protected to 
ensure confidentiality. [CONTACT_604758] -Nava  and the study team  will ensure that all patients have approp riate follow -up care  
[ADDRESS_800886] information/binders will be kept in locked file cabinets behind locked doors in the locked research suite. 
Subject binders will contain identifiable inf ormation. A master file/key with  subject identifie rs (typi[INVESTIGATOR_604725]) will be kept in a locked password protected database to which only relevant study staff will have access. 
Subje ct information will be placed in  a password -protected computer database, and will be available only to the 
principal investigators and research team members who are directly involved in entering and analyzing the data. The 
master file/key will exist u ntil all study related analyses and publications are completed. Every effort will be made to 
maintain the confidentiality of study records. Agents of the University of Cincinnati Medical Center Institutional Review 
Board and the Lindner Center of Hope may be allowed to inspect records related to this study. The data obtained from 
the study may be published; however, participants will not be identifiable in such publications. Participant identity will 
remain confidential unless disclosure is required by [CONTACT_2371].  The records of this research study will be kept confidential and 
will not be given to anyone who is not helpi[INVESTIGATOR_426189]. To further ensure confidentiality, study records will be kept i n locked file cabinets and/or in computers  and 
tablets  with passwords, all in locked rooms here at the Lindner Center of Hope. Additionally, participant identification is 
coded with letters and numbers to de -identify individuals. As required, this study wi ll be in full compliance of HIPAA.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 
  
 
 
L. REFERENCES.  
1. Kessler RC, Petukhova M, Sampson NA, Zaslavsky AM, Wittchen HU. Twelve -month and lifetime prevalence and 
lifetime morbid risk of anxiety and mood disorders in the United State s. Int J Methods Psychiatr Res. 2012;21(3):169 -84. 
2. Kessler RC. The costs of depression. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2012;35(1):1 -14. 
3. Craig AD. Forebrain emotional asymmetry: a neuroanatomical basis? Trends Cogn Sci. 2005;9(12):566 -71. 
4. Craig AD. Signi ficance of the insula for the evolution of human awareness of feelings from the body. Ann N Y 
Acad Sci. 2011;1225:72 -82. 
5. Craig AD. How do you feel --now? The anterior insula and human awareness. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2009;10(1):59 -
70. 
6. Simmons WK, Avery JA , Barcalow JC, Bodurka J, Drevets WC, Bellgowan P. Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_156712]: insula 
functional organization and functional connectivity integrate interoceptive, exteroceptive, and emotional awareness. 
Hum Brain Mapp. 2013;34(11):2944 -58. 
7. Avery JA, Dreve ts WC, Moseman SE, Bodurka J, Barcalow JC, Simmons WK. Major depressive disorder is 
associated with abnormal interoceptive activity and functional connectivity in the insula. Biol Psychiatry. 2014;76(3):258 -
66. 
8. Buijs RM. The autonomic nervous system: a balancing act. Handb Clin Neurol. 2013;117:1 -11. 
9. Simmons WK, Burrows K, Avery JA, Kerr KL, Bodurka J, Savage CR, et al. Depression -Related Increases and 
Decreases in Appetite: Dissociable Patterns of Aberrant Activity in Reward and Interoceptive Neurocircuitry. Am J 
Psychiatry. 2016;173(4):418 -28. 
10. Koschke M, Boettger MK, Schulz S, Berger S, Terhaar J, Voss A, et al. Autonomy of autonomic dysfunction in 
major depression. Psychosom Med. 2009;71(8):852 -60. 
11. Rocha Rde O, Teixeira MJ, Yeng LT, Cantara MG, Faria VG, Liggieri V, et al. Thoracic sympathetic block for the 
treatment of complex regional pain syndrome type I: a double -blind randomized controlled study. Pain. 
2014;155(11):2274 -81. 
12. Fond G, Loundou A, Rabu C, Macgregor A,  Lancon C, Brittner M, et al. Ketamine administration in depressive 
disorders: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2014;231(18):3663 -76. 
13. Hovington CL, McGirr A, Lepage M, Berlim MT. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimula tion (rTMS) for treating 
major depression and schizophrenia: a systematic review of recent meta -analyses. Ann Med. 2013;45(4):[ADDRESS_800887] current 
stimulation  for major depression: an updated systematic review and meta -analysis. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 
2014;17(9):1443 -52. 
15. Schlaepfer TE, Frick C, Zobel A, Maier W, Heuser I, Bajbouj M, et al. Vagus nerve stimulation for depression: 
efficacy and safety in a European study. Psychol Med. 2008;38(5):[ADDRESS_800888] current stimulation alter phrenic motoneurons and 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_604726]? A double -blind, sham -controlled, randomized, c rossover study. J 
Neurosci. 2014;34(43):[ADDRESS_800889] stimulation for the treatment of vascular pathology. Neurosurg 
Clin N Am. 2014;25(1):[ADDRESS_800890] s timulation in the treatment of refractory angina: 
systematic review and meta -analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2009;9:13.  
[ADDRESS_800891] stimulation 
of the dorsal root ganglion in the treatment of chronic neuropathic pain. Neuromodulation. 2015;18(1):41 -8; discussion 
8-9. 
20. Levita E, Rilan M, Waltz JM. Psychological effects of spi[INVESTIGATOR_54185]: preliminary findings. Appl 
Neurop hysiol. 1981;44(1 -3):[ADDRESS_800892] stimulation: an 
analysis with long -term follow -up. Pain Physician. 2013;16(3):[ADDRESS_800893] stimulation for relief of chronic back and extremity pain. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050] (Phila Pa 1976). 1996;21(23):[ADDRESS_800894] 
stimulation for chronic back and leg pain. Neurosurgery. 1995;36(6):1101 -10; discussion [ADDRESS_800895] Stimulation Success. 
Neuromodulation. 2015;18(7):599 -602; discussion  
25. Beltrutti D, Lamberto A, Barolat G, Bruehl SP, Doleys D, Krames E, et al. The psychological assessment of 
candidates for spi[INVESTIGATOR_604727]. Pain Pract. 2004;4(3):[ADDRESS_800896] HA, Degenhardt L, Rehm J, Baxter AJ, Ferrari AJ, Erskine HE, et al. Global burden of disease 
attributable to mental and substance use disorders: findings from the Global Burden of Disease Study 2010. Lancet. 
2013;382(9904):1575 -86. 
27. Simon G E, Barber C, Birnbaum HG, Frank RG, Greenberg PE, Rose RM, et al. Depression and work productivity: 
the comparative costs of treatment versus nontreatment. J Occup Environ Med. 2001;43(1):2 -9. 
28. Goldstein BI, Carnethon MR, Matthews KA, McIntyre RS, Mille r GE, Raghuveer G, et al. Major Depressive 
Disorder and Bipolar Disorder Predispose Youth to Accelerated Atherosclerosis and Early Cardiovascular Disease: A 
Scientific Statement From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;132(10):965 -86. 
29. Jakubovski E, Varigonda AL, Freemantle N, Taylor MJ, Bloch MH. Systematic Review and Meta -Analysis: Dose -
Response Relationship of Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors in Major Depressive Disorder. Am J Psychiatry. 
2016;173(2):174 -83. 
30. Turner EH, Matthew s AM, Linardatos E, Tell RA, Rosenthal R. Selective publication of antidepressant trials and its 
influence on apparent efficacy. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(3):[ADDRESS_800897] Rev. 2010(12):CD008121.  
32. Mendlewicz J. Towards achieving remission in the treatment of depression. Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 
2008;10(4):371 -5. 
33. Goss AJ, Kaser M, Costafreda SG, Sahak ian BJ, Fu CH. Modafinil augmentation therapy in unipolar and bipolar 
depression: a systematic review and meta -analysis of randomized controlled trials. J Clin Psychiatry. 2013;74(11):[ADDRESS_800898] not responded to antidepressant treatment: a 
European perspective. J Psychopharmacol. 2014;28(2):85 -98. 
35. Andrews G, Sanderson K, Corry J, Lapsley HM . Using epi[INVESTIGATOR_604728]*. J Ment Health Policy Econ. 2000;3(4):175 -86. 
36. Damasio AR. The somatic marker hypothesis and the possible functions of the prefrontal cortex. Philos Trans R 
Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 1996;351(1346):[ADDRESS_800899]. 2000;61(3):201 -16. 
38. Craig AD. How do you feel? Interoception: the sense of the physiological condition of the body. Nat Rev 
Neurosci. 2002;3(8):655 -66. 
39. Hofman MA, Swaab DF. The human hypothalamus: comparative morphometry and photoperiodic influences. 
Prog Brain Res. 1992;93:133 -47; discussion 48 -9. 
40. Buijs FN, Leon -Mercado L, G uzman -Ruiz M, Guerrero -Vargas NN, Romo -Nava F, Buijs RM. The Circadian System: 
A Regulatory Feedback Network of Periphery and Brain. Physiology (Bethesda). 2016;31(3):170 -81. 
41. Buijs RM, Escobar C, Swaab DF. The circadian system and the balance of the au tonomic nervous system. Handb 
Clin Neurol. 2013;117:173 -91. 
23 
 42. Duerden EG, Arsalidou M, Lee M, Taylor MJ. Lateralization of affective processing in the insula. Neuroimage. 
2013;78:[ADDRESS_800900]. 2012;142(1 -3):186 -92. 
44. Pessoa L. Emergent processes in cognitive -emotional interactions. Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2010;12(4):433 -48. 
45. Courtet P, Olie E. Circadian dimension and severity of depression. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2012;[ADDRESS_800901] 
3:S476 -81. 
46. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed. Washington, 
DC2013.  
47. Bair MJ, Robins on RL, Katon W, Kroenke K. Depression and pain comorbidity: a literature review. Arch Intern 
Med. 2003;163(20):[ADDRESS_800902] l ifetime epi[INVESTIGATOR_17108] --a prospective 5 -year follow -up study. Psychol Med. 
2016;46(6):1151 -61. 
49. Torpey DC, Klein DN. Chronic depression: update on classification and treatment. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 
2008;10(6):458 -64. 
50. Gold PW. The organization  of the stress system and its dysregulation in depressive illness. Mol Psychiatry. 
2015;20(1):32 -47. 
51. Owens M, Herbert J, Jones PB, Sahakian BJ, Wilkinson PO, Dunn VJ, et al. Elevated morning cortisol is a stratified 
population -level biomarker for major  depression in boys only with high depressive symptoms. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 
2014;111(9):3638 -43. 
52. Milaneschi Y, Lamers F, Bot M, Drent ML, Penninx BW. Leptin Dysregulation Is Specifically Associated With Major 
Depression With Atypi[INVESTIGATOR_604729]: Ev idence for a Mechanism Connecting Obesity and Depression. Biol Psychiatry. 2015.  
53. Li L, Shelton RC, Chassan RA, Hammond JC, Gower BA, Garvey TW. Impact of Major Depressive Disorder on 
Prediabetes by [CONTACT_604753]. J Diabetes Metab. 2016; 7(4).  
54. Bornstein SR, Chrousos GP. Clinical review 104: Adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) - and non -ACTH -mediated regulation 
of the adrenal cortex: neural and immune inputs. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999;84(5):1729 -36. 
55. Bookout AL, de Groot MH, Owen BM, Lee S , Gautron L, Lawrence HL, et al. FGF21 regulates metabolism and 
circadian behavior by [CONTACT_604754]. Nat Med. 2013;19(9):1147 -52. 
56. Shea SA, Hilton MF, Orlova C, Ayers RT, Mantzoros CS. Independent circadian and sleep/wake regulation of 
adipokines and glucose in humans. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005;90(5):2537 -44. 
57. Lilley TR, Wotus C, Taylor D, Lee JM, de la Iglesia HO. Circadian regulation of cortisol release in behaviorally split 
golden hamsters. Endocrinology. 2012;153(2):732 -8. 
58. Lavialle M, Champeil -Potokar G, Alessandri JM, Balasse L, Guesnet P, Papi[INVESTIGATOR_324045] C, et al. An (n -3) polyunsaturated 
fatty acid -deficient diet disturbs daily locomotor activity, melatonin rhythm, and striatal dopamine in Syrian hamsters. J 
Nutr. 2008;138(9):171 9-24. 
59. Mozaffarian D, Stein PK, Prineas RJ, Siscovick DS. Dietary fish and omega -3 fatty acid consumption and heart rate 
variability in US adults. Circulation. 2008;117(9):1130 -7. 
60. McNamara RK. Role of Omega -3 Fatty Acids in the Etiology, Treatment, and Prevention of Depression: Current 
Status and Future Directions. J Nutr Intermed Metab. 2016;5:[ADDRESS_800903] Growth Factor 21 
Browns White Fat via Sympathetic Actio n in Male Mice. Endocrinology. 2015;156(7):[ADDRESS_800904] as a predictor of outcome in depression: a meta -analysis. 
Am J Psychiatry. 1993;150(11):1618 -29. 
63. Herbert J. Cortisol and depression: three ques tions for psychiatry. Psychol Med. 2013;43(3):449 -69. 
64. Brunoni AR, Kemp AH, Dantas EM, Goulart AC, Nunes MA, Boggio PS, et al. Heart rate variability is a trait marker 
of major depressive disorder: evidence from the sertraline vs. electric current thera py to treat depression clinical study. 
Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013;16(9):1937 -49. 
65. Kemp AH, Quintana DS, Felmingham KL, Matthews S, Jelinek HF. Depression, comorbid anxiety disorders, and 
heart rate variability in physically healthy, unmedicated patients: implications for cardiovascular risk. PLoS One. 
2012;7(2):e30777.  
24 
 66. Yeh TC, Kao LC, Tzeng NS, Kuo TB, Huang SY, Chang CC, et al. Heart rate variability in major depressive disorder 
and after antidepressant treatment with agomelatine  and paroxetine: Findings from the Taiwan Study of Depression and 
Anxiety (TAISDA). Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2016;64:60 -7. 
67. Wang Y, Zhao X, O'Neil A, Turner A, Liu X, Berk M. Altered cardiac autonomic nervous function in depression. 
BMC Psychiatry. 2013;13:187.  
68. Gibson -Smith D, Bot M, Milaneschi Y, Twisk JW, Visser M, Brouwer IA, et al. Major depressive disorder, 
antidepressant use, and subsequent 2 -year weight change patterns in the Netherlands Study of Depression and Anxiety. 
J Clin Psychiatry. 2016;77(2):e144 -51. 
69. Vancampfort D, Correll CU, Wampers M, Sienaert P, Mitchell AJ, De Herdt A, et al. Metabolic syndrome and 
metabolic abnormalities in patients with major depressive disorder: a meta -analysis of prevalences and moderating  
variables. Psychol Med. 2014;44(10):2017 -28. 
70. Chen S, Zhang Q, Dai G, Hu J, Zhu C, Su L, et al. Association of depression with pre -diabetes, undiagnosed 
diabetes, and previously diagnosed diabetes: a meta -analysis. Endocrine. 2016;53(1):35 -46. 
71. Kreier F, Yilmaz A, Kalsbeek A, Romijn JA, Sauerwein HP, Fliers E, et al. Hypothesis: shifting the equilibrium from 
activity to food leads to autonomic unbalance and the metabolic syndrome. Diabetes. 2003;52(11):2652 -6. 
72. Shi S, Liu T, Liang J, Hu D, Yang B.  Depression and Risk of Sudden Cardiac Death and Arrhythmias: A Meta -
Analysis. Psychosom Med. 2017;79(2):[ADDRESS_800905] and peripher al nervous system for the treatment of chronic pain and ischemic diseases: the 
Neuromodulation Appropriateness Consensus Committee. Neuromodulation. 2014;17(6):515 -50; discussion 50.  
74. Kumar K, Taylor RS, Jacques L, Eldabe S, Meglio M, Molet J, et al. Th e effects of spi[INVESTIGATOR_604730]: a [ADDRESS_800906] stimulation. Neurosurgery. 2008;63(4):762 -70; discussion 70.  
75. Sobocki J, Herman RM, Fraczek M. Occipi[INVESTIGATOR_307] C1 -C2 neuromodulation decreases body mass and fat stores and 
modifies activity of the autonomic nervous system in morbidly obese patients --a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Obes Surg. 2013;23(5):[ADDRESS_800907] injury causes brain inflammation 
associated with cognitive and affective changes: role of cell cycle pathways. J Neurosci. 2014;34(33):[ADDRESS_800908] current stimulation as innovative tools for neuroscientists. J Physiol. 
2014;592(16):[ADDRESS_800909] current 
stimulation on somatosensory evoked potentials in humans. Clin Neurophysiol. 2008;119(11):[ADDRESS_800910] 
current stimulation inhibits the lower limb nociceptive flexion reflex in human beings. Pain. 2011;152(2):[ADDRESS_800911] conduction and increases pain tolerance in humans. Eur J Pain. 
2011;15(10):1023 -7. 
81. Lim CY , Shin HI. Noninvasive DC stimulation on neck changes MEP. Neuroreport. 2011;22(16):[ADDRESS_800912]. 2017;7(6):357 -65. 
83. Donges SC, D'Amico JM, Butler JE, Taylor JL. The effects of cervical transcutaneous spi[INVESTIGATOR_604731]. PLoS One. 2017;12(2):e0172333.  
84. Shee han DV, Lecrubier Y, Sheehan KH, Amorim P, Janavs J, Weiller E, et al. The Mini -International 
Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): the development and validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for 
DSM -IV and ICD -10. J Clin Psychiatry. 1 998;[ADDRESS_800913] 20:22 -33;quiz 4 -57. 
85. Montgomery SA, Asberg M. A new depression scale designed to be sensitive to change. Br J Psychiatry. 
1979;134:382 -9. 
86. Posner K, Brown GK, Stanley B, Brent DA, Yershova KV, Oquendo MA, et al. The Columbia -Suicide Seve rity Rating 
Scale: initial validity and internal consistency findings from three multisite studies with adolescents and adults. Am J 
Psychiatry. 2011;168(12):1266 -77. 
25 
 87. Busner J, Targum SD. The clinical global impressions scale: applying a research tool in clinical practice. Psychiatry 
(Edgmont). 2007;4(7):28 -37. 
88. Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JB. The PHQ -9: validity of a brief depression severity measure. J Gen Intern Med. 
2001;16(9):606 -13. 
89. Terluin B, van Marwijk HW, Ader HJ, de Vet HC, Penninx  BW, Hermens ML, et al. The Four -Dimensional Symptom 
Questionnaire (4DSQ): a validation study of a multidimensional self -report questionnaire to assess distress, depression, 
anxiety and somatization. BMC Psychiatry. 2006;6:34.  
90. Gormally J, Black S, Dast on S, Rardin D. The assessment of binge eating severity among obese persons. Addict 
Behav. 1982;7(1):47 -55. 
91. Mehling WE, Price C, Daubenmier JJ, Acree M, Bartmess E, Stewart A. The Multidimensional Assessment of 
Interoceptive Awareness (MAIA). PLoS One.  2012;7(11):e48230.  
92. Kessels RP, Montagne B, Hendriks AW, Perrett DI, de Haan EH. Assessment of perception of morphed facial 
expressions using the Emotion Recognition Task: normative data from healthy participants aged 8 -75. J Neuropsychol. 
2014;8(1):75 -93. 
93. Montagne B, Kessels RP, De Haan EH, Perrett DI. The Emotion Recognition Task: a paradigm to measure the 
perception of facial emotional expressions at different intensities. Percept Mot Skills. 2007;104(2):589 -98. 
94. Verbruggen F, Logan GD. Response inhibition in the stop -signal paradigm. Trends Cogn Sci. 2008;12(11):418 -24. 
95. Lyche P, Jonassen R, Stiles TC, Ulleberg P, Landro NI. Cognitive Control Functions in Unipolar Major Depression 
with and without Co -Morbid Anxiety Disorder. Front Psy chiatry. 2010;1:149.  
96. Parazzini M, Fiocchi S, Liorni I, Rossi E, Cogiamanian F, Vergari M, et al. Modeling the current density generated 
by [CONTACT_604755][INVESTIGATOR_604685] (tsDCS). Clin Neurophysiol. 2014;125(11):[ADDRESS_800914] 
current stimulation modulates human corticospi[INVESTIGATOR_604732]. J Neurophysiol. 2015;114(1):440 -6. 
98. Suzuki A, Aoshima T, Fukasawa T, Yoshida K, Higu chi H, Shimizu T, et al. A three -factor model of the MADRS in 
major depressive disorder. Depress Anxiety. 2005;21(2):95 -7. 
99. McCreery DB, Agnew WF, Yuen TG, Bullara L. Charge density and charge per phase as cofactors in neural injury 
induced by [CONTACT_604756] l stimulation. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 1990;37(10):[ADDRESS_800915] current 
stimulation. Front Psychiatry. 2012;3:63.  
 