 Page 1 of 13 Revised: 7/15/2019  1. Protocol Title  
Tofacitinib Hypothesis -generating, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_6000] -Dependent Sarcoidosis  
 
2. Objectives  
This study will enroll 5 subjects with corticosteroid dependent pulmonary sarcoidosis.  
 
The purpose of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_6001]. The primary end point for this study is a 50% or 
greater reduction in cortico steroid requirement. We hypothesize that 60% of the patients will have a 50% or 
greater reduction in their steroid requirement without a significant decrease in pulmonary function  testing and  
with  a similar quality of life.  We further hypothesize that STAT -1 dependent gene expression studies will show 
a significant decrease after tofacitinib treatment.  
 
Objective 1: Test the h ypothesis that the addition of t ofacitinib will allow p atients with sarcoidosis to have 50% 
or greater reduction in their cortico steroid requirement without a significant decrease in pulmonary function 
testing, and  with  a similar quality of life as measured by  a validated questionnaire (1).   
 
Objective  2: Test the h ypothesis that the addition of t ofacitinib will result in significantly decreased expression 
of STAT -1 dependent gene expression.  
 
3. Background  
Sarcoidosis is an inflammatory disorder of unclear etiology with a prevalence that has bee n estimated to be as 
high as 300/100,000.  (2) The mainstay of treatment is oral corticosteroids. However, this  therapy has 
numerous side effects and has been linked to increased relapses and poor quality of life, particularly at high 
doses.  (3, 4)   Furthermore, there is a subset of patients with persistent disease despi[INVESTIGATOR_6002]. This has led to multiple trials evaluating various immunomodulatory agents for steroid sparing 
treatment in sarcoidosis.  Our group and  others have previously shown upregulation of the STAT1 pathway 
including the downstream cytokines in tissue, whole blood and lymph nodes of patients with sarcoidosis. (5-7) 
 
Tofacitinib is a janus kinase (JAK) inhibitor with a predominant effect on JAK1 and JAK3 which in turn decreases 
STAT1 activation.  (8)  Tofacitinib is currently FDA approved for treatment of psoriatic arthritis and rheumatoid 
arthritis and has recently shown superiority when compared to methotrexa te as front -line therapy. It is similar 
to TNF -alpha inhibition when added as an adjunctive therapy.  (9, 10)   Other trials  have shown efficacy in a 
number of other inflammatory disorders includi ng ulcerative colitis.  (11, 12)   
 
Given the need for improved therapeutics , and the role of STAT1 in the pathogenesis of sarcoidosis, we 
propose a study examining the reduction in steroid use in patients who are dependent on a stable dose 
(defined as same dose for 4 weeks) of 15  mg/day  to 30 mg /day  of prednisone or its equivalent  to control their 
disease. A recent query of OHSU’s electronic medical record identified over 800 adult patients with sarcoidosis, 
generally 10 -30% of patients with sarcoid require chronic treatment for an expected population of 80 -240 
eligible patients in  our system. (13) We intend to enroll 5 patients with pulmonary sarcoidosis, age 18 or older 
of either gender in an open label  proof -of-concept study  design and treat with 5  mg of Tofacitinib BID for 16 
weeks as a steroid sparing agent. We hypothesize that 60% of patients will have a 50% or greater reduction in 
their steroid requirements without a significant decrease (defined as less than 15% reduction in  forced 
expi[INVESTIGATOR_6003] 1 second ( FEV1), forced vital capacity (FVC) or diffusing capacity for carbon monoxide  
(DLCO )) in pulmonary function testing and a similar quality of life as measured by [CONTACT_6016]. George’s Respi[INVESTIGATOR_6004]  (SGRQ ).(1)  A clinically sign ificant change is defined as >4 units in the SGRQ . (14) Patients who 
respond by [CONTACT_6017] 52 weeks.  This 
small study will serve as a pi[INVESTIGATOR_6005]; larger trials will ultimately be necessary to validate these 
results.  
 Page 2 of 13 Revised: 7/15/[ADDRESS_5282] imaging, and an FVC >50%.  They must requir e a 
stable dose (defined by 4 weeks or more) of prednisone at least 15 mg/day or equivalent cor ticosteroid  prior 
to enrollment in the study . The prednisone dose cannot exceed 30 mg/day.  The above criteria should insure 
that this is a relatively uniform group of subjects. All subjects will receive Tofacitinib 5mg twice daily for 16 
weeks. After four  weeks on Tofacitinib, the  corticosteroid  will be tapered per a pre -defined protocol ( attached ); 
once a reduction of 50% has been achieved , any further taper will be per physician discretion.  The schedule 
for corticosteroid taper is based on 30 plus years of experience and customary practice at the Oregon Health 
& Science University. The experience of the investigators has consistently demonstrated an inability to taper 
corticosteroid dosage in many patients with sarcoidosis  unless an effective, alternative  immunosuppressive 
has been added to the patient’s regimen. Furthermore, higher doses of corticosteroids have consistently been 
correlated  with the risk of infection . (15) Throughout the trial we will be monitoring blood counts, liver function 
tests, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], renal function, and pulmonary function testing .  We will also evaluate STAT -1 activity through 
measurement of CXCL10 levels and RNA -Seq measurement of selected transcripts (see below)  before and after 
Tofacitinib therapy. The primary endpoint is a 50% or greater reduction in steroids with no significant de crease 
in pulmonary function or quality of life. After 16 weeks, subjects who meet the prim ary end -point will be 
permitted  an optional one year open -label extension.   
 
5. Study Population  
 
a. Number of Subjects  
Five subjects  with histolo gically proven sarcoidosis with  pulmonary involvement  and corticosteroid 
dependence  will be enrolled in this trial .  
 
b. Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria: Subjects age [ADDRESS_5283] meet the WASOG 
definition of  pulmonary sarcoidosis.  (16) They must have histologically proven sarcoidosis, evidence of 
Pulmonary sarcoidosis  on chest radiograph  (Stage I, II, III or IV)  (17), an FVC >5 0%, and can have  concomitant  
extrapulmonary disease . Subjects must require 15  mg to 30 mg /day prednisone or equivalent corticosteroid 
to control their sarcoidosis. Dose of prednisone must be stable for 4 weeks  prior to enrollment in the study . 
Subjects may be taking methotrexate , but may not be taking other immunosuppressive or immunomodulatory 
treatments (see below) .  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
• Patients taking immunomodulatory m edications other than methotrexate in the two months prior to the 
study period will not be included. This includes but is not limited to azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, 
leflunomide, mycophenolate mofetil, cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and biologic medications.   
• Patients requiring >30  mg/day prednisone or its equivalent.  
• Pregnant or lactating women will not be included.  
• Subjects with the following blood dyscrasias will  not be included:  
o Hemoglobin <9g/dL or Hematocrit <30%  
o White blood cell count <3.0 K/cu mm  
o Absolute neutrophil count <1.2 K/cu mm  
o Platelet count <100 K/cu mm  
• Subjects with an estimated GFR ≤40 ml/min  
• Subjects with a total bilirubin, AST, or ALT more  than 1.5 times the upper limit  of normal at screening.  
 Page 3 of 13 Revised: 7/15/2019  • Severe, progressive, or uncontrolled chronic liver disease including fibrosis, cirrhosis, or recent or active 
hepatitis.  
• History of any lymphoproliferative disorder such as Epstein Barr virus (EBV) related lymphoproliferative 
disorder, history of lymphoma , leukemia, or signs and symptoms suggest of current lymphatic disease.  
• Current malignancy or history of malignancy, with the exception of adequately treated or excised non -
metastatic basal cell or squamous cell cancer of the skin, or cervical carcinoma in  situ.  
• Have or have had an opportunistic infection (e.g., herpes zoster [shingles], cytomegalovirus, Pneumocystis 
carinii, aspergillosis and aspergilloma, histoplasmosis, or mycobacteria other than TB) within 6 months prior 
to screening.  
• Have a known infe ction with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV ) 
• Have current signs and symptoms of systemic lupus erythematosus, or severe, progressive, or uncontrolled 
renal, hepatic, hematologic, endocrine, pulmonary, cardiac  ([LOCATION_001] Heart Association class III or IV) , 
neurologic, or cerebral diseases (with the exception of sarcoidosis).  
 
Screening: Subjects will be recruited through the  Oregon Health and Science University  (OHSU ) pulmonary, 
ophthalmology, rheumatology, and internal medicine clinics  in addition to local community pulmonology 
clinics by [CONTACT_6018] . Review of OHSU medical records and Epic query will also be used to identify potential 
subjects. Pre-screening will take place first through chart review  and then  telephone interview . Subjects  who 
are eligible  for the trial after pre -screening will then be screened in person. At the screening visit subjects will 
receive  informed consent as below . Health history and medications will be reviewed. Blood and/or urine 
samples will be collect ed, and pulmonary function testing will be done as per the baseline visit plan detailed 
below.  Data from subjects who fail screening will be destroyed at the end of the study.  
 
c. Vulnerable Populations  
This study will not include children, pregnant women, neonates,  prisoners, or decisionally impaired adults.  
 
d. Setting  
Subjects will be consented and samples will be drawn at the OHSU specialty clinics on the 3rd and 4th floors of 
the Physician’s Pavilion. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_6006]’s Pavilion. Samples will be stored in a central repository as part of [CONTACT_6029]’s laboratory.  
 
RNA extraction and gene expression analyses will be performed  by [CONTACT_6019] g Shared Resource 
and the Massively Parallel Sequencing Shared Resource under the guidance of [CONTACT_6030].  
 
e. Recruitment Methods  
Subjects will be recruited through the OHSU rheumatology , pulmonary , ophthalmology, and internal medicine  
clinics.  Subjects referred from outside clinicians/scientists or self -referral will be allowed, but is expected to 
account for a minority of subjects. Postings on internet support groups for people living with sarcoidosis will 
also be used for recruitment. An Epic  and medical record query will be used to identify potential subjects. 
Subjects will be contact[CONTACT_3012]. A copy of the phone script is attached.  
  
f. Consent Process  
The consent process will take place in the OHSU pulmonary  clinic or other appropriate OHSU  clinic prior to any 
study procedures.  [CONTACT_6031] , [CONTACT_6032],  or a member of  their research team will be 
responsible for discussing the study and consent documents with study participants.  Ample time will be 
provided to ask and answer questions.  It will be emphasized that participation is entirely voluntary and that 
this will not affect ongoing clinical care.  If needed, an interpreter will be provided for the consent process and 
subsequent study visits.  There are no current plans to provide a translated consent. Written consent will be 
verified by [CONTACT_6020] h procedures.  The signed  form will  be kept in study binders.  
 
 Page 4 of 13 Revised: 7/15/2019  6. Procedures Involved  
• Blood draw: A blood draw will be done  at baseline and at weeks 2, 4, 8, 1 2, 16 (end of treatment) . We 
estimate that the blood draw at baseline and week 16 will be approximately 15ml. We estimate that the 
blood draw at weeks 2, 4, 8, and 12  will be approximately 7.5 ml.  
• Urinalysis: Women will have a baseline urine pregnancy test.  
• RNA Seq : at baseline and week [ADDRESS_5284] previously shown to be up regulated in the blood of patients with sarcoidosis  and which 
are downstream of STAT -1 (including STAT -1 itself).7 These transcripts are A2M, WARS, CCND1, STAT -1, 
MT-1, TRH, CD64, IRF1, PSMB9, MHC2TA, OPRM1, Pim -1, CXCL9, and CDKN1A. The thousands of additional 
transcripts detected by [CONTACT_6021], but in all cases, changes in expression will be considered 
as a preliminary observation which requires validation.  
• Pulmonary function testing: At baseline and at the end of treatment (week 16), we will measure 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_6007] . At weeks 4, 8, and 12 we will measure spi[INVESTIGATOR_6008] .  
• Study drug: Tofacitinib 5  mg twice daily will be given from week 0 to week 16 to treat sarcoidosis. 
Tofacitinib is FDA approved for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis but is not FDA approved for the 
treatment of sarc oidosis.  
• Questionnaires: At each visit , quality of life will be measured with the Saint George R espi[INVESTIGATOR_6004] (SGRQ), and assessment of involved organ systems will be measured via the WASOG 
sarcoidosis organ assessment instrument.  
• Subjects should have had a chest x -ray within one year of enrollment and will have a repeat chest x -ray 
after the 16 weeks of treatment.  
 
Procedures  Basel
ine 
 Week 
0* We
ek 2 Wee
k 4 We
ek 8 Week 
12 Week 
16 
Informed Consent  X       
Screening labs**: 
Quantiferon, HIV, HBsAg, 
HBcAB, HCV ab,  X       
Urine pregnancy test 
(women only)  X       
Start study drug   X      
End study drug        X 
Start steroid taper     X    
Physical Exam  X  X X X X X 
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_6009]  X***       X 
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_038]     X X X  
Labs: CBC, LFT, Lipid 
measurement, BMP.  X***   X X X X X 
Labs: CRP  X      X 
Labs: CXCL10 level  X      X 
RNA Seq  X      X 
Questionnaires: SGRQ , 
WASOG  X  X X X X X 
 Page 5 of 13 Revised: 7/15/[ADDRESS_5285] Xray  X**      X 
* There should be no more than 4 weeks between baseline and start of study drug (week 0)  
**If screening labs  or Chest Xray  have been done within the past one year, they do not need to be repeated 
here.  
***If these tests have been done within 4 weeks of baseline visit, they do not need to be repeated. HIV: 
human immunodeficiency virus, HBsAG: hepatitis B surface antigen, HBcAB: hepatitis B core antibody, HCV: 
hepatitis C virus, PFT: pulmonary function tes ting, CBC: complete blood count, LFT: liver function test, BMP: 
basic metabolic panel, CPR: C -reactive protein, SCGQ: Saint George Respi[INVESTIGATOR_6010], testing, and study drug will be billed to the study. Patients and their insurance 
will not be billed for any of the above procedures during the [ADDRESS_5286] laboratory testing billed to insurance as below under “Long term follow -up”.  
 
Long term follow -up: Patients  who do not meet the primary end point will not be followed long term. Patients 
who meet the primary endpoint will be continued on study drug for up to  one year.  During that one year they 
will be followed with labs (CBC, BMP, liver function panel, lipid pa nel) every two months, and the above 
questionnaires and adverse event reporting by [CONTACT_6022].  A clinic visit will be required every 
6 months.  Labs done during the one -year extension period will be billed to the patient’s insurance ; study drug 
will be covered by [CONTACT_4618].    
 
Voluntary w ithdrawal from the study:  Subjects may withdraw from the intervention (study drug Tofacitinib) 
at any time. For subjects who cho ose to withdraw from the intervention we will collect the following data tw o 
weeks after withdrawal from the intervention: CBC, lipid measurement, LFT, BMP, adverse event reporting.  
 
Treatment with Tofacitanib to be discontinued and the patient withdrawn from this study for:  
• Serious infections (those requiring parenteral antimic robial therapy or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059])  
• A decline in glomerular filtration rate of 33% or greater  
• An increase in liver function tests (LFTs) > 2.5x the upper limit of normal  
• Neutrophil counts <1000 neutrophils/mm3  
• Platelet counts <100,000 platelets/mm3  
• Any single hemoglobin value <8.0 g/dL or one that drops ≥2 gm/dL below ba seline  
• Other serious or severe AEs that the investigator believes are sufficient to discontinue the medication  
• Extrapulmonary disease such as uveitis with substantial worsening despi[INVESTIGATOR_6011]  
 
7. Data and Specimen s 
a. Handling of Data and Specimens  
Clinical case report forms  and signed consent forms  will be kept on paper in locked filing cabinets in restricted 
access offices at OHSU. Electronic data is stored on restricted drives on the OHSU network through encrypted 
computers , and using OCTRI’s installation of REDCap .  Samples will be stored in [CONTACT_6029]’s laboratory 
on the second floor of the Biomedical Research Building. [CONTACT_6033] , [CONTACT_6034]  or their  study staff will 
verify that consent has been given to participate in genetic research prior to collecting any samples for genetic 
studie s (see study consent). The PAXGene Blood tubes will be transported by [CONTACT_6023].  Case report 
forms will be kept for three years after study completion and then destroyed. After three  years, electronic data 
and samples will be de -identified and encrypted and stored in a repository as discussed below under “Data and 
 Page 6 of 13 Revised: 7/15/2019  Specimen Banking”. [CONTACT_6033]  or [CONTACT_6034]  will be responsible for receipt a nd transmission of data and 
specimens.  
 
Data for this project will be stored in OCTRI's installation of REDCap, a highly secure and robust web -based 
research data collection and management system.  
  
Features of REDCap that protect participants' privacy an d data security include:  
·        Physical Security: OCTRI's REDCap software is housed on servers located in ITG's Advanced Computing 
Center providing locked physical security  
·        Electronic Security: The REDCap servers are housed behind both the OHSU  firewall and a second ACC 
firewall.  All web -based data transmissions are encrypted with industry -standard SSL methods.   
·        Controlled User Access: REDCap is employs a robust multi -level security system that enables researchers 
to easily implement "minimum necessary" data access for their research staff, including specification of data 
fields that are identifiers. This  feature includes “single click” ability to provide completely deidentified 
(removing all identified data fields and shifting dates) for analysis or other purposes.  User activities are logged 
to enable auditing of all data access.   Access is integrated w ith OHSU's network such that users who are also 
OHSU employees are authenticated against their OHSU network credentials.   
·        Data Integrity: REDCap is jointly managed in accordance with OHSU Information Security Directives by 
[CONTACT_6024] o f OCTRI's Biomedical Informatics Program, ensuring fidelity of database configuration 
and back -ups.  User activities are logged to enable auditing of all data changes.  
 
b. Sharing of Results with Subjects  
Resu lts of standard tests (CBC, LFT , Lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], BMP,  CRP,  pregnancy testing, quantiferon,  HIV, H epatitis B , Hepatitis 
C, and PFT/spi[INVESTIGATOR_038] ) will be shared with subjects at their request or if deemed clinically necessary. Lab tests 
evaluating RNA expression and  CXCL10 , as well as scores on the SGRQ, WASOG -SOAI w ill not be shared as they 
are for research purposes only and the RNA -expression and CXCL10 laboratory tests are not CLIA certified.  
 
c. Data and Specimen Banking  
After three  years , all clinical data and laboratory specimens will be de -identified with an assigned numerical 
code that will not contain any personal identifiers. The key to associating codes and subjects’ personally 
identifying information will be restricted to the PI [CONTACT_1629] d study staff. De -identified data will be stored indefinitely 
in an encrypted databank. De -identified samples will be stored indefinitely in a repository in [CONTACT_6035]’s 
laboratory on the second floor of the Biomedical Research Building.  De -identifi ed samples may be used for 
future research including genetic research.  
 
d. Repository  
Blood will be obtained from the patient in PAXGene Blood tubes via veinipuncture and be transported by [CONTACT_6025] J ones Hall where the RNA extraction will 
be performed.  Specimens will be accepted only if in appropriate containers with appropriate labeling .  [CONTACT_6036], [CONTACT_6034] or their study staff will verify that consent has been given to participate in genetic  
research  and repository  prior to collecting any samples for genetic studies (see study consent) . Participating in 
the repository is mandatory for inclusion into the study .  Subjects will be assigned  a numerical code that will 
not contain any personal iden tifiers.  The key associating the codes and the subjects personally identifying 
information will be restricted to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_6012]. This code will be used on all clinical case report forms, 
electronic files for data analysis, and for tracking of speci mens.  De-identified samples will be stored indefinitely 
in a locked repository in [CONTACT_6035]’s laboratory on the second floor of the Biomedical Research Building . 
The Repository Guardian is [CONTACT_6037]. His responsibilities include:  
  
• Ensuring that data/specimens are received and released according to OHSU policy and the IRB approved 
repository protocol.  
 Page 7 of 13 Revised: 7/15/2019  • Executing a repository sharing agreement each time data or specimens are released for research purposes.  
• Ensuring the security and confidential ity of stored data and specimens.  
• Ensuring the security and confidentiality of data and specimens during transfer.  
• Tracking acquisitions and releases of data and specimens.  
• Maintaining methods for identifying data/samples for which consent has been withdra wn and ensuring no 
future use.  
• Identifying data/samples that have limitations on future uses and ensuring that future uses are not contrary 
to those limits.  
 
A separate IRB approval/determination will be required for each specific human subject research activity that 
uses identifiable data/specimens from the repository.  Material transfer agreements will be used when 
necessary for the transfer of biological materials. Only de -identified samples will be released to ensure security 
and confidentiality during  the release of data and specimens.  
 
8. Data Analysis  
Objective 1 : 
The primary endpoint will be a 50% reducti on in corticosteroid requirement  in at least 60% subjects (or 3/5 of 
the subjects)  by [CONTACT_5875] 16 , without significant decline in their pulmonary function —defined as a >15% decline 
in FVC, FEV1, or DLCO  relative to the baseline value .  
 
 
Objective 2 : 
The secondary endpoints include significant decreases in of peripheral markers of STAT pathway activity  using 
RNA sequencing and CXCL10 levels, both measured before and after 16 weeks of tofacitinib treatment.  
 
RNA sequencing will be done using before the study drug is started , and at week 16. We will evaluate  STAT1 -
dependent gene expression as detected in  our prior publication . (18) In our previous study, we found that of 
the 13/18 genes known to be downstream of STAT1  were upregulated in the peripheral blood of sarcoidosis 
patients  (WARS, A2M, CCND1, CD64, MT -1, TRH, IRF -1, PSMB9, MHC2TA, OPRM1, Pim -1, CXCL9, and CDKN1A). 
We expect these [ADDRESS_5287] were  
also found to be upregulated (I FNAR1, I FNAR2, I FNAR3, JAK1, JAK2, STAT1, STAT2, and STAT3). In a rheumatoid 
arthritis study of synovial biopsies before and after tofaci tinib, STAT1 and STAT3 were found to be significantly 
decreased after tofacitinib treatment.  (19) Interferon alpha receptors (IFNAR) are located upstream o f the JAK -
STAT pathway, and whether these expression profiles are expected to change is less clear. Expression of JAK [ADDRESS_5288] 
will be used to compare  expression levels at baseline and after 16 weeks of treatment, where a p<0.[ADDRESS_5289] suppression. (20) Serum levels of CXCL10 have been 
found to be elevated in the peripheral blood of patients with sarcoidosis, and were also be found to be 
associated with severity and chronicity  of disease.  (21) Peripheral expression of CXCL10 in the rheumatoid 
arthritis has been found t o decrease after treatment with tofacitinib. (19) A pair T -test will be used to compare 
peripheral CXCL10 levels before and after 16 weeks of treatment, where a p<0.[ADDRESS_5290] institutional practices will be followed as describe d in the OHSU Information Security and Research 
Data Resource Guide (http://ozone.ohsu.edu/cc/sec/isg/res_sec.pdf) to maintain the confidentiality and 
security of data collected in this study. Study staff will be trained with regard to these procedures.  Paper files 
 Page 8 of 13 Revised: 7/15/2019  will be stored in locked filing cabinets in restricted access offices at OHSU.  Electronic data is stored on restricted 
drives on the O HSU network. Access to data/specimens is restricted to study personnel.  
 
Upon completion of the trial, data wil l be de -identified and stored in a repository. Upon completion of the trial, 
subjects will be assigned a code that will be used instead of their name, medical record number , or other 
personally identifying information. Electronic files for data analysis wi ll contain only the subject code.  Codes 
will not contain any part of the 18 HIPAA identifiers (initials, DOB, MRN) . The key associating the codes and the 
subjects personally identifying information will be restricted to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_6012]. The key will  be kept 
secure on a  restricted OHSU network drive  in a limited access folder.  
 
10. Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
See uploaded Data Safety Monitoring Plan form.  
 
11. Risks and Benefits  
a. Risks to Subjects  
Blood draw:  A blood draw may cause bleeding, a bruise, an infection, or fainting. Subjects may feel some pain 
when blood is drawn.  
 
Pulmonary function testing or spi[INVESTIGATOR_038]:  Pulmonary function testing or spi[INVESTIGATOR_6013] a few moments after the test.  
Genetic testing:   Although we will make  efforts to protect subjects’  identity, there is a small risk of loss of 
confidentiality .  If the results of these studies of genetic makeup were to be accidentally released, it might be 
possible that the information we will gather could become available to an insurer or an employer, or a relative, 
or someone else outside the study. Even thou gh there are certain genetic discrimination and confidentiality 
protections in both Oregon law and federal law, there is still a small chance that a subject  could be harmed if 
a release occurred.  
 
Study drug Tofacitinib:  
Tofacitinib has been FDA approved for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, but not for the treatment of 
sarcoidosis. It is possible the risks of this drug in sarcoidosis are different from the risks in rheumatoid arthritis. 
In rheumatoid arthritis, this drug has been found to have the fo llowing risks:  (22)  
 
• Infections:  Serious and sometimes fatal infections due to bacterial, mycobacterial, invasive fungal, viral, or 
other opportun istic pathogens have been reported in rheumatoid arthritis patients receiving Tofacitinib . 
The most common serious infections reported with Tofacitinib  included pneumonia, cellulitis, herpes 
zoster, urinary trac t infection, and diverticulitis. Among opportunistic infections, tuberculosis and other 
mycobacterial infections, cryptococcosis, esophageal candidiasis, pneumocystosis, multi -dermatomal 
herpes zoster, cytomegalovirus, and BK virus were reported with Tofacitinib . Some patients have presented 
with disseminated rather than localized disease, and were often taking concomitant immunomodulating 
agents such as methotrexate or corticosteroids.  Other serious infections that were not reported in clinical 
studies may also occur (e.g., histoplasmosis, cocc idioidomycosis, and listeriosis).  
 
o Overall Infections:  In the seven controlled trials, during the 0 to 3 months exposure, the overall 
frequency of infections was 20% and 22% in the 5 mg twice daily and 10 mg twice daily groups, 
respectively, and 18% in the  placebo group. The most commonly reported infections with 
Tofacitinib  were upper respi[INVESTIGATOR_6014], nasopharyngitis, and urinary tract infections 
(4%, 3%, and 2% of patients, respectively).  
 
o Serious Infections:  In the seven controlled trials, during the 0 to 3 months exposure, serious 
infections were reported in 1 patient (0.5 events per 100 patient -years) who received placebo and 
 Page 9 of 13 Revised: 7/15/2019  11 patients (1.7 events per 100 patient -years) who received Tofacitinib  5 mg or 10  mg twice daily. 
The rate difference between treatment groups (and the corresponding 95% confidence interval) 
was 1.1 ( -0.4, 2.5) events per 100 patient -years for the combined 5 mg twice daily and 10 mg twice 
daily Tofacitinib  group minus placebo. In the s even controlled trials, during the 0 to 12 months 
exposure, serious infections were reported in 34 patients (2.7 events per 100 patient -years) who 
received 5 mg twice daily of Tofacitinib  and 33 patients (2.7 events per 100 patient -years) who 
received 10 m g twice daily of Tofacitinib . The rate difference between Tofacitinib  doses (and the 
corresponding 95% confidence interval) was -0.1 ( -1.3, 1.2) events per [ADDRESS_5291] infection.  
 
o Tuberculosis:  In the seven controlled trials, during the 0 to 3 months exposure, tuberculosis was 
not reported in patients who received placebo, 5 mg twice daily of Tofacitinib , or 10 mg twice daily 
of Tofacitinib . In the seven controlled trials, during the 0 to 12 months exposure, tuberculosis was 
reported in 0 patients who received 5 mg twice daily of Tofacitinib  and 6 patients (0.5 events per 
100 patient -years) who received 10 mg twice daily of Tofacitinib . The rate difference between 
Tofacitinib  doses (and the corresponding 95% confidence interval) was 0.5 (0.1, 0.9) events per 100 
patient -years for 10 mg twice daily Tofacitinib  minus 5 mg twice daily Tofa citinib .  Cases of 
disseminated tuberculosis were also reported. The median Tofacitinib  exposure prior to diagnosis 
of tuberculosis was 10 months (range from 152 to 960 days).  
 
o Opportunistic Infections (excluding tuberculosis ): In the seven controlled trials, during the 0 to 3 
months exposure, opportunistic infections were not reported in patients who received placebo, 5 
mg twice daily of Tofacitinib , or 10 mg twice daily of Tofacitinib . In the seven controlled trials, 
during the 0 to 12 months exposure, opportunistic infections were reported in 4 patients (0.3 
events per 100 patient -years) who received 5 mg twice daily of Tofacitinib  and 4 patients (0.3 
events per 100 patient -years) who received 10 mg twice daily of Tofacitini b. The rate difference 
between Tofacitinib  doses (and the corresponding 95% confidence interval) was 0 ( -0.5, 0.5) events 
per 100 patient -years for 10 mg twice daily Tofacitinib  minus 5 mg twice daily Tofacitinib .  The 
median Tofacitinib  exposure prior to diagnosis of an opportunistic infection was 8 months (range 
from 41 to 698 days)  
 
• Malignancies and Lymphoproliferative Disorders:   In the seven controlled rheumatoid arthritis clinical 
studies, [ADDRESS_5292] -transplant lymphoproliferative disorder was observed in 5 out of 218 patients treated 
with Tofacitinib  (2.3%) compared to [ADDRESS_5293] been reported in patients treated with Tofacitinib  and identified as an adverse drug reaction.  
 
o Malignancy:  In the seven controlled trials, during the 0 to 3 months exposure, malignancies 
excluding NMSC were reported in 0 patients who received placebo and 2 patients (0.3 events per 
100 patient -years) who received either Tofacitinib  5 mg or 10 mg twice daily. Th e rate difference 
between treatment groups (and the corresponding 95% confidence interval) was 0.3 ( -0.1, 0.7) 
events per 100 patient -years for the combined 5 mg and 10 mg twice daily Tofacitinib  group minus 
placebo. In the seven controlled trials, during the 0 to 12 months exposure, malignancies excluding 
NMSC were reported in 5 patients (0.4 events per 100 patient -years) who received 5 mg twice daily 
 Page 10 of 13 Revised: 7/15/2019  of Tofacitinib  and 7 patients (0.6 events per 100 patient -years) who received 10 mg twice daily of 
Tofacit inib. The rate difference between Tofacitinib  doses (and the corresponding 95% confidence 
interval) was 0.2 ( -0.4, 0.7) events per [ADDRESS_5294] cancer, followed by  [CONTACT_6026], colorectal, renal cell, prostate cancer, lymphoma, and 
malignant melanoma  
 
• Gastrointestinal Perforation:  Events of gastrointestinal perforation have been reported in clinical studies 
with Tofacitinib  in rheumatoid arthritis patients, although the  role of JAK inhibition in these events is not 
known.  
 
• Laboratory Abnormalities:  Treatment with Tofacitinib  was associated with initial lymphocytosis at one 
month of exposure followed by a gradual decrease in mean absolute lymphocyte counts below the baseline 
of approximately 10% during 12 months of therapy. Lymphocyte counts less than 500 cells/mm3 were 
associ ated with an increased incidence of treated and serious infections . Treatment with Tofacitinib  was 
associated with an increased incidence of neutropenia (less than 2000 cells/mm3) compared to placebo.  
Treatment with Tofacitinib  was associated with an incre ased incidence of liver enzyme elevation compared 
to placebo. Most of these abnormalities occurred in studies with background DMARD (primarily 
methotrexate) therapy.   
 
• Treatment with Tofacitinib  was associated with increases in lipid parameters including t otal cholesterol, 
low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, and high -density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. Maximum effects 
were generally observed within [ADDRESS_5295] of these lipid parameter elevations on cardiovascular 
morbidity and mortality ha s not been determined.  
 
o Lymphopenia:  In the controlled clinical trials, confirmed decreases in absolute lymphocyte counts 
below 500 cells/mm3 occurred in 0.04% of patients for the [ADDRESS_5296] 3 months of exposure. Confirmed lymphocyte counts 
less than 500 cells/mm3 were associated with an increased incidence of treated and serious 
infections.  
 
o Neutropenia:  In the controlled clinical trials, confirmed decreases in ANC below 1000 cells/mm3 
occurred in 0.07% of patients for the [ADDRESS_5297] 3 months of exposure. There were no confirmed decreases in ANC below 
500 cells/mm3 observed in any treatme nt group. There was no clear relationship between 
neutropenia and the occurrence of serious infections. In the long -term safety population, the 
pattern and incidence of confirmed decreases in ANC remained consistent with what was seen in 
the controlled cli nical trials.  
 
o Liver Enzyme Elevations:  Confirmed increases in liver enzymes greater than 3 times the upper limit 
of normal (3x ULN) were observed in patients treated with Tofacitinib . In patients experiencing liver 
enzyme elevation, modification of treatm ent regimen, such as reduction in the dose of concomitant 
DMARD, interruption of Tofacitinib , or reduction in Tofacitinib  dose, resulted in decrease or 
normalization of liver enzymes. In the controlled monotherapy trials (0 -3 months), no differences 
in the  incidence of ALT or AST elevations were observed between the placebo, and Tofacitinib  [ADDRESS_5298] trials (0 -3 months), ALT 
elevations greater than 3x ULN were observed in 1.0%, 1.3% and 1.2% of pa tients receiving placebo, 
[ADDRESS_5299] were 
 Page 11 of 13 Revised: 7/15/2019  observed in 0.6%, 0.5% and 0.4% of patients receiving placebo, [ADDRESS_5300], which required 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4355] a liver biopsy.  
 
o Lipid elevations:  In the con trolled clinical trials, dose -related elevations in lipid parameters (total 
cholesterol, LDL cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, triglycerides) were observed at one month of 
exposure and remained stable thereafter. Changes in lipid parameters during the first 3 months of 
exposure in the controlled clinical trials are summarized: Mean LDL cholesterol increased by 15% 
in the Tofacitinib  5 mg twice daily arm and 19% in the Tofacitinib  10 mg twice daily arm. Mean HDL 
cholesterol increased by 10% in the Tofacitinib  5 mg twice daily arm and 12% in the Tofacitinib  10 
mg twice daily arm. Mean LDL/HDL ratios were essentially unchanged in Tofacitinib -treated 
patients. In a controlled clinical trial, elevations in LDL cholesterol and ApoB decreased to 
pretreatment levels in response to statin therapy. In the long -term safety population, elevations in 
lipid parameters remained consistent with what was seen in the controlled clinical trials.  
 
o Serum creatinine elevations:  In the controlled clinical trials, dose -related elevation s in serum 
creatinine were observed with Tofacitinib  treatment. The mean increase in serum creatinine was 
<0.1 mg/dL in the 12 -month pooled safety analysis; however,  with increasing duration of exposure 
in the long -term extensions, up to 2% of patients wer e discontinued from Tofacitinib  treatment 
due to the protocol -specified discontinuation criterion of an increase in creatinine by [CONTACT_726] 
50% of baseline. The clinical significance of the observed serum creatinine elevations is unknown.  
 
• Other adverse re actions:   The following occurred in at least 2% or more of patients and at least 1% greater 
than that observed in patients on placebo:  
 
 Tofacitinib  5 
mg Twice 
Daily  Tofacitinib  10 
mg Twice 
Daily*  Placebo  
Preferred Term  N = 1336 (%)  N = 1349 (%)  N = 809 (%)  
Diarrhea  4.[ADDRESS_5301] 
infection  4.5  3.8  3.3  
Headache  4.3  3.4  2.1  
Hypertension  1.6  2.3  1.1  
N reflects randomized and treated patients from the seven clinical trials  
 
• Adverse reactions occurring in controlled and open -label extension studies include:  
o Blood and lymphatic system disorders: Anemia  
o Infections and infestations: Diverticulitis  
o Metabolism and nutrition disorders: Dehydration  
o Psychiatric disorders: Insomnia   
o Nervous system disorders: Paresthesia  
o Respi[INVESTIGATOR_696], thoracic and mediastinal disorders: Dyspnea, cough, sinus congestion  
o Gastrointestinal disorders: Abdominal pain, dyspepsia, vomiting, gastritis, nausea  
o Hepatobiliary disorders: Hepatic steatosis  
o Skin and subcutaneous tissue disorders: Rash, erythema, pruritus  
o Musculoskeletal, connective tissue and bone disorders: Musculoskeletal pain, arthralgia, 
tendonitis, joint swelling  
 Page 12 of 13 Revised: 7/15/2019  o Neoplasms benign, malignant and unspecified (including cysts and polyps): Non -melanoma skin 
cancers  
o General disorders and administration site conditions: Pyrexia, fatigue, peripheral edema  
 
• Pregnancy and Teratogenic effects:  Pregnancy Category C . Pregnant and breastfeeding women will not be 
included in this trial.  
 
b. Potential Benefits to Subjects  
The purpose of this trial is to determine if Tofacitinib is an effective therapy in sarcoidosis. If this therapy is 
effective, subjects may see a symptomatic improvement and a reduction in corticosteroid requirement. 
Subjects who meet the primary endpoint will go on to a one -year extension where they will be given the study 
drug free of cost.   
 
12. Resources Available   
This study involves RNA extraction and RNA sequencing, which requires special resources through the Gene  
Profiling Shared Resource (GPSR). [CONTACT_6030] is the director of the GPSR and will be assisting with 
this study.  
 
13. Drugs or Devices   
We will follow the applicable Research Pharmacy policies and procedures and provide Research Pharmacy with 
a pharmacy manual for the study.  
 
References  
 
1. Barr JT, Schumacher GE, Freeman S, LeMoine M, Bakst AW, Jones PW. American transl ation, 
modification, and validation of the St. George's Respi[INVESTIGATOR_6015]. Clin Ther. 
2000;22(9):1121 -45. 
2. Erdal BS, Clymer BD, Yildiz VO, Julian MW, Crouser ED. Unexpectedly high prevalence of 
sarcoidosis in a representative U.S. Metropolitan po pulation. Respir Med. 2012;106(6):[ADDRESS_5302] of corticosteroids on quality of 
life in a sarcoidosis clinic: the results of a propensity analysis. Respir Med. 2015;109(4):[ADDRESS_5303]. 1997;111(3):623 -31. 
5. Koth LL, Solberg OD, Peng JC, Bhakta NR, Nguyen CP, Woodruff PG. Sarcoidosis blood 
transcriptome reflects l ung inflammation and overlaps with tuberculosis. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 
2011;184(10):1153 -63. 
6. Rosenbaum JT, Pasadhika S, Crouser ED, Choi D, Harrington CA, Lewis JA, et al. Hypothesis: 
sarcoidosis is a STAT1 -mediated disease. Clin Immunol. 2009;132( 2):174 -83. 
7. Zhou T, Casanova N, Pouladi N, Wang T, Lussier Y, Knox KS, et al. Identification of Jak -STAT 
signaling involvement in sarcoidosis severity via a novel microRNA -regulated peripheral blood 
mononuclear cell gene signature. Sci Rep. 2017;7(1):423 7. 
8. Ghoreschi K, Jesson MI, Li X, Lee JL, Ghosh S, Alsup JW, et al. Modulation of innate and 
adaptive immune responses by [CONTACT_6027] (CP -690,550). J Immunol. 2011;186(7):4234 -43. 
9. Lee EB, Fleischmann R, Hall S, Wilkinson B, Bradley JD, Gruben D, et al . Tofacitinib versus 
methotrexate in rheumatoid arthritis. N Engl J Med. 2014;370(25):2377 -86. 
10. van Vollenhoven RF, Fleischmann R, Cohen S, Lee EB, Garcia Meijide JA, Wagner S, et al. 
Tofacitinib or adalimumab versus placebo in rheumatoid arthritis. N E ngl J Med. 2012;367(6):508 -19. 
 Page 13 of 13 Revised: 7/15/2019  11. Mamolo C, Harness J, Tan H, Menter A. Tofacitinib (CP -690,550), an oral Janus kinase inhibitor, 
improves patient -reported outcomes in a phase 2b, randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled study 
in patients with moderat e-to-severe psoriasis. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2014;28(2):192 -203. 
12. Sandborn WJ, Ghosh S, Panes J, Vranic I, Su C, Rousell S, et al. Tofacitinib, an oral Janus kinase 
inhibitor, in active ulcerative colitis. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(7):616 -24. 
13. Statement on sarcoidosis. Joint Statement of the American Thoracic Society (ATS), the European 
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_3764] (ERS) and the World Association of Sarcoidosis and Other Granulomatous 
Disorders (WASOG) adopted by [CONTACT_6028], 
February 1999. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1999;160(2):736 -55. 
14. Jones PW. Interpreting thresholds for a clinically significant change in health status in asthma 
and COPD. Eur Respir J. 2002;19(3):398 -404. 
15. Miloslavsky EM, Naden RP, Bijlsma JW, Brogan PA, Brown ES, Brunetta P, et al. Development 
of a Glucocorticoid Toxicity Index (GTI) using multicriteria decision analysis. Ann Rheum Dis. 
2017;76(3):543 -6. 
16. Judson MA, Costabel U, Drent M, Wells A, Maier L, Koth L, et al. The WA SOG Sarcoidosis 
Organ Assessment Instrument: An update of a previous clinical tool. Sarcoidosis Vasc Diffuse Lung 
Dis. 2014;31(1):19 -27. 
17. Siltzbach LE, James DG, Neville E, Turiaf J, Battesti JP, Sharma OP, et al. Course and prognosis 
of sarcoidosis aro und the world. Am J Med. 1974;57(6):[ADDRESS_5304] Bio. 
2013;7:41 -56. 
19. Boyle DL, Soma K,  Hodge J, Kavanaugh A, Mandel D, Mease P, et al. The JAK inhibitor 
tofacitinib suppresses synovial JAK1 -STAT signalling in rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 
2015;74(6):1311 -6. 
20. Rashighi M, Harris JE. Interfering with the IFN -gamma/CXCL10 pathway to d evelop new 
targeted treatments for vitiligo. Ann Transl Med. 2015;3(21):343.  
21. Su R, Nguyen ML, Agarwal MR, Kirby C, Nguyen CP, Ramstein J, et al. Interferon -inducible 
chemokines reflect severity and progression in sarcoidosis. Respir Res. 2013;14:121.  
22. Administration USFaD. Xeljaz Full Prescribing Information; Reference ID: 3891137. FDA 
Maryland; 2016.  
 