  
 
Version 9.0,  
January 31 2023   1 
 Title: Social -LEAF Life Enhancing Activities for Caregivers  
IRB Approved Protocol  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Date  of last Modification: 1.31.23  
  
  
 
Version 9.0,  
January 31 2023   2 
  
Improving Dementia with Lewy Bodies Care Partner Outcomes through Positive 
Connections  
 
• Principal Investigator:   [INVESTIGATOR_252399], MD, MS  
• Co-Investigators:   Sue Ouellette, PhD  
   Judith Moskowitz, PhD Sandhya Seshadri, PhD, MS, MA 
• Sub-Investigator:
  Kathi Heffner, PhD   
Sally Norton, PhD Benjamin Chapman, PhD, MPH Sarah Kluger, LMHC, MA Judy Long, MDiv, BCC 
• Research Coordinators: 
 Ellen Beckwith, BS  
Kelly Bellenger -Fedele, MS  
Jeffrey Swan, MA  
 
1. PURPOSE OF STUDY  Family care partners of persons with Lewy Body Dementia (also known as Dementia with Lewy Bodies, DLB) face numerous challenges to their wellbeing including social isolation, changes in close relationships, difficult emotions, high burden of caregiving tasks and burnout. Many interventions focus on education around dementia caregiving, 
dementia symptom management, and dealing with negative consequences of caregiving. More recently, interest has arisen in developi[INVESTIGATOR_252400]-based interventions that seek to support family care partners discover positive emotions, self- efficacy, and meaning in 
caregiving.  
 
The purpose of this study is to further this work using the Life Enhancing Activities for Family Caregivers (LEAF) intervention by [CONTACT_252417] a group setting and by [CONTACT_252418] (Social-LEAF). We hope to display that social networks’ can be used as a means of reinforcing the positive life skills of the intervention; and that these same skills will enhance social networks, increase mutual satisfaction in social interactions, and boost motivation to reach out to others, thus combatting social isolation.  
 
In this 18- month long pi[INVESTIGATOR_252401] a foundation for future clinical trials to 
test the effectiveness and mechanisms of Social -LEAF through the two main aims that will 
be displayed and utilized throughout the duration of this study.  
 
Aim 1) To understand care partner needs, preferences, concerns and optimal 
communication strategies to adapt the LEAF intervention to a group with social components; and Aim 2)  To determine the feasibility and acceptability of the LEAF 
intervention as a source of pi[INVESTIGATOR_252402], and to assess for signs of efficacy and to identify areas where further optimization may be needed. 
 
  
 
Version 9.0,  
January 31 2023   3 
 2. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
With the aging of the US and global population, the number of persons living with, and dying from, dementia is predicted to increase with an estimated 1/[ADDRESS_306896] common Alzheimer's disease and related 
dementias, and, despi[INVESTIGATOR_252403], is relatively understudied
[ADDRESS_306897] impacts on individuals, society, and our elder-
care infrastructure; what tends to be less discussed is the impact of the growing number of family care partners who do the vast majority of caregiving. This impact includes lost financial opportunities, adverse effects on mental and physical health and social isolation
[ADDRESS_306898] many significant opportunities to improve the care partner experience, particularly opportunities for joy, meaning and connection.  To optimally promote wellbeing, we need to go beyond merely treating diseases and eliminating suffering, to also actively promoting health and positive emotions
7 Notably 
positive interventions, such as the Life Enhancing Activities for Family care partners (LEAF) intervention, have been shown to increase positive outcomes (e.g. positive affect, physical health) while still addressing important negative outcomes (e.g. depression, anxiety)
[ADDRESS_306899] the majority of its operations held at the University of [COMPANY_002]ster Medical Center. This will include faculty in the Department of Neurology and the Center for Health and Technology (CHeT). We will also be collaborating with the [COMPANY_002]ster Roybal STAR Center, a professor and Co-Investigator on the study at Northwestern University, the Alzheimer's Association and the Parkinson’s Foundation. [CONTACT_3739]'s key roles will be to offer templates for the individual interviews and pi[INVESTIGATOR_252404] 1 and 2, verifying that study procedures are adequately being conducted, and help interpret the findings during data analysis and manuscript preparation. 
  
 
Version 9.0,  
January 31 2023   4 
  
 Study Overview  
We seek to adapt the LEAF intervention to a group setting and by [CONTACT_252419] (Social-LEAF). We hypothesize that social networks can reinforce the positive life skills of the intervention; and that these same skills will enhance social networks. In this 18- month pi[INVESTIGATOR_252405] a foundation for future clinical trials 
to test the effectiveness and mechanisms of Social -LEAF.  
 
4. STUDY DESIGN  
This will be a completely virtual 18 -month long pi[INVESTIGATOR_252406]. The 
initial month will be dedicated to start-up activities including IRB submission, training, 
database set -up and initial meetings with our internal team to review the interve ntion. 
Following this, 3 months will be towards executing the activities related to Aim 1 of the study. This will include individual interviews with up to 20 people, iterative optimization and ongoing analyses, and pi[INVESTIGATOR_252407]-LEAF procedures. W e will be assessing 
the efficacy of the Social -Leaf procedures before finalizing the intervention to implement 
these changes for Aim 2. Aim 1 is mainly about the interview and gaining feedback on what individuals would like to see and what they would change about the intervention. At the end of Aim 1, our team members will meet to review the transcripts and suggestions we’ve received.  The feedback we get from Aim 1 will facilitate the study materials and final intervention for Aim 2.  
Moreover, the next 12 months of the study will be focused on the execution and 
completion of Aim 2. This will include the implementation of the Social- LEAF 
interventions. Beginning with the 1:[ADDRESS_306900] consented to study and entered into Redcap to be randomly assigned to the group that they will be in (waitlist control or intervention). The Social-LEAF course consists of 6 skills delivered online, through video-conferencing (“video sessions”) with a trained facilitator, to help manage subject’s mood and cope with the stressors of caregiving. Aim [ADDRESS_306901] 2 months of the proposal will be dedicated to completing data analyses/quality assurance, planning future studies, and the writing of grants, manuscripts, etc. Below, Table 1  depi[INVESTIGATOR_252408].  
 
Table 1:  
Study Procedure  Timeline  
Study start up  0-1 Month  
Aim 1  3 Months  
Aim 2  12 Months  
  
 
Version 9.0,  
January 31 2023   5 
 Analyses, extensions, etc.  2 Months  
 
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE RESEARCH STUDY POPULATION 
 
Subjects:  
Overall, they must be a primary care partner of a person with DLB, have had direct contact [CONTACT_252420][INVESTIGATOR_252409] 3 days per week (bereaved care partners can be included for this aim), be able to speak English, and be willing to participate. Subj ects 
will be excluded if they lack the capacity to consent for themselves or have urgent supportive care needs. We are looking for up to 20 subjects for Aim 1 and 60 subjects for Aim 2.   Gender, Age, Racial, and Ethnic Origin of Subjects:  
Gender and Age of Subjects:   
There will be no gender-based restrictions. There will be no maximum age restriction.  Racial and Ethnic Origin:  There will be no enrollment restrictions based upon race or 
ethnic origin. The study will include enrollment of persons of diverse racial/ethnic backgrounds to ensure that the benefits and burdens of research participation are distributed in an equitable manner.  
 Vulnerable Subjects  
Caretaking for individuals with conditions like Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB) can be a strenuous task. Individuals identified by [CONTACT_134639]/or investigator to be exhibiting characteristics of poor mental health will be addressed as soon as possible. This includes extreme responses to the questionnaires, tearfulness, signs of self-injury, etc. The coordinator will adapt ways in which to identify and approach these situations. In a more serious case, the subject will be referred to the chaplain and/or the mental health counselor on the study. Their needs and concerns are crucial to the implementation of this project.   
5. INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITERIA 
SUBJECTS  
Aim 1  
• CARE PARTNER INCLUSION CRITERIA:  Must be a primary care partner of a person 
that has been clinically diagnosed with Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB) or Parkinson’s Disease Dementia, and has access to high -speed internet connection at home 
or in a location where they can speak privately with a facilitator. iPads and a hotspot will be given to those who lack internet and a sufficient mobile device but show willingness to participate. The iPa ds and hotspot will be returned to the study team once study 
procedures have concluded.  
 
• CARE PARTNER EXCLUSION CRITERIA:  Not a primary care partner of a person 
with DLB. Is a primary care partner of someone who has not been clinically diagnosed with DLB. Cannot provide clear and concise consent to the project.  
  
 
Version 9.0,  
January 31 2023   6 
  
 
Aim 2  
• CARE PARTNER INCLUSION CRITERIA:  Must be a primary care partner of a person 
that has been clinically diagnosed with Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB) or 
Parkinson’s Disease Dementia, and has access to high -speed internet connection at home 
or in a location where they can speak privately with a facilitator. iPads and a hotspot will be given to those who lack internet and a sufficient mobile device but show willingness to participate. The iPa ds and hotspot will be returned to the study team once study 
procedures have concluded. Must be willing and ready to begin the intervention either immediately or in 6 weeks depending on which group they are randomly selected to be in.  
 
o CARE PARTNER EXCLUSION CRITERIA:  Not a primary care partner of a 
person with DLB. Is a primary care partner of someone who has not been clinically diagnosed with DLB. Cannot speak English or provide clear and concise consent to the project.  
 
o INTERVENTION INCLUSION CRITERIA:  Must begin LEAF procedures as 
soon as consented to the study. Has not taken part in Aim 1 of the study.  
 
o INTERVENTION EXCLUSION CRITERIA:  Has not started LEAF procedures 
at the beginning and has taken part in Aim 1 of the study. 
 
o  CONTROL INCLUSION CRITERIA:  Will have waited the 6 -week period 
before starting LEAF procedures after consenting and has not taken part in Aim 1 
of the study.  
 
o CONTROL EXCLUSION CRITERIA:  Has started/taken part in the LEAF 
procedures at the beginning and also has taken part in Aim 1 of the study.  
 
6. RECRUITMENT METHODS  
 
Aim 1 Recruitment Plan:  
Leaders of Lewy Body Dementia support groups identified by [CONTACT_252421]'s Association will be contact[CONTACT_252422]. We will provide information on the study goals by [CONTACT_252423] /information sheets. Interest 
by [CONTACT_252424].   
Aim 2 Recruitment Plan:  
Subjects will be recruited using recruitment strategies that have been successful for our ongoing studies of care partner s of a family member with DLB. Including: 
• Flyers to family members of patients with DLB receiving care at UR Memory Care and clinics participating in the UR Provider -Based Research Network  
  
 
Version 9.0,  
January 31 2023   7 
 • Lifespan and Alzheimer’s Association staff who have direct contact [CONTACT_252425] (who provide referrals)  
• Existing research registries held by [CONTACT_197882] (which afford direct contact [CONTACT_252426]).  
• ResearchMatch - Potential volunteers will be sent out a contact [CONTACT_252427] a brief 
overview of our study which is in our IRB approved ResearchMatch form. Potential volunteers will then have an option to complete a brief pre-screening survey via a REDCap survey link and provide their contact [CONTACT_252428]. The prescreening survey will screen potential subjects for age and care partner of LBD or PDD eligibility criteria.  
• The Roybal STAR Center  
• Foxtrialfinder (research matching service maintained by [INVESTIGATOR_68020] J. Fox flyer on the website and interested individuals will contact [CONTACT_252429].  
• Alzheimer’s Association TrialMatch  website  (connects individuals living with 
Alzheimer’s caregivers and healthy volunteers to clinical trials) . 
https://www.alz.org/alzheimers -dementia/research_progress/clinical -trials/trialmatch   
• LBDA Research Study page  (Lewy Body Dementia Association website’s research study 
page) . https://www.lbda.org/research/clinical- trials/  
• We will also use strategies specific to recruiting care partners for individuals with 
Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB):  mailing the flyer to researchers in the Lewy Body 
Dementia Research Network (national network of which URMC is a Center of Excellence); newsletters and mailings through the Parkinson Foundation (international 
network of which URMC is a Center of Excellence); recruitment at UR Memory Care, 
movement disorders center and neuropalliative care clinics by [CONTACT_15098]. In working with UR Memory Care and Movement Disorders clinics, study coordinators may review charts for upcoming clinics and ask clinicians to provide approved study flyers to introduce the study if they feel it would be helpful and appropriate for DLB caregivers of their patients.  
• In addition, we may also reach out to Recruitment Consultation, a service core of UR 
Clinical and Translational Science Institute (CTSI) for consultation and recruitment 
strategy planning to promote inclusion of racial and ethnic minority subjects.  
 
 
Staff -level strategies (continuous quality monitoring and refresher trainings targeting the 
 following): 
1. Establish rapport. 
2. Know the subject. 
3. Guide subject with sensitivity.  
4. Ongoing communications 
5. Accommodations for subject needs and safety, such as transportation, safety protocols (i.e., in response to suicidal ideation, for example). 
6. Focus on achievement and progress. 
 
7. CONSENT PROCESS  
Aim 1:  
  
 
Version 9.0,  
January [ADDRESS_306902] study coordinator. We are requesting a waiver of 
documentation of consent because the research is no greater than minimal risk and the 
interview will be addressing a topic where written consent is not normally required. The waiver won’t affect the rights and welfare of the subjects. The Roybal center will play an integral part in the determination of subject eligibility (I.e. the screening process). They will use our inclusion/exclusion criteria to view potential subjects, and if seen to be eligible by [CONTACT_252430], they will send these subjects to the study coordinator. The coordinator will then verify their interest and eligibility by [CONTACT_252431]. If interest is presented and eligibility is met, the study coordinator will move forward with acquiring the subject's consent to participate. Once they have consented to participate, the project study coordinator will proceed to schedule them for an interview session.  
 
Aim 2:  
All subjects will receive some information with regard to the study via our different recruitment methods (i.e. Researchmatch), help from the Roybal Center, etc. Once they have expressed their interest about participating in the study coordinator will begin the screening process of checking their eligibility for the study. This will include verifying that they are a primary care partner  of someone with DLB or PDD, did not participate in 
Aim 1, are willing and able to provide clear and concise consent, etc. In addition, the screening will also utilize the already established inclusion/exclusion criterions. After the eligibility criteria is met and their consent has been obtained, all subjects will be asked to provide contact/demographic information about themselves and begin the study procedures.    The project study coordinator will complete a thorough review of the study procedures and information with potential study subjects prior to obtaining consent. Potential study subjects will have an opportunity to ask questions and have their questions answ ered to 
their satisfaction prior to giving consent. The process of reviewing the study information will be conducted in a manner to facilitate questions from potential study subjects. If the project study coordinator is unable to answer a question, an inve stigator will be 
contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]. All questions from potential subjects will be answered prior to the project study coordinator obtaining consent. They will be reminded of the voluntary nature of study participation and the project study coordinator will explain the study, the voluntary nature of participation, the study’s potential benefits and risks, and alternatives as needed for the subject. The study coordinator will also explain to the potential subject that even if they decide to drop out of the study, we will still use any data that we previously gathered, up to the point in which they decide to discontinue. An explanation of risks will include information that questions asked may cause subjects to feel uncomfortable or upset. They will be informed that they may withdraw from the study at any time for any reason without negative consequences to them. They will also be notified that all of their rights will be protected.   
  
 
Version 9.0,  
January [ADDRESS_306903] 4 digits of the 
phone number they provide us with.  Once received they can either go over the form on their own, over the phone with the help of the study coordinator, or over zoom with the study coordinator (if requested by [CONTACT_423]). A confirmation email is supposed to be sent to all respondents that have completed the survey, but because your email address is not on file, the confirmation email cannot be sent automatically. If you wish to receive it, you must provide your email address to the study coordinator. There will be a signature [CONTACT_252448]'s participation in the study. This will be an e-signature [CONTACT_252449], their procedures for the study, and that they consent to participate in it. Moreover, once the first [ADDRESS_306904] control. This will continue to be the recruitment/consent process until our recruitment goal of 60 subjects is met. We plan to administer this consent process via e-consent.  
 
 
8. STUDY PROCEDURES (AIM 1)  
 Aim 1: Adapt the Life Enhancing Activities for Family Caregivers intervention to an online group intervention integrating social skills and connections. We will conduct these individual interviews with up to 20 care partners to adapt the LEAF course materials to a group setting. Also, we plan to incorporate social connections and skills (Social- LEAF) 
with these materials. We are looking for a max of 20 subjects to take part in this. We will be sched uling these potential subjects in a 6 week window based on their availability. 
Depending on the timing, there may be multiple individual interviews conducted in one day. Once they agree to take part in this portion of the study, subjects will join the interview and be exposed to the intervention (this will be completely virtual, and interviews will take place via the Zoom application). We will provide them the main basis of each element of the intervention during the interview, then go through the guide to see what kind of feedback we receive, Landmark Associates w ill be utilized to 
transcribe these interviews to help the study team further develop the intervention for Aim 2.  Those who have participated in Aim 1 and aid in the adaptation of this 
intervention will be automatically ineligible for Aim 2.  
 
- Aim 1 Procedures: The adaptation and tailoring process will consist of individual 
interviews, feedback, and consultation with the study team which some members have experience with supporting individuals who are dementia care partners. Explanation of the implementation of these interviews is above, and will be further outlined in sections below. As a first step, our core team will review the LEAF intervention, the LEAF-2 modifications (study in progress: R01AG058613) and the Positive Emotion Orientation for Nurturing Your Relationships intervention (PEONY: R01AA024065) to create the first draft of the Social- LEAF training manual 
  
 
Version 9.0,  
January 31 2023   10 
 and guide. We will draw on these other interventions to deliver the CORE aspects of 
LEAF in a group context and to integrate social examples, skills, and positive social outcomes. We will then begin recruitment/enrollment for individuals who are interested , mainly through support groups and the Parkinson’s Foundation. 
Individuals who enroll will be asked to provide basic contact [CONTACT_252432], so that we are able to schedule them for the interview. During the interview subjects will receive a brief introduction to the intervention and its core components by [CONTACT_20679], who is a part of the study. The interviewer will then go through the interview guide and ask subjects questions about the intervention and acquire feedback from them. The interview will be recorded and later transcribed by [CONTACT_252433]. Notably, Co-investigator [CONTACT_3739] (consultant and originator of LEAF, LEAF- 2, and 
PEONY) has adapted her interventions to multiple populations and contexts using the procedures described below, including to a group intervention for men infected with HIV (PEONY). [CONTACT_3739]’s main role within this study is to provide her own feedback and consultation on how the intervention should be provided to subjects. She has years of experience with these interventions and modifying them, so she will play an integral role in the finalization of the intervention for Aim 2. She will have access to the de-identified data of the subjects but she will not be directly interacting with them. Moreover, she will also play a part in quality assurance and making sure study procedures are being conducted properly for Aim 2. Additionally, Table [ADDRESS_306905] between facilitated sessions .  
- Outcomes will be the data/feedback we receive from the individual interviews (the materials for the adapted LEAF program, see Study Procedures below). Subsequent to this, after all the interviews have been conducted the main study team will get together to review and finalize the intervention in preparation for Aim 2. The research study coordinator will submit any RSRB modifications needed if anything within the intervention is changed subsequent to study approval.  
 
Table 2. Current LEAF Content and Potential Adaptations for Social -LEAF  
 Weekly Focus  Potential Adaptations  
Week [ADDRESS_306906] of social events both large 
(family visit) and small (email or card); Develop plans to 
build on social intentions  
Week 2  Mindfulness  Learn to balance self -awareness and self -compassion with 
attentive listening and mindful connection  
Week 3  Positive 
Reappraisals  Recognize role of negative attributions in disrupting social 
connections; Consider ways to share positive reappraisals of 
stressful events  
Week 4  Strength and 
Goals  Recognizing social strengths (e.g., good listener) and positive 
attributes (e.g., sense of humor)  
Week 5  Acts of Kindness  Appreciate the personal and relational benefits of both 
performing small acts of kindness and in receiving them  
  
 
Version 9.0,  
January 31 2023   11 
 Week 6  Sustainment  Subjects develop concrete plans to continue to practice 
Social -LEAF skills including with members of their social 
network  
 
 
9. STUDY PROCEDURES (AIM 2)  
 Aim 2: The goal of this aim is to assess the acceptability, appropriateness, feasibility, and efficacy of Social -LEAF. We will conduct a pi[INVESTIGATOR_252410] -LEAF intervention in 60 subjects (30 intervention; [ADDRESS_306907] control) and us e 
mixed methods to assess feasibility, acceptability and efficacy.  
- Aim 2 Procedures: Subjects will complete six, weekly, [ADDRESS_306908] control (receives intervention after 6 weeks) by a computer program. Subjects will know which arm they will be in after enrollment in the stu dy. The intervention will be delivered 
completely online. We ask that subjects find a nice and quiet area in which there is minimal distractions to conduct these visits. Subject privacy is very important to us. Subjects will be asked to complete a daily emotion check -in (5 minutes) during the 6-
week course period. This will be delivered to them via Redcap as a survey as well. Prior to beginning the Social- LEAF course, they will receive a computer tablet to use 
for the study, if they express the need for it. Subjects will also be asked to complete our online outcome measures at each data collection point (3 total) approximately every 6 weeks (baseline, week 6, and week 12) after you are officially enrolled in the study. The total time to complete these activities in one day is approximately [ADDRESS_306909] of these measures. Furthermore, if 
the study research coordinator sees anything concerning (I.e., signs of abuse, self-harm, etc.) during the duration of a research visit, then there are measures in place to address this. These measures include contact[CONTACT_232560] [INVESTIGATOR_252411], relaying these concerns, and gathering as much information as possible before taking action towards this concern. There will be 3 g roups of 10 (on average; this number 
may range from 5-15 depending on randomization, recruitment and retention)  that will be in each group (intervention or control). Each group of subjects will go through the study procedure together. Data from subjects in all groups will be collected at baseline, week 6, and week 12. Data collection will happen via zoom/via Redcap survey sent to them by [CONTACT_252434]. The waitlist control subjects will start the intervention at week [ADDRESS_306910]. Planned deliverables from this aim will include a final intervention manual, a manuscript on the pi[INVESTIGATOR_52393], and pi[INVESTIGATOR_252412].  
- Quantitative Survey Outcome Measures: Our primary outcome measure is the 
PROMIS Positive Affect Scale. We will also be assessing the Positive Aspects of 
Caregiving scale ( positive consequences of caregiving)10   and other measures of 
caregiver distress and wellbeing (see Table 4). These measures will be administered at each data collection point mainly via Redcap as a survey, and/or via the study 
  
 
Version 9.0,  
January [ADDRESS_306911] Control  
Baseline  Data collection point, Start 
online LEAF procedures  Data collection point  
Week 6  Data collection point  Data collection point, Start 
online LEAF procedures  
Week 12  Data collection point 
(maintenance)  Data collection point  
 Table 4. Outcome measures  
Demographics (Baseline)  UCLA Loneliness, short form  
Modified Barthel Index (Baseline)  Perceived Stress Scale (PSS -10) 
FAST (Baseline)  Positive Aspects of Caregiver scale  
PROMIS social isolation  Berkman -Syme Social network  
PROMIS satisfaction w/ roles and activities  Modified Caregiver Strain Index  
PROMIS depression  SF-[ADDRESS_306912] Scale  UCLA Loneliness, version 3  
NPI-Q Differential emotions scale  
 
- Aim 2 Feasibility and Efficacy Outcomes: We will utilize the RE -AIM framework to 
assess feasibility including: % of subjects approached who join the study (Reach) ; 
change in survey results (Efficacy) ; % of subjects who complete all intervention 
activities (Adoption) ; fidelity of facilitators to the manual as written 
(Implementation); and % of subjects who continue to engage in these skills 6- weeks 
following the intervention (Maintenance) .  
- Aim 2 Interviews and Value Proposition Design: We will conduct a semi -structured 
end of study interview with select subjects at the completion of the study to understand their perspectives on whether the intervention was beneficial, how it impacted their personal and social lives, and how it was received by [CONTACT_252435]. Additionally, we would like to receive feedback on what specifically worked for them and what areas they would personally modify. To understand opportunities for any further improvements we will follow customer discovery and value proposition design guidance and materials from Osterwalder et al.
11 This 
framework allows us to gain greater depth into the perceived “jobs, pains, and gains, of daily care partner  and features of the intervention and related social support that 
serve as “gain creators and pain relievers.” Care partners will undergo a single, brief and focused interview at the end of the study to see whether and where they noticed any changes in social interactions  with the primary subject and whether they have 
suggestions for further improvement.   
- Analysis: Our primary analyses of surveys and data will be descriptive with particular 
attention paid to feasibility and to which scales appear most and least responsive to 
  
 
Version 9.0,  
January [ADDRESS_306913] provided their consent to participate. The information will be provided by [CONTACT_252436]/or REDCap survey sent to their email. The demographic information will be documented in the University of [COMPANY_002]ster’s REDCap system.   End of study interview  will be conducted by [CONTACT_252437]. Subjects will be scheduled for a video interview via Zoom based on their choice and convenience. Interviews will be conducted at a time 
convenient to the subject, will be audio-recorded using Zoom connected to a URMC-approved HIPPA-compliant account. Interviews with the research coordinator will typi[INVESTIGATOR_252413] [ADDRESS_306914], etc.   The interview will be audio recorded so that the full conversation can be transcribed for later analysis, and subjects will be informed of this before the discussion begins. No identifying information (for example, subject names, or other personal details shared during the discussion) will be included in the transcript.   
Return of Research Results  
As part of this study, we may learn information relevant to subject. If this happens, we 
 will provide them information that would be relevant once the study is complete. Subjects 
 will be given the option at the end of this consent to decide if they would like to receive 
 these relevant results. For the interpretation of these results, we strongly recommend 
 subjects contact [CONTACT_110319].  
 Some things subjects should know about results:  
• Sometimes the meaning of the results will be uncertain. It is important to know 
that our understanding of health is changing quickly, and in many cases, we may 
not know for sure what the results mean for a subject’s future health.  
• Any results we return to subjects will first be verified by [CONTACT_978].  
 
10. AUDIO/VIDEO RECORDINGS  
A URMC -approved HIPPA-compliant zoom account will be used to conduct the 
recording of the interviews. Recordings of interviews will be deleted from the recording 
  
 
Version 9.0,  
January [ADDRESS_306915] these recordings destroyed at any time. Interview recordings will be transcribed by [CONTACT_252438], a transcription company that has been approved and vetted by [CONTACT_252439]. All files transmitted or stored in their system are protected by [CONTACT_252440]’s S3 -managed 
encryption keys (SSE-S3). With SSE, every file is encrypted with a unique key, which is also encrypted by a separate master key which rotates regularly. The encrypted data, encryption keys and master keys are stored and secured on separate hosts for additional layers of protection
. In addition,  Landmark internally implements two -factor 
authentication for administrative users, which adds an additional safeguard in the login process. Login attempts that do not have the valid credentials from both sources are not granted access to the system. In addition, Landmark implements IP restrictions, preventing those who try to login to their system outside the designated IP address to gain access. Each employee, executive staff member and contractor of Landmark is required to sign a non-disclosure and confidentiality agreement, and follow Landmark’s security policies.  
10. RISKS TO SUBJECTS  
For the majority of study activities (which include the qualitative/quantitative measures, the intervention, and the interview) the primary risk is mild reactions of distress or fatigue or is invasion of privacy, and/or breach of confidentiality (if safety issues are detected). It is 
possible that conversations around certain conditions, telehealth, or support needs could cause distress or anxiety . The URMC project study coordinator is trained to recognize 
potential signs of fatigue and distress among subjects and is experienced in coordinating the interviews. During the course of the semi- structured interviews, the researcher will listen for 
signs of fatigue and will offer subjects a break from the interview, or provide them with the 
option to complete the interview over several sessions if needed. If subjects express or demonstrate signs of distress, they will have the option to decline answering a question. There is the possible risk of unauthorized release of interviews that could result in release of private information. All and every effort will be made to minimize any breach of data and ensure that all data are de -identified.  There is potential risk of signs of depression and 
suicidal ideation. If the study team finds a subject exhibiting these characteristics, they will address this immediately by [CONTACT_252441]. The research study coordinator will ascertain their risk by [CONTACT_252442]. They will contact [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_1238] /or chaplain for immediate assistance/guidance to develop a plan to address the issue. Lastly, if the study team learns that you or someone with whom you are involved is in danger or potential harm, such as elder abuse they will need to inform, as required by [CONTACT_252443], the appropriate agencies.  
 
11. POTENTIAL RISK TO SUBJECTS  
Fatigue, stress, topi[INVESTIGATOR_252414], conversation about these topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102], invasion of 
  privacy, etc.  
12. POTENTIAL BENEFITS TO SUBJECTS  
  
 
Version 9.0,  
January 31 2023   15 
 There are no anticipated benefits.  
 
13. COSTS FOR PARTICIPATION 
None anticipated  
 
14. PAYMENT FOR PARTICIPATION  Subjects will receive $25 for successfully completing the individual interview for Aim 1. For Aim 2, they will receive $25 for the completion of each data collection point associated with the study. This includes baseline, week 6, and week 12, for a total of $75. Individuals who express interest and are chosen to do the post- intervention interview will 
receive $25 as well, which can will total their compensation to $100.  
15. SUBJECT WITHDRAWALS  
Subjects are free to withdraw at any time without negative consequences. Subjects may also refuse to answer any individual questions. If a subject voluntarily withdraws from the study, we will attempt to the note the reason if provided by [CONTACT_423]. We w ill use 
the data already collected up until the point in which the subject decides to voluntarily withdraw from the study. In the event of the latter, subjects who withdraw from the study will be replaced.  
 
16. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY OF SUBJECTS AND RESEARCH DATA  
We are requesting altering HIPAA authorization so as to obtain permission during the verbal consent process to gather subjects’ demographic data.   
• Elements of authorization are being altered  
• Without subjects’ phone, email, and home address the study data collection and the mailed check for participation cannot be completed. Other demographic data such as race/ethnicity are important to answering the study research questions as they will facilitate an understanding of the challenges, barriers, and supports experienced by [CONTACT_252444]. 
• The demographic data being gathered are no more than minimal risk to the privacy of the individuals 
• All identifying information will be maintained on the REDCap system at the University of [COMPANY_002]ster and printed copi[INVESTIGATOR_252415]’s names, email, and home addresses will be held by [CONTACT_252445] a locked cabinet in her office at the University of [COMPANY_002]ster and on an encrypted University of [COMPANY_002]ster computer. All identifying information will be destroyed three years after the completion of the study.  
•  PHI will not be reused or disclosed to any other person or entity except (i) as 
required by [CONTACT_2371], (ii) for authorized oversight of the research study, or (iii) for 
other research for which the use or disclosure of PHI would be permitted by 
[CONTACT_36869]. 
  In order to protect the confidentiality of subject information, we will take a number of precautions. All data will be securely stored and maintained according to the regulations of privacy stipulated by [CONTACT_53013]. All data will be held by [CONTACT_252446] 9.0,  
January [ADDRESS_306916] protected computer and will be accessible only to the study PI [INVESTIGATOR_72226]. Back- ups of all study files will be made daily to allow 
for recovery of data due to disk failure. Confidentiality will be further maintained by [CONTACT_252447] "hard copy" data in locked files in a locked office. Only the research team and approved study personnel will have access to the data. All data reported in presentations or publications will be de- identified and will report only cumulative data or descriptions 
certain to maintain subjects' anonymity.   
15. DATA / SAMPLE STORAGE FOR FUTURE USE  
N/A  
16. DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING PLAN N/A  
17. DATA ANALYSIS PLAN 
Qualitative analyses (Aim 1) will use Atlas.ti software for coding and an inductive approach.
11 
We will iteratively modify materials alongside interviews and will plan to pi[INVESTIGATOR_252416] 2. For qualitative analyses in Aim 2, to understand opportunities for any further improvements we will follow customer discovery and value proposition design guidance and materials from Osterwalder et al.
12 
  
For Quantitative analyses (Aim 2), our primary analyses of surveys and data will be primarily 
descriptive with particular attention paid to feasibility and to which scales appear most and least responsive to the intervention. Secondary quantitative analyses will explore mechanisms and qualitative analyses will be used to gain further insights into how Social- Leaf benefits care 
partner s, what outcomes are most meaningful and whether further adaptations are needed. With 
[ADDRESS_306917] large between -group differences (0.7 SD/mean) and modest 
pre/post differences (0.5 SD/mean), which fall within the range of the original LEAF results.
8  
 
18. REFERENCES  
1) Creutzfeldt CJ, Kluger B, Kelly AG, et al. Neuropalliative care: Priorities to move the 
field forward. Neurology 2018;91:217-226 
2) Boersma I, Jones J, Carter J, et al. Parkinson disease patients' perspectives on palliative 
care needs: What are they telling us? Neurol Clin Pract 2016;6:209-219. 
3) Boersma I, Jones J, Coughlan C, et al. Palliative Care and Parkinson's Disease: 
Caregiver Perspectives. J Palliat Med 2017;20:930-938. 
  
 
Version 9.0,  
January 31 2023   17 
 4) Kluger BM, Shattuck J, Berk J, et al. Defining Palliative Care Needs in Parkinson's 
Disease. Mov Disord Clin Pract 2019;6:125-131. 
5) Kluger BM, Miyasaki J, Katz M, et al. Comparison of Integrated Outpatient Palliative 
Care With Standard Care in Patients With Parkinson Disease and Related Disorders: A 
Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Neurol 2020. 
6) Kluger BM, Vaughan CL, Robinson MT, Creutzfeldt C, Subramanian I, Holloway RG. Neuropalliative care essentials for the COVID -19 crisis. Neurology 2020. 
7) Beebe, J. Rapid Qualitative Inquiry: A Field Guide to Team- Based Assessment . 
Second Edition. Rowman & Littlefield, Lanham, Maryland. 2014 
8) Neal JW, Neal ZP, VanDyke E, Kornbluh M. Expediting the analysis of qualitative data in evaluation: A procedure for the rapid identification of themes from audio recordings (RITA). American Journal of Evaluation. 2015;36:118-132. 
9) Norton SA, Ladwig S, Caprio TV, Quill TE, Temkin- Greener H. Staff Experiences 
Forming and Sustaining Palliative Care Teams in Nursing Homes. Gerontologist. 
2018;58(4):e218-e225. 
10) Boerner K, Schulz R, Horowitz A. Positive aspects of caregiving and adaptation to 
bereavement. Psychol Aging. 2004;19(4):668-675. 
11) Osterwalder A, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_228065] Y, Bernarda G, Smith A. Value proposition design: How to create products and services customers want. John Wiley & Sons; 2014  