 1  
    
 
 
        
 
Rhode Island Diastolic Dysfunction – Heart Failure (RIDD -HF) 
  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
9/22/2016 
   
                      
 2 Study Title:  Rhode Island Diastolic Dysfunction – Heart Failure (RIDD -HF) 
Primary Investigator:  Wen -Chih Wu 
Version Date:   12/12/14; 2/10/15, 5/10/16, 9/22/16 
 
Rationale: 
Congestive heart failure carries a significant epi[INVESTIGATOR_472551]’s healthcare system and is associated with increased morbidity and mortality in those affected.  There are approximately [ADDRESS_605835] heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF)
1. HFpEF, also referred to as diastolic heart failure, is a clinical syndrome 
characterized by [CONTACT_472563], edema, fatigue, and decreased exercise tolerance, which are clinically indisting uishable from the presentation of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction 
(HFrEF). The underlying mechanisms in diastolic dysfunction are not clearly elucidated, making targeted therapy a challenge
2. There are currently no FDA approved treatments 
for this syndrome, and multiple clinical trials have demonstrated that standard treatments for systolic heart failure are ineffective in treating diastolic dysfunction 
3-6. The current 
standard of care for HFpEF includes blood pressure control with beta -blockers, ACE 
inhibitors, and angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) in accordance with current clinical practice guidelines, as well as the use of diuretics for management of symptoms due to volume overload.  One of the proposed underlying mechanisms of diastolic dysfunction is via the reduction of nitric oxide (NO), an endothelium-derived vasodilator that regulates blood pressure and regional blood flow
7. In 2010, Silberman et al. examined the effect of cardiac 
oxidation on nitric oxide and found that depletion of tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4), an essential cofactor in the production of nitric oxide, causes uncoupling of nitric oxide synthase, impaired relaxation of cardiac myocytes, and leads to subsequent diastolic dysfunction. The authors further went on to demonstrate that treatment with BH4 can improve diastolic dysfunction in a hypertensive mouse model as well as in isolated cardiac myocytes and may play a role in the treatment of HFpEF
8.  
 
Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride) is  a synthetic form of the cofactor BH4 
(tetrahydrobiopterin) for the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). PAH 
hydroxylates phenylalanine to form tyrosine. BH4 activates residual PAH enzyme, 
improving normal phenylalanine metabolism and decreasing phenylalanine levels in 
responders.  Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride) was approved by [CONTACT_3361] (FDA) in 2007 for use in treatment of the genetic disorder phenylketonuria at doses of 5-20mg/kg once daily.   To our knowledge, the role of Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride) in treating diastolic dysfunction in human subjects has not been studied. 
 
Hypothesis: 
Treating patients with underlying diastolic dysfunction with Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride), in addition to standard care for heart failure  will improve metabolic 
parameters and echocardiographic parameters of diastolic function compared to standard care for heart failure alone 
 3  
Specific Aims:  
Primary Aim :   
Study the effect of Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride) supplementation in addition to 
standard care for heart failure compared to standard care alone on m aximum VO 2 
consumption in patients with diastolic dysfunction from baseline to three months on medication . This parameter will be obtained via cardiopulmonary exercise stress testing.   
 
Secondary Aim :  
Study the effect of Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride) supplementation in addition to standard care for heart failure compared to standard care alone on addi tional metabolic 
parameters obtained from CPET ( Ve/VCO2 ), echocardiographic parameters of diastolic 
dysfunction (see below), and quality of life (measured by [CONTACT_14871]) for the duration of the study. 
  
Relevance to VA:  
The functional and economic burden of congestive heart failure on the Veterans’ health system is unparalleled.  It is the number one reason for admission in this system, with over 100,000 hospi[INVESTIGATOR_472552] a re- admission rate of near 20% in 
the last fiscal year.  Additionally, it accounted for over 1,000,[ADDRESS_605836] of this disease is greater than $37 billion to the 
[LOCATION_002] healthcare system10.  Accordingly, The CHF Quality Enha ncement 
Research Initiative [QUERI] was created to improve both survival and quality of life in veterans with heart failure.  The efforts of this initiative have been focused on systolic dysfunction, due to the paucity of positive studies on diastolic dysfunction. If successful, our study will improve the quality of life and outcomes for the large number of veterans affected by [CONTACT_53220].  
 
Study Design  
This proposal describes a randomized  crossover pi[INVESTIGATOR_9985] 30 subjects at the 
Providence VA Medical  Center to address the hypothesis that Kuvan®(sapropterin 
dihydrochloride) supplementation is an effective treatment strategy in patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction.  The subjects will be randomized into two groups; 
Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride), in addition to best current clinical practices versus  
best current clinical practices  alone.  The randomization process will occur in a one to 
one fashion. At the end of three months, there will be  a wash out period of one week 
(during which both groups will not take the study medication) prior to the groups being crossed over. Data will again be collected and reviewed at monthly intervals and at the end of the study. 
 
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Male and female U.S. Veteran patients over the age of eighteen, with echocardiographic findings of >= Grade 2 diastolic dysfunction [as per American Society of Echocardiography guidelines] and  
2. Diagnosis of hypertension, diabetes (type 1 or type 2), or hear t failure in medical 
records.  
 [ADDRESS_605837] be ambulatory (not dependent on any ambulatory assist 
devices including cane or walker).  
Exclusion Criteria  
1. Any history of documented ejection fraction <50%  
2. Significant COPD ( defined as oxygen- dependent COPD ) 
3. Acute coronary syndrome within the past three months defined by [CONTACT_472564] (ie. elevated troponin) in the setting of chest pain or an anginal equivalent) 
4. Presence of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
5. Presence of infiltrative/restrictive cardiomyopathy  
6. Echocardiographic evidence of moderate or severe aortic or mitral valve stenosis or regurgitation 
7. Bioprosthetic or mechanical  valves  
8. Use of medication that effect folate metabolism (e.g. Methotrexate, pralatrexate)  
9. Previously diagnosed phenylketonuria 
10. Previously diagnosed BH4 deficiencies 
11. End stage renal  disease requiring hemodialysis 
12. Pre-existing seizure disorder 
13. Terminal illne ss (not including heart failure) with expected survival of one year or 
less 
14. Females who are pregnant or breastfeeding.  All females of child bearing age will undergo pregnancy testing prior to randomization. 
15. Recent hospi[INVESTIGATOR_472553]. 
Source of Participants and Participant Recruitment:  
Patient recruitment will occur at the site of the Providence VAMC by [CONTACT_472565]. A population of potential study patients will be 
generated, which will identify patients with echocardiographic parameters of diastolic dysfunction without evidence of systolic dysfunction. Subsequently, a chart review of the electronic medical record system [CPRS]  will be performed  on potential patients to 
evaluate for inclusio n and exclusion criteria. Potential subjects will be temporarily 
recorded in a password protected spreadsheet in a restricted access folder on a VA secure server.  Personal identifiers of subjects who do not participate will be deleted from the 
database. We will be requesting an IRB waiver of HIPAA and informed consent for screening purposes ONLY.   After subjects are identified by [CONTACT_472566], subjects will be sent a letter informing about the study. The letter will contain a return envelope to notify us within [ADDRESS_605838] does not want to be contact[CONTACT_3012]. If we do not receive the refusal letter, subjects will be contact[CONTACT_472567]. Patients who are interested in participating will be scheduled for a screening visit.   
Study Visits (Total of 7 Study Visits and 5 Telephone Calls)  
The study visits will take place in patient exam rooms in either the main hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] 
(building l) ,research buildings 32 or 35. 
 5  
 1. Screening visit : 
At this visit, the study will be explained in detail to the patient, and inclusion and exclusion criteria will be reviewed  by [CONTACT_214297] . If the patient meets the 
eligibility criteria and is willing to participate, written informed consent will be obtained. Following the completion of informed consent, the subjects will undergo a limited history and physical exam.   
 
Blood will be drawn for measurement of basic chemistry panel, complete blood count, fasting lipid panel, liver function tests, and the following biomarkers: BNP, 
glutathionylated myosin binding protein C, adiponectin, aldosterone, endothelin-1, NT-procollagen III, uric acid, and derivatives of reactive oxygen metabolites  (DROM) . These 
blood tests have been examined in various studies as markers of the presence of heart failure, ability to respond to treatment of heart failure, or early diagnosis of heart failure
11-15.   
 Subjects will then receive a weight -based test dose of 10mg/kg (rounded to the nearest 
hundred) of the study medication (Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride), ) and the subject 
will be observed with blood pressure and oxygen levels being recorded every thirty minutes for one hour. If at any point during this time period, the subject develops hypotension (S ystolic Blood P ressure [SBP] <90 or a drop in SBP >20mmHg with 
associated dizziness or syncope), hypoxemia (decrease in oxygen saturation to <90% on room air), or any evidence of an allergic reaction (pruritus, rash, hives, H eart R ate>100, 
abdominal crampi[INVESTIGATOR_007], nausea, emesis, or angioedema), the subject will not participate further in the study. Subjects experiencing any of the above symptoms will receive appropriate monitoring and clinical care, potentially including hospi[INVESTIGATOR_063], supplemental oxygen, IV fluids, until they are stabilized.   The patients  who tolerate the test dose will complete the Kansas City  Cardiomyopathy 
Questionnaire and receive a baseline echocardiogram.   
 Informed Consent Procedure:  
Members of the investigat or team  will explain the study to the potential participants and 
answer any questions that they may have regarding the study protocol.  The investigator will make it clear that the protocol is research as well as voluntary and that declining participation will in no way affect further evaluation or access to clinical care.  
Participants will also be informed that they may withdraw their consent at any point throughout the study. Patients will be given adequate time to read the consent form and discuss its c ontents with research personnel before signing the consent form.  They will 
also be provided with a phone number through which adverse events should be reported. Participants will then be asked to sign an IRB -approved written consent document and 
health in surance portability and accountability act (HIPAA) agreement, which will allow 
data pertinent to the study to be collected.  Following the completion of informed consent, the baseline visit will be scheduled within 
one week of study enrollment.   
 6  
2. Basel ine visit :  
At this visit, the subjects will undergo a brief interview to assess for recent changes in health status. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing will be performed  to establish the 
subjects’ baseline. The patients will then be randomized  (in a 1:1 fashion as mentioned 
above) to either Group 1, who will begin the study by [CONTACT_472568], or Group 2, who will begin the study by [CONTACT_472569] . The subjects 
in Group 1 will be provided with  their preference ofeither  a supply of 100mg 
Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride) tablets  or Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride) in 
the powder form.  This visit will last three hours.   The subjects in Group 1 will be instructed to initiate the study medication at the weight-based dose of 10mg/kg (rounded to the nearest hundred) with meals  (at the same time 
each day)  for one week beginning the following day (day 1). After telephone contact  
(table 2)  with a study team member on day 7, assuming no adverse effects are noted, the 
patient will be instructed to increase their daily dose to 20mg/kg (rounded to the nearest hundred) with meals  (at the same time each day)  for the remainder of the study period. 
The subjects in Group 2 will not be started on the study medication until after the ‘wash-out period’ as described in the study design   
Study Drug:  
Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride) is the synthetic form of the naturally occurring essential cofactor BH4 that is FDA approved for the treatment of phenylketonuria at the 
recommended dose of 10-20mg/kg daily. This study does not require an IND waiver as 
set forth by [CONTACT_472570] : 
 
“The clinical investigation of a drug product that is lawfully marketed in the [LOCATION_002] is exempt from 
the requirements of this part  [investigational new drug application]  if all the following apply:  
  
(i) The investigation is not intended to be reported to FDA as a well -controlled study in support of a new 
indication for use nor intended to be used to support any other significant change in the labeling for the drug;  
  
(ii) If the drug that is undergoing investigation is lawfully marketed as a prescription drug product, the 
investigation is not intended to support a significant change in the advertising for the product;  
  (iii) The investigation does not involve a route of administration or dosage level or use in a patient population or other factor that significantly increases the risks (or decreases the acceptability of the risks) 
associated with the use of the drug product;  
  
(iv) The investigation is conducted in compliance with the requirements for institutional review set forth in part 56 and with the requirements for informed consent set forth in part 50; and  
  (v) The investigation is conducted in compliance with the requirements of 312.7. ” 
 
The study drug will be provided by [CONTACT_189447] (Committee decision letter attached below – Appendix A)  
 [ADDRESS_605839].  
 
Follow up visits:   
Patients will attend routine follow up visits as outlined below .  These visits will occur 
within one week of the proposed outlined schedule. At all study visits, a  brief history and 
physical exam will be performed and subjects will be evaluated for medicat ion 
compliance, adverse reactions, and  exacerbation history. In a ddition, interim ED visits 
and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_472554]. Any exacerbations of heart failure, defined as worsening in dyspnea (including orthopnea or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea), J ugular 
Venous P ressure  elevation, significant weight gain (>3  lbs in 3 days) or lower extremity 
edema will be recorded.   
Summary of follow up visits is as follows:  
  6 week visit  (thirty minutes)  – Brief history  and physical exam  
 12 week visit  (three  hours) - Brief history and physical exam , Kansas City 
Card iomyopat hy Questionnaire, labwork for biomarkers  (as documented above) , 
chemistry, lipid, and liver panels, BNP, echocardiogram, and CPET testing.  
13 week visit  (thirty minutes) - Patients will be crossed over to the second arm of the 
study. They will receive a brief history  and the second group will be provided with a 
supply of Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride)  tablets  or powder .  
19 week visit  (thirty minutes) - Brief history  and physical exam . 
25 week visit  (three hours) - Brief history , Kansas City Car diomyopathy Questionnaire, 
labwork for biomarkers, chemistry, lipid, and liver panels, BNP, echocardiogram, and 
CPET testing.  
Telephone calls will be made at week 1, 3, 9, 16, and [ADDRESS_605840]  Clinic  Clinic  Tel Tel Clinic  Tel Clinic  Clinic  Tel Clinic  Tel Clinic  
Limited  
History/ 
Physical  x    x  x x  x  x 
Assess  
Medication  
Compliance      x  x   x  x 
 
Labwork  x      x     x 
Echo  x      x     x 
CPET   X     x     x 
KCCQ  
 x      x     x 
Exacerbation  
History   x x x X x x x x x x x 
Adverse  
Event  
Monitoring    x x X x x x x x x x 
Table 1. Follow- up Clinic Visits, telephone calls, and schedule of studies. CPET, 
cardiopulmonary exercise stress test; KCCQ, Kansas City Cardiomyopathy questionnaire ; Tel, 
telephone contact; Labwork: basic chemist ry panel, complete blood count , lipid panel, liver 
function tests, and the following biomarkers: BNP, glutathionylated  myosin binding protein C, 
adiponectin, aldosterone, endothelin-1, NT-procollagen III, uric acid, DROM   
 
Subject Reimbursement:  
 Subjects will be reimbursed for every visit they attend.  Attendance to visits 1 and 2 (screening and baseline visits), as well as visits 4 and 7 (all three  hour visits) will be 
reimbursed fifty dollars. Attendance to visits 3, 5, and 6 will be reimbursed twenty -five 
dollars.   
Specific Study Procedures: 
Questionnaire: The Kansas City Cardiomyopathy questionnaire will be used and is attached  (Appendix B).  
 
 9 Echocardiogram :  Transthoracic echocardiography uses ultrasound technology to 
evaluate heart structure and function. Measurements to be collected include:  
 
1. Tissue Doppler Index (Septal and Lateral E’)  
2. E Velocity 
3. E/E’ ratio  
4. E/A Ratio  
5. Pulmonary Vein Tracing (S/D Ratio, A -AR duration, AR Velocity)  
6. Deceleration Time  
7. Pulmonary artery systolic pressure  
8. Right Ventricular Function (assessed by [CONTACT_472571])  
9. Left Ventricular Mass  
10. Left Atrial Volume Index 
11. Longitudi nal Strain  
12. Circumferential Strain  
13. Strain Rate  
 All ec hocardiograms will be reviewed by [CONTACT_472572].  
 Cardiopulmonary exercise test:  
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing is a test of a subject's maximal exercise capacity.  This test will be performed at the Providence VAMC on clinical VA owned equipment. This 
test will be performed on a bicycle in the presence of a physician.   The subject will wear 
nose clips, and will breathe through a mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_82424] a metabolic machine, which will measure factors including oxygen consumption, CO2 production, volume of 
air per breath, and respi[INVESTIGATOR_697].  The patient will also be monitored by [CONTACT_472573].  The patient will then exercise at increasin g 
levels of resistance (increasing intensity of exercise) according to a protocol until the protocol is completed or the patient can no longer exercise.  The maximal value for oxygen consumption (VO2 max) will be recorded, along with other exercise paramet ers 
such as the respi[INVESTIGATOR_38952] (ratio of O2 consumption to CO2 production), the ventilatory equivalent ratio for carbon dioxide ( Ve/VCO2 ), and the dead space to tidal 
volume ratio.  Laboratory testing:  
This will be done by a trained phlebotomist who will draw blood samples from a venipuncture site, typi[INVESTIGATOR_472555]’s arm. The laboratory tests drawn include a , 
basic serum chemistry panel, lipid panel, liver panel, and biomarkers associated with diastolic dysfunction (as descr ibed above) .  All labs, besides the diastolic dysfunction 
biomarkers are basic labs and will be drawn and handled at the Providence VA per VA laboratory protocol.   The labs associated with diastolic dysfunction will be drawn by [CONTACT_472574] t he protocol below:     
  
  
 10  
 1) Draw six lavender top (EDTA) tubes (2 tablespoons each).  These tubes will be maintained at 4°C.  2) 1cc of whole blood will be aliquotted from the 1st tube and transferred into the plain orange- screw -top cryo tubes. 
3) Then, the tube will be balanced and centrifuged at 2000g for 10 min using refrigerated centrifugation. 4) 1cc plasma to orange top cryo tubes and stored at -80°C freezer until use.  This blood will be stored in [CONTACT_472586]’s (co-investigator) storage area  Blood Samples T ransfer see: Protocol Addendum: Information Privacy and 
Security Items and Safety  
 Patient safety:  
Human Subjects Research  
This Human Subjects Research meets the definition of “Clinical Research”.  This study is a clinical trial, and will be registered on Clinicaltrials.gov.  Protection of human subjects  
Potential risks  
Questionnaires and record keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007].  There is no specific physical risk to completing the 
quality of life questionnaires.  All records will be kept confidential, kept in locked cabinets, and identified by [CONTACT_472575].  
 
Phlebotomy . Phlebotomy for blood drawing i s associated with temporary pain at this site 
and may result in bruising at the needle insertion site.  Risks of the procedure include: vasovagal reaction during needle puncture; bruising at the phlebotomy site; and the possibility of skin or soft tissue infection at the needle puncture site. 
 
Echocardiogram . Standard approaches to performing transthoracic echocardiography will 
be utilized, which may induce transient discomfort as the ultrasound probe is pressed against the upper chest. 
 
Cardiopulmonary exe rcise testing . The testing may cause shortness of breath, fatigue, 
muscle discomfort, and very rarely (<1:1,000) may be associated with heart attack or death.  
 Therapeutic risks  
Treatment with Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride). 
Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride) is currently FDA approved for the treatment of phenylketonuria (PKU). The most common side effec ts include: headache, peripheral 
edema, arthralgia, polyuria, agitation, dizziness, nausea, pharyngitis, abdominal pain, upper abdominal pain, and upper respi[INVESTIGATOR_1092].   
In clinical trials  the most common adverse reactions (≥4% of patients) were : 
headach e, rhinorrhea, pharyngolaryngeal pain, diarrhea, vomiting, cough, and nasal 
congestion.   
 [ADDRESS_605841] been reported, including one case in a patient who received an accidental overdose of Kuvan .
 
 Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride) has not been tested in pregnant women, and there may be unknown risks for pregnant women and for their developi[INVESTIGATOR_472556], fetus, or unborn child. The package insert for Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride) is included in Appendix C.    
Protection against risk  
Study personnel will be fully trained and credentialed in human subjects protection. Study ID numbers will not include PHI.  All research data which will be kept in locked cabinets or password protected files on VA servers.   Risks from cardiopulmonary exercise te sting will be minimized by [CONTACT_472576], fellow/resident, or trained technicians at VA Providence with emergency equipment readily available.  Patients will be encouraged to exercise to their symptomatic limits, if there are any signs of medical instability, the physician will end the test before the symptomatic endpoint is ac hieved. 
 Phlebotomy will be performed by [CONTACT_54339].  Females  of reproductive age will undergo pregnancy testing prior to receiving the study 
drug as per the previously noted exclusion criteria. Female subjects will be instructed to use an effective form of contraception during the study period. If any female subjects become pregnant during the study, they will immediately stop taking the study medication and inform their study physician.   Social Risk:  
There is a mild risk of inadvertent loss of  confidentiality if the computer files or paper 
files where the patient protected health information or identifiers are breached by [CONTACT_472577]. This risk will be minimized by [CONTACT_20526] a study patient ID and saving all protected health information separate from patient files that contain the key with the identifiers. This key will be saved in a password protected file. All paper forms (informed consent, data collection forms, study binders) will be saved in a locked cabinet within [CONTACT_192437]’s office. Only study personnel will have access to these files.  Potential benefits of research to human subjects and others  
The potential benefit of Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydr ochloride) includes improvement of 
quality of life by [CONTACT_472578]. If the administration of Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride) does not accomplish these goals, then there  may be no direct clinical 
benefit to the subjects. However, in such case our results will demonstrate that 
 12 Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride)  supplementation is not a useful therapy in the 
treatment of H eart Failure with preserved E jection F raction .  
 
Importance of knowledge gained  As detailed above, heart failure with preserved ejection fraction remains a therapeutic 
dilemma and plays a significant role in the growing cost of health care due to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_472557]. Further, there are no established treatments that have been 
proven to improve the morbidity and mortality associated with this syndrome. The benefits to this study include establishing new data regarding the treatment of HFpEF. If Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride)  suppleme ntation is successful in improving 
symptoms and outcomes in this patient population, this study will be an important step towards a novel treatment for HFpEF. However, if this medication is ineffective in our subjects, then this study will argue against the use of Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride)  for treatment of this disease.   
 Data and safety monitoring  Patients will be contact[CONTACT_472579] 1, 3, 9, 16, and 22.  During these phone calls, patients will be asked the questions outlined in Tabl e 2.  Additionally, the patient s 
will be seen in person in a research clinic during weeks 6, 12, 13, 19, and 25.  At these clinic visits, patients will be asked the questions listed in Table 3 .  The  research team will 
meet every 4  weeks to review study progress and adverse events.  Additionally, all data 
will be reviewed to assure that no physiological findings warrant immediate intervention.  If so, the participant will be contact[CONTACT_472580]. Data from the echo cardiogram,  laboratory tests and 
cardiopulmonary exercise testing procedures will be reviewed by [CONTACT_472581]’s primary care physician. Adverse even ts will be defined as per the BioMarin Standard Language for 
Adverse Event Report  (below, and attached in A ppendix D) and reported to the IRB in 
accordance with the rules regulating each severity class (expected vs. unexpected, serious vs. other, related vs. unrelated).  
 
BioMarin Standard  Language for Adverse Event Reporting: IST Program, Kuvan  
According to the ICH definition, an adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical 
occurrence in a patient or clinical investigation subject administered a pha rmaceutical 
product, and that does not necessarily have a causal relationship with this treatment.  
An AE can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal 
laboratory finding), symptom, or disease temporally associated with the us e of a 
medicinal (investigational) product, whether or not considered related to the 
investigational product.  
This definition includes intercurrent illnesses or injuries that represent an exacerbation 
(increase in frequency, severity, or specificity) of pre -existing conditions.  Whenever 
possible, it is preferable to record a diagnosis as the AE term rather than a series of terms relating to a diagnosis.  
Adverse event information will be collected in an ongoing fashion through patient 
reporting AEs to their physician or health care provider.  Seriousness and relatedness 
will be assessed by [CONTACT_1963], with appropriate reporting.  
 [ADDRESS_605842] person based at the treatment center will be responsible 
for the collection and reporting  of AEs for patients participating in the program.   
Serious Adverse Events  
A serious adverse event (SAE) is defined as any AE that:  
• Results in death  
• Is life threatening, that is, places the subject at immediate risk of death from the event 
as it occurred.  This definition does not include a reaction that, had it occurred in a 
more severe form, might have caused death  
• Requires in-patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_189315]-patient 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. Admission of a subject to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_189294]-patient as a result of an 
AE, even if the subject is released on the same day, qualifies as hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  
• Results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity. An event qualifies as 
resulting in a persistent or significant disability or incapac ity if it involves a 
substantial disruption of the subject’s ability to carry out usual life functions.  This 
definition is not intended to include experiences of relatively minor or temporary 
medical significance.  
• Is a congenital anomaly or birth defect, an AE that occurs in the child or fetus of a 
subject exposed to the product prior to conception or during pregnancy  
• Important medical event that does not meet any of the above criteria, but may 
jeopardize the subject or require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the 
outcomes listed above.  
More than one of the above criteria may apply to any specific event.  
Pregnancy   
Pregnancy in a subject being treated with the product should be reported immediately 
(within 24 hours of becoming aware of the pregnancy) to BioMarin Pharmacovigilance 
by [CONTACT_204485] 3500A (MedWatch Form).  Every effort should be made to follow the 
patient through resolution of the pregnancy (termination or delivery) and report the 
resolution of the FDA 3500A (MedWatch Form) to  BioMarin Pharmacovigilance.  
SAE and Pregnancy Reporting 
All serious adverse events (SAEs) and pregnancy reports whether or not considered 
drug -related should be reported to BioMarin Pharmacovigilance within 24 hours of 
receipt by [CONTACT_093]/sponsor  by [CONTACT_204485] 3500A (MedWatch 
Form).Clinicians should  not wait to collect additional information that fully documents 
the event before notifying BioMarin’s Pharmacovigilance Department of an SAE or pregnancy.  BioMarin may be required to report certain SAEs to regulatory authorities 
within 7 calendar days of  being notified about the event; therefore it is important that 
clinicians submit additional information requested by [CONTACT_204486].   
Reporting of SAEs to the IRB will be done in compliance with the standard op erating 
procedures and policies of the IRB and with applicable regulatory requirements.   
 
  
 14 Follow up visits:   
Patients will undergo routine follow up visits as outlined in Table 1 to assess compliance 
with medication use, changes in symptoms, development  of adverse reactions and further 
data collection.  
 
Monitoring for Adverse Events (AEs)   
At the baseline clinic visit and each follow -up contact, subjects are to notify study staff if 
they experience any change in their medical condition or medications, or have urgent care visits, emergency room visits, or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602].  Study staff will a lso monitor for 
interim emergency room visits or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_472558].   The investigator will contact [CONTACT_472582].  During the study, if a subject experiences medical problems or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], the study medication will be continued unless complicated by [CONTACT_48005]. If discontinued, it would be resumed once baseline clinical status is confirmed, assuming the event was not felt to be related to the study medication itself.  
 
Any adverse events that are immediately life -threatening, cause permanent or lasting 
harm, or require a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_472559] a “serious” classification  as per defined by 
[CONTACT_472583]  (above, and Appendix D) .  
All serious AEs and unanticipated problems will be reported to the IRB as soon as possible, but no later than 5 days from notification.  If an event is  possibly, probably or 
definitely related to the intervention, it will be classified as intervention -related.  Any 
incidental finding discovered during follow up visits or imaging will be graded based on level of severity . Severe findings (as determined by [CONTACT_472584]) will be referred 
to the Emergency Department for further evaluation. Findings determined to be low or moderate severity will be relayed to both the subject and his or her primary care physician or cardiologist.   Sample size determina tion  
Primary Aim :   
This study is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], and as a result a sample size determination is not necessary.   
 Data Collected  see: Protocol Addendum: Information Privacy and Security Items 
and Safety  
 Data Analysis Plan  see: Protocol Addendum: Information Privacy and Security 
Items and Safety  
 
Aim 1:  The primary outcome will be the difference in maximum VO2 consumption 
obtained from a cardiopulmonary exe rcise test at baseline , 3 months  and conclusion of 
the study [ΔVO2 consumption]  between Kuvan ®(sapropterin dihydrochloride)  use 
versus not . Descriptive statistics (mean, standard deviation, median, inter -quartile range,  
and frequency distribution) will be calculated to summarize, at baseline, participants’ demographic and medical history, and the primary outcome of interest (peak Vo2) according to randomized intervention sequences. We will ensure a balanced randomization is accomplished using t or nonparametric (Wilcoxon’s) tests whenever 
 [ADDRESS_605843]’s distribution assumption is appropriate. We will use the variants of statistical 
methods (t tests and linear models) specifically designed to analyze crossover clinical trials to assess changes in peak VO2 in response to Kuvan®(sapropterin dihydrochloride)  
supplement ation  in addition to current best practices versus current best practices alone.  
 
Secondary Aims:  The CPET measures and molecular biomarkers will be analyzed using 
the same crossover analysis models for crossover clinical trials16. 
      
Data storage and sharing see: Protocol Addendum: Information Privacy and 
Security Items and Safety  
                                     
 16  
Table 2  - Telephone Monitoring:  
Side Effects  – fevers, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, 
rhinorrhea?  
Compliance and barriers to compliance?  
Have there been changes in previous medication 
regimen?  
Weight loss/gain?  
Is dyspnea improved, worse, or unchanged?  
Is there any subjective change in exercise 
tolerance?  
Have there been any doctor’s visits or 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]?  
 
Table 3  - Brief History and Physical: 
 
 Vital Signs:   
Temperature  
HR 
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_472560]:   
HEENT: JVD  
CVS: S3  
Chest: Crackles  
Abd: HJR, Pulsatile Liver  
Ext: Edema?  
 
Side Effects  – fever, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, 
rhinorrhea?  
Compliance and barriers to compliance?  
Have there been changes in previous medication 
regimen?  
Weight loss/gain?  
Is dyspnea improved, worse, or unchanged?  
Is there any subjective change in exercise 
tolerance?  
Have there been any doctor’s visits or 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]?  
 17 References  
 
1) Redfield MM, Jacobsen SJ, Burnett JC Jr, Mahoney DW, Bailey KR, Rodeheffer RJ. Burden 
of systolic and diastolic ventricular dysfunction in the community: appreciating the scope of the 
heart failure epi[INVESTIGATOR_901]. JAMA. 2003;289:194 –202. 
2) Ouzounian M, Lee DS, Liu PP. Diastolic heart failure: mechanisms and controversies. Nat Clin 
Pract Cardiovasc Med. 2008;5:375–386. 
 
3) Ahmed A, Rich MW, Fleg JL, Zile MR, Young JB, Kitzman DW, Love TE, Aronow WS, 
Adams KF Jr, Gheorghiade M. Effects of digoxin on morbidity and mortality in diastolic heart failure: the ancillary digitalis investigation group trial. Circulation. 2006;114:397 – 403. 
 4) Hernandez AF, et al. Clinical effectiveness of beta- blockers in heart failure: findings from the 
OPTIMIZE- HF (Organized  Progra m to Initiate Life -saving Treatment in Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_472561]) Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009; 53:184-192 
 
5) Massie BM, Carson PE, McMurray JJ, Komajda M, McKelvie R, Zile MR, Anderson S, 
Donovan M, Iverson E, Staiger C, Ptaszynska A. Irbesartan in patients with heart failure and 
preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:2456 –2467. 
 
6) Pi[INVESTIGATOR_32887] B, et al. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_472562]. N Engl J Med 
2014; 370:1383-1392 
7) Ziolo MT, Kohr MJ, Wang H. Nitric oxide signaling and the regulation of myocardial function. J Mol Cell Cardiol . 2008;45:625–632. 
 
8) Silberman GA, et al. Uncoupled Cardiac Nitric Oxide Synthase Mediates Diastolic 
Dysfunction. Circulation 2010; 121: 519-528. 
 
9) Heidenreich, et al. Forecasting the Impact of Heart Failure in the [LOCATION_002]: A Policy 
Statement from the American Heart Association  
 
10) Heidenreich, Paul. The Burden of Heart Failure. 
http://www.queri.research.va.gov/chf/products/nurse_education/Burden-of- Heart -Failure.pdf  
 
11) de Boer , RA, Voors, AA, Muntendam, P, van Gilst, WH, & van Veldhuisen, DJ. Galectin-3: 
a novel mediator of heart failure development and progression.". European journal of heart 
failure  2009; 11 (9): 811 –817. 
 
12) Ky B, French B, McCloskey K, Rame JE, McIntosh E, Shahi P, Dries DL, Tang WH, Wu 
AH, Fang JC, Boxer R, Sweitzer NK, Levy WC, Goldberg LR, Jessup M, Cappola TP (March 
2011). "High -sensitivity ST2 for prediction of adverse outcomes in chronic heart failure" . Circ 
Heart Fail  4 (2): 180–7. 
 13) Takano H, Obata JE, Kodama Y, et al. Adiponectin is released from the heart in patients with 
heart failure. Int J Cardiol. 2009; 132: 221-226 
 
14)  Bishu K, Deswal A, Chen HH, et al. Biomarkers in acutely decompensated heart failure with preserved or reduced ejection frac tion. Am Heart J. 2012 Nov; 164(5): 763-770 
 
 18 15) Jeong, EM, Monasky M, et al. Tetrahydrobiopterin improves diastolic dysfunction by 
[CONTACT_472585]. J  Mol Cell Cardio l. 2013 Mar; 56:44- 54. 
 16) Senn S. Cross -over trials in clinical research. Second Edition. Wiley; 2002.  
 
 