Study Title: The Influence of Testosterone on Experimental Pain Perception  
 
NCT Number: NCT 05781685   
 
Document Date: 08/26/2017  
 
 
 
Page 1 of 14 UNM IRB Protocol Template v1 2/03/13 UNM IRB  PROTOCOL  
 
TITLE:  The Influence of Testosterone on Experimental Pain 
Perception and Social Psychological Functioning  
VERSION DATE:  08/26/17 
INVESTIGATOR /RESPONSIBLE 
FACULTY : Jacob M. Vigil  
STUDENT INVESTIGATOR:  Chance Strenth  
FUNDING AGENCY:  N/A 
 
Page 2 of 14 UNM IRB Protocol Template v1 2/03/13  
 
BACKGROUND/ SCIENTIFIC RATIONALE  
     Scientists and health providers are currently limited in their knowledge of all of the biopsychosocial processes 
that constitute a pain experience. Pain perception is influenced by, and modulated through, processes that involve 
tissue stress and damage (e. g., physical disease and injury), peripheral and central nociception (i.e., afferent input 
and brain processing), mental thoughts (e.g., memories), emotions, and social settings (e.g., Gatchel, Peng, Peters, 
Fuchs, & Turk, 2007; McCaffery & Pasero, 1999). Although significant progress has been made in investigating 
many of these processes (e.g., opi[INVESTIGATOR_299035]), we still do not fully understand how certain aspects of pain 
experiences operate, including the role of endogenous steroids on the behavioral dem onstration of pain . It is well -
established that biological sex modulates pain.  As compared to males, females report greater prevalence, 
frequency, and duration of clinical pain and pain -related distress (Unruh, 1996; Berkley, 1997; Fillingim, 
Edwards, & P owell, 2000; Riley, Robinson, Wise, Myers, & Fillingim, 1998; Ruau, Liu, Clark, Angst, & Butte 
2012).  Experimental studies show that women are more likely to report lower pain threshold and tolerance, and 
higher pain intensity associated with various type s of noxious stimuli (e.g., ischemic, pressure, electrical, and 
thermal; Berkley, 1997; Fillingim, Edwards, & Powell, 2000; Riley, Robinson, Wise, Myers, & Fillingim, 1998; 
Fillingim, & Maixner, 1996; Shinal & Fillingim, 2007; Vigil & Coulombe, 2011). The magnitude of these effects 
varies from moderate to large depending on sample size, nature of the stimulus, and whether pain sensitivity is 
indexed by [CONTACT_299052] (Berkley, 1997Riley, Robinson, Wise, Myers, & Fillingim, 1998; Shinal & 
Fillingim, 2007, Fillingim, King, Ribeiro -Dasilva, Rahim -Williams, & Riley, 2009). It is generally assumed that 
gonadal sex hormones contribute to greater clinical and experimental pain experiences in women as compared to 
men (Fillingim, King, Ribeiro -Dasilva, Rahim -Williams, & Riley, 2009; Kuba & Quinones -Jenab, 2005; Riley, 
Robinson, Wise, Myers, & Fillingim, 1998; Ruau, Liu, Clark, Angst, & Butte, 2011; Vigil & Coulombe, 2011). 
Among the potential endocrine substrates responsible for gender differences in pain sens itivity is testosterone, an 
androgen produced primarily in the testis in males. Testosterone has been linked to several behaviors that prepare, 
motivate, and otherwise promote exposure to environmental dangers that result in pain experiences in vivo. 
Previ ous research with animal models and humans has found that individuals with higher levels of testosterone 
tend to be on average more aggressive and perform riskier behaviors than individuals with lower levels of 
testosterone (Beeman, 1947; Albert, Walsh, Go rzalka, Siemens, & Louie, 1986; Hume, & Wynne -Edwards, 2005; 
Stenstrom, Saad, Nepomuceno, &Mendenhall, 2011; Vermeersch, T’Sjoen, Kaufman, & Vincke, 2008; Booth, 
Johnson, & Granger, 1998). Studies looking at competition have found that humans that succeed in a competitive 
tasks (e.g., wrestling,tennis, stock -trading) had higher levels of testosterone and lower levels of the stress 
hormone cortisol than the losers of these tasks (Coats & Herbert, 2008; Mazur & Lamb, 1980;  Elias, 1981). 
Dominant males in sev eral primate groups have been found to have higher testosterone and lower cortisol than 
submissive males (Rose, Ho laday, & Bernstein, 1971; Muller  & Wrangham, 2004). Therefore, it has been 
assumed that testosterone has been linked to prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_299036], risk taking 
behaviors, competition, and dominance.  
      Experimental studies in females ha s found that women with higher basal levels of testosterone show higher 
levels of what are generally considered protypi[INVESTIGATOR_299037], and repeated experiments have replicated 
similar effects. For example, a study looking at dominance in females found that females with high levels of 
testosterone attributed more dominant characteristics to themselves than women with lower levels of testos terone 
(Grant & [LOCATION_009], 2001). Female twins with a male twin brother show higher mean levels of aggress ion than same -
sex, female twins, and this has been attributed to testosterone exposure in the womb (Cohen -Bendahan, Buitelaar, 
van Goozen, Orlebeke, & Co hen-Kettenis, 2005). Under controlled laboratory conditions, females that are given 
low doses of testosterone show reductions in empathetic behaviors (Hermans, Putman, & van Honk,  2006;  van 
Honk, Schutter, Bos, Kruijt, Lentjes, & Baron -Cohen,  2013; Mont oya, Terburg, Bos, Will, Buskens, Raub, van 
Honk, 2013). A logical extension of the above described work as it relates to sex differences in pain perception is 
to use a controlled laboratory experiment to examine how ephemeral and thus safe, short -lasting testosterone 
induction interacts with naturally circulating basal levels of testosterone to influence external pain sensitivity as 
part of a broad spectrum of changes in social behaviors associated with fluctuating testosterone levels.    
 
 
Page 3 of 14 UNM IRB Protocol Template v1 2/03/13 OBJECTIVES /AIMS /HYPOTHESES  
Our hypotheses are that: a) Females  with high levels of circulating salivary (basal) Testosterone levels 
will experience reduced pain tolerance (hypoanalgesia)  in a ischemic pressure pain  task (primary outcome) ; b); 
Testosterone will alter the participants  basal levels of estradiol and progesterone (secondary outcome)   c): Further, 
exploratory outcomes will test whether  testosterone will increase risk -taking behaviors , aggression , perception of 
health , attractiven ess, disgust response,  and sexual attitudes and beliefs.  
 
 
STUDY DESIGN AND PROCEDURES  
I. Study Design  
 
The first part of the experiment will: a) examine basal levels of testosterone in females b)  measure baseline pain 
tolerance ) experimentally manipulate ephemeral (short -lasting) testosterone levels in females. The second part o f 
the experiment takes place 4  hours later and consists of a pain task and behavioral measures /tasks . A double -blind 
protocol will be used so neither the r esearchers nor participants will know whether the participants were in the 
testosterone group or the placebo group until after the experimental procedures have been completed .  
 
 
II. Study Procedures  
 
Main Procedure  
The proposed study will consist of [ADDRESS_364920] 5 
hours per session. Prospective participants who meet our initial inclusionary criteria will come to the lab for a pre -
lab session  (See Appendix: Flow Cha rt of Experimental P rocedures that Will Occur Over 4  Days  for Each 
Participant ). This session will be used to explain to the participants about the risks and benefits of participating in 
this study and to make sure they understand the time commitment. Once  the prospective participants have read 
and stated they understand what is required of the m, they will be allowed to sign the consent form and schedule 
their first lab visit.  All lab visits will be determined based on the participant’s menstrual cycle (See  Appendix: 
Menstrual Cycle Scale). All female participants will visit the lab during their luteal phase of their menstrual cycle. 
The second lab visit will be [ADDRESS_364921] lab visit, participants will be pre -screened for pregnancy, 
tree nut allergies, and any use o f drugs (e.g., Insulin, Blood -Thinners, Corticosteroids, Oxyphenbutazone, 
Triamcinolone) that may negatively interact with testosterone. After the first session, female participants will 
continue to be screened for pregnancy via a pregnancy test. Females who do test positive for pregnancy will be 
excused from the experiment and will be referred to the UNM Student Health and Counseling Center (SHAC) 
where they can seek further care. All participants will be inquired  about  any new medication  use before the st art 
of each session. Because exercise, sexual behaviors, and competitive activities may increase testosterone, all 
participants will be instructed to avoid these activities on the days that they participate in the experiment. 
Participants will also be aske d to report the time they woke up in the morning to control for fluctuations in 
testoste rone over the course of the day.  
Participants will be randomly assigned to either a placebo group or a te stosterone group before arrival.  
The experimenters will be blin ded to this assignment. Randomization of the placebo and experimental drugs wil l 
be controlled by [CONTACT_5130].  
Participants will provide  an initial salivary sample to establish baseline testosterone levels.  Once they 
have given this sample, the  participants will be given either the placebo or testosterone. They will then provide 
saliva samples 15 mins following the intervention. This will establish an intervention check. Baseline  saliva 
sample before and after each intervention will be provided.  Participants will remain in the lab for the duration of 
 
Page 4 of 14 UNM IRB Protocol Template v1 2/03/[ADDRESS_364922] 3 days  apart . Participants will be reminded about their informed consent 
before their second session to ensure that they understand their continued rights as a research participant across 
the 2 experimental se ssions. Participants will be awarded 3 research credits for each session for a total of 6 
research credits.  Participants will also be paid $5 after completing each session for a total of $[ADDRESS_364923] tube where it will be stored in our lab freezer.  These saliva samples will be labeled with the participant’s 
subject number.  Three hormones will be assessed from the participant’s saliva: testosterone, estradiol, and 
progesterone. An enzyme -linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) diagnostic tool will  be used to assess the specific 
level of each of these hormones at Hominoid Reproductive Ecology Laboratory located on UNM Main Campus. 
Measurement of testosterone using salivary samples has been found to be a reliable methods of assessing 
hormonal levels of individuals and has been used for diagnoses of endocrine dysfunctions in both males and 
females (Shirtcliff, Granger, & Likos, 2002; Morely, Perry, Dollbaum, & Kells, 2006; Cardoso, Contreras, 
Tumilasci, Elbert, Aguirre, Aquilano, & Arregger, 2011; Karr er-Voegeli, Rey, Reymond, Meuwly, Gaillard, & 
Gomez, 2009).  Three hormones will be assessed in these analyses: testosterone, estradiol, and progesterone.  
Once these samples have been processed, they will be disposed of by [CONTACT_38768].  
 
Testosterone Administra tion 
 
The drug will be attained from the UNM Research Pharmacy that will prepare both the placebo and the 
drug for the purposes of this study  (See Appendix: Letter from Research Pharmacist) . The researchers will be 
blinded to this study. On the day of the experiment, the medical doctor on staff will write an individual 
prescription for the subjects participating in the study that day. The researchers conducting this study will then 
present the prescriptions to the UNM Research Laboratory and pi[INVESTIGATOR_299038] g for the purposes of this study. 
Each subject will have an individual syringe prepared for them in which they will self-administer  with directions 
from the researchers of this study.  When the drug/placebo is in the lab it will be secured in a locked cabi net in 
our lab facilities ; however, only testosterone/placebos being used for that days session will be stored at our lab  . 
Only authorized lab personnel and/or medical person nel will have access to the drug  at any time and a log will be 
kept indicating the inventory of the drug and when the drug has been removed from the cabinet and used. In the 
case that an unauthorized removal of the drug occurs (i.e. theft) or if there is indication that the log has been 
fabricated, the IRB will be notified immediately.  
     Participant Safety. Previous research has established that the current protocol will increase circulating levels of 
testosterone in the body by a factor of 10 within 15 mins of administration with bas eline levels of testosterone 
returning to normal in 1.5 hrs after administration.  As noted, however, behavioral effects of .5 mg of 
Testosterone reach their maximum levels 3 -4 hours after administration (Tuten, van Honk, Koppeschaar, 
Bernaards, Thijssen, & Verbauten, 2000). Several studies using this same procedure for administration for 
Testosterone have found it to be a safe and effective means of administration for women with no ill effects or 
complications being reported by [CONTACT_299053] “Table of Past 
Studies” (van Honk, Schutter, Bos, Kruijt, Lentjes, & Baron -Cohen, 2011; Montoya, Terburg, Bos, Will , Busken, 
 
Page 5 of 14 UNM IRB Protocol Template v1 2/03/13 Raub, & van Honk, 2013 ; Hermans, Putman, & van Honk, 2006).  We consulted a medical doctor about the  
dosage we intend on administering and they confirmed that the amount we will administer is safe,  miniscule, and 
should not cause any long term issues with the participants (See Appendix: Letter from Medical Doctor).  Subjects 
will be notified of the side -effects of more potent, repeated hormonal medication therapy which include: stomach 
or bowel complaints, acne/skin irritation, sleeplessness, chills, headache, anxiety, mental depression, excitation, 
confusion, dizziness, muscle pain, prolonged abnormal er ection, inflamed testies, bladder, sexual dysfunction, 
prostatic growth, high blood pressure, blood disorders, shortness of breath, fluid retention, breast enlargement, 
and changes in liver function. However, the amount of testosterone we will be administr ating is very low when 
compared to a typi[INVESTIGATOR_299039] (e.g., 40 mg to 300 mg) and will only be 
administered once. Further, previous studies show that potential complications associated with this drug are very 
minimal ( see Table of Past Studies  in Appendix ). This same method was used in a previously approved protocol 
at UNM (IRB Approval Code: 902016 -3). None of our participants reported any complications or side -effects 
from receiving the testosterone.   Known medication s that negatively interact with this form of Testosterone are: 
barbiturates, antidiabetic drugs, cyclosporine, Insulin, and anti -coagulants. Subjects will provide information on 
the medications they are currently taking in order to avoid these potentially harmful interactions.  
      
Ischemic Discomfort Task  
 
The ischemic discomfort task will require applying a sphygmomanometer (blood pressure cuff) 5 cm 
below their elbow. The participants will raise their arm vertically in the air and hold it there for 1 minute to 
desanguinate the limb. The cuff is then inflat ed to 200 mmHg over the course of 20 seconds. The subjects are then 
asked to lower their arm and perform handgrip exercise for a 30 second period. This procedure was previously 
found to be a safe and effective means to produce pain (Johnson & Tabasam, 2003 ; Ring et al., 2007). Participants 
will report their pain using the visual analogue scale (VAS) every 30 seconds. The pain task will end after 6 
minutes (participants will not be aware of this); all participants will be told that they can discontinue the t ask at 
any point they desire.  The main primary outcome will measure pain tolerance, which will be measured by [CONTACT_299054]. The longer the participant in the task, the 
higher their pain tol erance will be.  
 
Disgust  
 
 Tybur, Lieberman, Kurzban, and DeScioli (2013) proposed three domains of disgust: moral, pathogen, 
and sexual. Overall, women are more sensitive to disgust, but it was specifically found that women are more 
sensitive to sexual di sgust (Tybur, Bryan, Lieberman, Hooper, & Merriman, 2011: Tybur et al., 2009; Tybur et 
al., 2013). Disgust sensitivity has  not been explored using testosterone manipulation methods, however, due to the 
large sex difference found in the literature, it is pr obable that testosterone might manipulate disgust perceptions. 
To measure disgust, we plan on using the Three Domain Disgust Videos (TDDV; Del Giudice, in preparation). 
The videos can be found here http://tinyurl.co m/nl995ew . These [ADDRESS_364924] Scale (TDDS), a measure 
often used in the literature to measure the three domains of disgust  (Del Giudice, in preparation). We also plan on 
administering the TDDS along with the TDDV.  
 
Balloon Analogue Risk Task (BART)  
  
The BART is a computerized measure of risk taking behavior developed by [CONTACT_299055]. (2002). The BART 
models real -world risk behavior through the conceptual frame of balancing the potential for reward versus loss. In 
the task, the participant is presented with a balloon and offered the chance to earn money by [CONTACT_275246][INVESTIGATOR_299040] 6 of 14 UNM IRB Protocol Template v1 2/03/[ADDRESS_364925]. Participants are not informed about the balloons breakpoints; the absence of this information allows 
for testing both participants' initial responses to the task and changes in responding as they gain experience with 
the task conti ngencies.  
  
Reimbursement is based on the number of pumps accrued without the balloon exploding.  Subjects will likely 
complete 30 trials and will be reimbursed for 5 cents per pump. This leads to an estimated reimbursement of $[ADDRESS_364926] (expected ran ge $5 and $20).  
 
Behavioral Measures  
As reviewed above, testosterone has been known to influence aggression, risk taking behavior, and empathy 
in human subjects. It is our intention to measure all three of these aspects to see if the behavioral effects of 
testosterone are manifesting at 3.[ADDRESS_364927] established (See Appendix: Table of Past 
Studies). The behavioral tasks will consist of the Buss -Perry Aggression Questionnaire (Buss & Perry 1992; 
Bryant & Smith, 2001) , which measures 4 d omains of aggression that include: physical aggression, verbal 
aggression, anger, and hostility.  Risk -taking behaviors will be measured using the Domain -Specific Risk -Attitude 
Scale (Weber, Blais, & Betz, 2002) that measures risk taking behavior over 5 do mains that include: financial, 
health, ethical, recreational, and social risk-taking  behaviors. The Body -Esteem Scale (Franzoi & Shields, 1984) 
is a 35 items scale used to measure how the participants feel about certain aspects of their bodies. The Self-
Perceived Mating Success Scale (Landolt, Lalumière, & Quinsey, 1995)  is a 12 item scale used to measure a 
participants self -perceived mating success.  The SF -36 Health Survey (Ware  & Sherbourne, 1992) is a 36 items 
survey and measures self-perceived physical and mental health. It is widely used in medical setting to assess 
patient’s physical and mental health.  Finally sexual attitudes and beliefs will be assessed using a scale developed 
by [CONTACT_299056], Simpson, cousins, Garver -Apgar, and Christensen (2004).   Participants will be have to compl ete 
these behavioral tasks once  in a single session. Once to establish a baseline and second to measure the effect of 
the drug/placebo (See Appendix: Flow Chart of Experimental Procedures ). The order of the questions will be 
randomized each time . This is  to ensure that the participants are not answering a question as they had previously 
answered it  See Appendix: Behavioral Measures) . 
Feasibility  
 It is important to note, that the testosterone administ ration being proposed here is exactly the same to a 
previous study approved by [CONTACT_166725] (UNM Approval Code # 902016 -3). During the course of that previous study, 
none of the participants  reported any ill effects from taking testosterone . With our previous e xperience, we f eel 
that we can execute  this protocol with minimum risk to the participants.  The exact same researchers that worked 
on the previous study will also work on current study. These individuals will bring their experience and 
knowledge  from the pi[INVESTIGATOR_299041].   
Compared to that previous study, this study is scaled down. Our Pi[INVESTIGATOR_299042] [ADDRESS_364928] 2  sessions with 2 saliva samples per sess ion. The 
participants in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_299043] (i.e. testosterone) twice during the course of the 
experiment. In the current study, they will only receive the drug intervention once. Therefore, the amount of risk 
to the partic ipants is significantly reduced.  
 
Page 7 of 14 UNM IRB Protocol Template v1 2/03/[ADDRESS_364929] published several papers using the ischemic pain task  (Vigil & Coulombe, 2011; Vigil & Alcock, 2014; 
Vigil Str enth, Trujillo, & Gangestad, 2014 ; Vigil, Rowell, & Lutz, 2014) . Again, we feel confident that we can 
complete this protocol successfully with little risk to the participants.  
 
 
 
I. Target Population and Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
College -aged females  that are over the age of 18 and younger than 25  will be used for this study.  
 
Exclusion Criteria : 
 
All participants will be shown a list of exclusion criteria for this study on the Sona website. Before given 
the consent form the experimenter will go through this list to make sure the subjects do not meet any of the 
exclusion criteria. All women will be given a pregnancy test at each experimental session to ensure that the drug 
will not negatively impact an unborn child. If women are pregnant, they wil l be brought aside in the research lab 
and told they are pregnant and be given information on the Student Health and Counseling Center (SHAC) here 
on campus and excluded from the experiment. The following criteria will exclude a participant from the study:  
 
  Anyone that has a tree nut allergy.  
Females that are pregnant or may feel that they may be pregnant or breast -feeding . 
Anyone taking supplements that may influence their testosterone level.  
Anyone taking any kind of steroid that may increase his or her testosterone level.  
Anyone that smokes tobacco or uses smokeless tobacco .  
Anyone that reports any condition associated with nerve damage . 
Anyone that is using hormonal contraceptive.  
 
Each pa rticipant will complete a Testosterone Pre -Screen form (see Appendix). This form will ask each 
participant individually whether they are taking any drugs or have any conditions that might be exacerbated by 
[CONTACT_97113]. This form will be completed before t hey participate sign the consent form and each time they arrive 
in the lab for an experimental session.   
II. Participant Enrollment  
Twenty  Female Participants will be enrolled in this study.  
 
III. Recruitment and Screening Procedures  
Participants will be recruited via the UNM Psychology SONA system.  
 
IV. Informed Consent Process  
The participants have several opportunities to decide whether to continue or to terminate their 
involvement.  Solicitations will operate through the SONA system, in which prospective 
participants are fully informed of the study protocol. All participants will attend a pre -lab session 
where only the consent form will be discussed. The experimenter will go through the consent form 
and make sure that the participant understands all that is  required of them before they sign the 
consent form. Students will thus be allowed up to two weeks prior to a scheduled start date to 
decide whether they would like to participate in this study. I am also freely available to answer 
questions and concerns. Prior to their involvement in the study (upon arrival to the study location), 
participants are expected to provide written consent for the overall study (See Consent Form).  
 
V. Data Collection Procedures  
Described above in the Main Experiment Procedure. Two s aliva samples will be collected during each of 
the [ADDRESS_364930] attends:  
 
Page 8 of 14 UNM IRB Protocol Template v1 2/03/[ADDRESS_364931], self -perceived health, self -perceived attraction, and sexual 
attitudes and beliefs.  These surveys wi ll be stored on an e lectronic survey site (Opi[INVESTIGATOR_3078]) at UNM. We 
estimate that in all the experiment should take [ADDRESS_364932] the data, and  an additional 
month to 2 to 3  months to analyze t he data and to process the biological samples, an additional month is needed 
to interpret the results, and finally and additional 3 to 4 months to prepare the manuscript write up. .  
 
VII. Study Location(s)  
The study will be conducted in the Pain Lab (Room B56) at Logan Hall on UNM Campus  
 
VIII. Participant Compensation  
Participants  will be given 6  class credits  ([ADDRESS_364933] experimental session and 4 credits for the 2nd 
experimental session)  for participation in this study  and participants will be given $5 for participating in each 
session of this study.  Additionally, when participants  preform the BART task they can earn between $5 to $20 per 
session.  In total, participants can receive between $10 and $25 for each session they complete. In each session, 
participants will receive both the class credit and monetary compensation.  The participants will be paid in cash. 
The class credit and the monetary compensation  will be pro -rated based on the completion of each experimental 
session. If a participant fails to a ppear for an experimental session they will not be awarded credit or money for 
not showing up. If a participant decides to terminate the experiment during an experimental session they will be 
awarded credit and money for that session, but no further compen sation will be provided if they do not complete 
the following experimental sessions. If participants terminate the session before they complete the BART, they 
will only be awarded the class credit for the session and  the $5.  
 
If the participants are injur ed or become sick as a result of this study, the University of New Mexico Health 
Sciences Center (UNM HSC) will provide them with emergency treatment, at the patient’s cost. The University 
makes no commitment to provide free medical care or money for injur ies to participants in this study.  
   
IX. Study Resources  
The ideal research team consists of a tenured, Associate Professor and expert pain researcher with over 50 
published scientific articles in the areas of psychology and pain perception, Jacob Vigil, and a Master’s level 
graduate student with experience in running multiple types of social psychological and pain experiments, 
Chance Strenth. The researchers have protected research facilities and lab space for conducting the proposed 
experiments.   
EXPECTED RISKS/BENEFITS  
 
I. Potential Risks  
The potential risks associated with the induction of 0.5mg Testosterone are not documented. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_299044] a dosage that ranges from 10 mg to 200 mg (Bassil, Alkaade, & 
Morely , 2009).  As such, the dosage used in the current study is miniscule in comparison. However, as with 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_299045], the general risks include: increased aggression and increased 
libido, liver dysfunction, sleep apnea, edema may  increase or worsen, gynecomastia, exacerbation of breast 
cancer, and finally skin irritation (Bassil, Alkaade, & Morely, 2009). However, it should be noted that these 
 
Page 9 of 14 UNM IRB Protocol Template v1 2/03/[ADDRESS_364934] included in the Appendix , contains 6 studies 
where a similar experimen tal procedure was used. None of those studies reported any adverse problems to 
the participants and no participant dropped out of any of those studies due to complications of taking the T. 
Therefore, we believe that this experimental procedure is safe.  
In our previous pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] (UNM Approval Code # 902016 -3), an error occurred where a participant 
received 3 doses of testosterone instead of 2.  This error occurred at the research pharmacy where the 
drug/placebo was prepared and randomized.  We believe this i ncident was due to random human error during 
the course of the preparation of the placebo.  This incident was reported to the IRB as soon as it was 
discovered.  The participant in question did not report any adverse effects due to receiving [ADDRESS_364935] 2 sessions, not 4. During the course of 
the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], no participa nt reported adverse effects of receiving 2 doses of testosterone. It is very unlikely 
that this error will occur again, but even if it did the participants should not be adversely affected by [CONTACT_299057].  
The pain task is designed to experimentally induce mild to severe pain over a short period of time. The 
pain is manually controlled and will be stopped upon the participants' wishes. To avoid potential medical 
complications, only people without circulation problems, neuropathy, and  alcoholism are permitted to 
participate in the pain task.  
 
II. Benefits  
The participants will not gain a direct benefit from this study. However, the k nowledge gained from this 
study will contribute to a better understanding of how hormones influence pain in normal individuals. This 
could eventually lead to better treatments  for pain and better mean s of diagnosing pain.  
  
III.  Privacy of Participants  
Privacy will be protected by [CONTACT_299058] a secure location separate from the 
participants data in the lab. All other material will be labeled with subject number as oppose to subject’s 
name. All biological samples will also be labeled with subject’s number. The Vigil Pain Lab is located in the 
basement of Logan Hall. Logan Hall has any number of ongoing experiments taking place from day to day. 
The basement of Logan Hall and the actual location of the Pain lab or relatively secluded. Therefore, 
participants can enter the pain lab with lit tle worry that they will be identified as participating in this specific 
study. All research assistants have completed the CITI certification course and are sensitive to privacy issues 
and will therefore take necessary steps to ensure that the privacy of t he participant is protected.  
IV. Unanticipated Problems/Adverse Events  
We will terminate the study in the event that a participant claims they have experienced significant 
psychological or physical distress lasting more than [ADDRESS_364936] the PI [INVESTIGATOR_7966]. When conce rning complaints, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_299046] a timely manner. However, if the complaint appears to be of a serious nature, 
the IRB will be contact[CONTACT_11252] 24 hours and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_299047].  
 
STUDY DATA  
 
 
Page 10 of 14 UNM IRB Protocol Template v1 2/03/[ADDRESS_364937] basic demographic information. The paper surveys will be entered 
into an excel spreadsheet once data collection is completed. Data from the biological samples will be 
provided by [CONTACT_299059].  The data from all of these sources will be combined into a 
single spreadsheet from which the data will be analyzed.  All the paper -pencil data will be stored in a 
private area (i. e. locked storage cabi nets within a locked lab) and the electronic data will be secured under 
password protection on secure lab computers/hard drives. All paper surveys, electronic files, and biological 
samples will be labeled using the participants subject number to ensure pri vacy and confidentiality.  
Pregnancy tests will be used to assess pregnancy status of each of the female participants in order to 
exclude females that may be pregnant. In order to protect the confidentiality of each of the female 
participants, no identifyi ng information will be written on any of the pregnancy tests. Upon completing the 
pregnancy test, if the test is negative, the pregnancy test will be disposed of and the subjects will be allowed 
to continue. If the participants test positive, they will be excluded from the study. No written record or 
reason for exclusion will be recorded and the positive pregnancy test with no identifying information on it 
will be disposed of and the research assistant will provide information on SHAC as described above.  
After [ADDRESS_364938]. All data w ill be formatted according to the guidelines established by 
[CONTACT_299060] (RMOA).  
 
 
II. Data Analysis/Statistical Considerations  
Data analysis will be conducted using Multilevel Modeling to examine any potential differences across 
the expe rimental conditions. The pi[INVESTIGATOR_299048] [ADDRESS_364939] size reported in Chen, Decety, Huang, Chen, 
and Cheng (2016) used similar methods.   Using these reported effects a sample size of [ADDRESS_364940] that 15 participants will be sufficient in capturing significant 
results.  
Participant Withdrawal  
Subjects who decide to not participate in the study or who are otherwise ineligible for participation i n the 
experimental protocol will be given the option to write a 5 page essay for the equivalent of 6 hours of 
research credit (for instructors who accept such credit).   
Due to the expense and the co mplication of this study, if participants  choose to withdraw, the researchers 
will process the biological samples and  psychological data that were collected from the participants . This 
data will be used in subsequent analyses for this study. However, upon withdrawal  if the participant would 
not like their  biological or psychological data to be used for this study: they will be instructed to inform 
either the research assistants or the Principle Inve stigator for this study and their data will be excluded and 
their biological samples and psychologic al data will be destroyed.  
PRIOR APPROVALS/REVIEWED AT OTHER IRBS  
n/a 
 
 
Page 11 of 14 UNM IRB Protocol Template v1 2/03/13 REFERENCES  
 
Albert, D. J., Walsh, M. L., Gorzalka, B. B., Siemens, Y., & Louie, H. (1986). Testosterone removal in 
rats results in a decrease in social aggression and a loss of social d ominance. Physiology & behavior , 
36(3), 401 -407. 
Beeman, E. A. (1947). The effect of male hormone on aggressive behavior in mice. Physiological 
Zoology , 373 -405. 
Berkley, K. J. (1997). Sex differences in pain. Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 20(03), 371 -380. 
Birnie, K. A., Noel, M., Chambers, C. T., von Baeyer, C. L., & Fernandez, C. V. (2010). The cold 
pressor task: Is it an ethically acceptable pain research method in children?. Journal of pediatric 
psychology , jsq092.  
Bassil, N., Alkaade, S., & Morley, J.  E. (2009). The benefits and risks of testosterone replacement 
therapy: a review. Therapeutics and Clinical Risk Management , 5, 427.  
Booth, A., Johnson, D. R., & Granger, D. A. (1999). Testosterone and men's depression: the role of 
social behavior. Journal of Health and Social Behavior , 130 -140. 
Bryant, F. B., & Smith, B. D. (2001). Refining the architecture of aggression: A measurement model for 
the Buss –Perry Aggression Questionnaire. Journal of Research in Personality, 35(2), 138 -167. 
Buss, A. H.,  & Perry, M. (1992). The aggression questionnaire. Journal of personality and social 
psychology, 63(3), 452.  
Cohen -Bendahan, C. C., Buitelaar, J. K., Van Goozen, S. H., Orlebeke, J. F., & Cohen -Kettenis, P. T. 
(2005). Is there an effect of prenatal testost erone on aggression and other behavioral traits? A study 
comparing same -sex and opposite -sex twin girls. Hormones and Behavior , 47(2), 230 -237. 
Chen, C., Decety, J., Huang, P. C., Chen, C. Y., & Cheng, Y. (2016). Testosterone administration in 
females modu lates moral judgment and patterns of brain activation and functional connectivity. Human 
brain mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007], 37(10), [ADDRESS_364941], B. M., & Lucas, R. E. (2006). The mini -IPIP scales: tiny -yet-
effective measures of the Big Fi ve factors of personality. Psychological assessment, 18(2), 192.  
Elias, M. (1981). Serum cortisol, testosterone, and testosterone -binding globulin responses to 
competitive fighting in human males. Aggressive Behavior . 
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (1977). Fa cial action coding system.  
Fillingim, R. B., Edwards, R. R., & Powell, T. (2000). Sex -dependent effects of reported familial pain 
history on recent pain complaints and experimental pain responses. Pain, 86(1), 87 -94. 
Fillingim, R. B., King, C. D., Ribeiro -Dasilva, M. C., Rahim -Williams, B., & Riley, J. L. (2009). Sex, 
gender, and pain: a review of recent clinical and experimental findings. The Journal of Pain , 10(5), 447 -
485. 
Fillingim, R. B., & Maixner, W. (1996, February). Gender differences in the respon ses to noxious 
stimuli. In Pain forum  (Vol. 4, No. 4, pp. 209 -221). Churchill Livingstone.  
 
Page 12 of 14 UNM IRB Protocol Template v1 2/03/13 Gatchel, R. J., Peng, Y. B., Peters, M. L., Fuchs, P. N., & Turk, D. C. (2007). The biopsychosocial 
approach to chronic pain: scientific advances and future directio ns. Psychological bulletin , 133(4), 581.  
Hermans, E. J., Putman, P., & Van Honk, J. (2006). Testosterone administration reduces empathetic 
behavior: A facial mimicry study. Psychoneuroendocrinology , 31(7), 859 -866. 
Hume, J. M., & Wynne -Edwards, K. E. (2005 ). Castration reduces male testosterone, estradiol, and 
territorial aggression, but not paternal behavior in biparental dwarf hamsters (Phodopus campbelli). 
Hormones and Behavior , 48(3), 303 -310. 
Johnson, M. I., & Tabasam , G. (2003). An investigation into the analgesic effects of interferental 
currents and transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation on experimentally induced ischemic pain in 
otherwise pain -free volunteers. Physical Therapy, 83(3), 208.  
Jones, D. N., & Paul hus, D. L. (2014). Introducing the short dark triad (SD3) a brief measure of dark 
personality traits. Assessment, 21(1), 28 -41. 
Kemper, C. J., & Schwerdtfeger, A. (2009). Comparing indirect methods of digit ratio (2D: 4D) 
measurement. American Journal of H uman Biology, 21(2), 188 -191. 
Kuba, T., & Quinones -Jenab, V. (2005). The role of female gonadal hormones in behavioral sex 
differences in persistent and chronic pain: clinical versus preclinical studies. Brain research bulletin , 
66(3), 179 -188. 
Lippa, R. A . (2006). Finger lengths, 2D: 4D ratios, and their relation to gender -related personality traits 
and the Big Five. Biological Psychology, 71(1), 116 -121. 
Penke, L., & Asendorpf, J. B. (2008). Beyond global sociosexual orientations: a more differentiated lo ok 
at sociosexuality and its effects on courtship and romantic relationships. Journal of personality and 
social psychology, 95(5), 1113.  
Manning, J. T., & Fink, B. (2008). Digit ratio (2D: 4D), dominance, reproductive success, asymmetry, 
and sociosexuality  in the BBC Internet Study. American Journal of Human Biology, 20(4), 451 -461. 
Mazur, A., & Lamb, T. A. (1980). Testosterone, status, and mood in human males. Hormones and 
Behavior , 14(3), 236 -246. 
McCaffery, M. and Pasero, C. (1999). Pain—Clinical Manual . St. Louis:  Mosby.  
Montoya, E. R., Terburg, D., Bos, P. A., Will, G. J., Buskens, V., Raub, W., & van Honk, J. (2013). 
Testosterone administration modulates moral judgments depending on second -to-fourth digit ratio. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology , 38(8), 1362 -1369. 
Muller, M. N., & Wrangham, R. W. (2004). Dominance, aggression and testosterone in wild 
chimpanzees: a test of the ‘challenge hypothesis’. Animal Behaviour , 67(1), 113 -123. 
Riley III, J. L., Robinson, M. E., Wise, E. A., Myers, C. D., & Fillingim, R. B. (1998). Sex differences in 
the perception of noxious experimental stimuli: a meta -analysis. Pain, 74(2), 181 -187. 
Ring, C., [LOCATION_009], C. R., al’Absi, M., Beesley, L., Edwards, L., McIntyre, D., ... & Martin, U. (2007). 
Effects of opi[INVESTIGATOR_299049]. 
Journal of behavioral medicine, 30(1), 59.  
Rose, R. M., Holaday , J. W., & Bernstein, I. S. (1971). Plasma testosterone, dominance rank and 
aggressive behaviour in male rhesus monkeys. Nature . 
 
Page 13 of 14 UNM IRB Protocol Template v1 2/03/[ADDRESS_364942], M. S., & Butte, A. J. (2012). Sex differences in reported pain 
across 11,000 patient s captured in electronic medical records. The Journal of Pain , 13(3), 228 -234. 
Shinal, R. M., & Fillingim, R. B. (2007). Overview of orofacial pain: epi[INVESTIGATOR_299050]. Dental Clinics of North America , 51(1), [ADDRESS_364943] rom, E., Saad, G., Nepomuceno, M. V., & Mendenhall, Z. (2011). Testosterone and domain -
specific risk: Digit ratios (2D: 4D and rel2) as predictors of recreational, financial, and social risk -taking 
behaviors. Personality and Individual Differences , 51(4), 412-416. 
Tuiten, A., Van Honk, J., Koppeschaar, H., Bernaards, C., Thijssen, J., & Verbaten, R. (2000). Time 
course of effects of testosterone administration on sexual arousal in women. Archives of General 
Psychiatry , 57(2), 149 -153. 
Tybur, J. M., Lieberma n, D. L., & Griskevicius, V. G. (2009). Microbes, mating, and morality: Individual 
differences in three functional domains of disgust. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97(1), 
103-122 
Unruh, A. M. (1996). Gender variations in clinical pain expe rience. Pain, 65(2), 123 -167. 
Vermeersch, H., T'sjoen, G., Kaufman, J. M., & Vincke, J. (2008). The role of testosterone in 
aggressive and non -aggressive risk -taking in adolescent boys. Hormones and Behavior , 53(3), 463 -
471. 
Vigil, J. M. (2009). A socio -relational framework of sex differences in the expression of emotion. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 32, 375 -428. 
Vigil, J. M., & Coulombe, P. (2011). Biological sex and social setting affects pain intensity and 
observational coding of other people’s pain be haviors. Pain, 152(9), 2125 -2130.  
Van Honk, J., Schutter, D. J., Bos, P. A., Kruijt, A. W., Lentjes, E. G., & Baron -Cohen, S. (2011). 
Testosterone administration impairs cognitive empathy in women depending on second -to-fourth digit 
ratio. Proceedings of t he National Academy of Sciences , 108(8), 3448 -3452.  
von Baeyer, C. L., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_299051], T., Chambers, C. T., Trapanotto, M., & Zeltzer, L. K. (2005). Guidelines for the 
cold pressor task as an experimental pain stimulus for use with children. The Journal of Pain , 6(4), [ADDRESS_364944]  
IV. Experimenter Generated Questionnaire  
a. Demographic Questionnaire  
 
Page 14 of 14 UNM IRB Protocol Template v1 2/03/13 b. Pre-Lab Testosterone Related Behaviors Survey  
V. Non-Experimental Generated Questionnaires  
a. Buss -Perry Aggression Scale  
b. Domain -Specific Risk -Attitude Scale  
c. The Body -Esteem Scale (Franzoi & Shields, 1984)  
d. The Self -Perceived Mating Success Scale  
e. Sexual Attitudes and Beliefs Scale  
f. Menstrual Cycle Scale  
g. Three -Domain Disgust Scale  
VI. Debriefing Form  
VII. SONA Recruitment Form  
VIII. Testosterone Pre -Screen Form  
 
 