Confidential  
 metaMe Health, Inc.  
Protocol  
 
Title  
A Randomized, Double -Blinded, Comparator -Controlled, Parallel -
Group Study to Evaluate the Efficacy and Safety of Self -administered 
Digital Gut -Directed Hypnotherapy for the Treatment of Adult Subjects 
with Symptomatic Irritable Bowel Syndrome  
 
Short Title  
Efficacy and Safety of IBS Digital GDH Treatment (EASITx)  
 
 
Sponsor:  metaMe Health, Inc.  
[ADDRESS_62522]:  Gut-directed hypnotherapy (Regulora)  
Version Number:  6.[ADDRESS_62523]  
Huntington Beach, CA [ZIP_CODE]  
(323) 719 -7832  
[EMAIL_1072]   
 
Medical Monitor  (for patient safety related issues or questions)  
[CONTACT_57573], MD  
metaMe Health, Inc.  
222 Merchandise Mart Plaza, Suite 1230  
Chicago, IL [ZIP_CODE]  
(703) 447 -2615  
[EMAIL_1073]  
 
Curebase Study Manager (for study procedural, technical or administrative questions)  
Arsheen Ali  
Curebase, Inc.  
335 S Van Ness Av e 
San Francisco, CA [ZIP_CODE]  
(626) [ADDRESS_62524] for individual subjects in accordance with 
the requirements of this study protocol and in accordance with the following:  
 
● The ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.  
● International Council for Harmonisation E6 Good Clinical Practice: Consolidated 
Guideline.  
● [LOCATION_002] (US) Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) applicable to clinical studies (45  
CFR Part 46, 21 CFR Part 50, 21 CFR Part 56, and/or 21 CFR Part 812)  
● All applicable laws and regulations, including, without limitation, data privacy laws, 
clinical trial disclosure laws, and regulations.  
 
SIGNATURE  
 
 
 
 
 
[CONTACT_57571], MD        Date  
Chief  Medical Officer  
metaMe Health, Inc.  
 
 
 
  

 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62525] the rights, safety, privacy, and wel l-being of study subjects in accordance 
with the following:  
 
● The ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.  
● International Council for Harmonisation, E6 Good Clinical Practice: Consolidated 
Guideline.  
● [LOCATION_002] (US) Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) applicable to clinical studies (45 
CFR Part 46, 21 CFR Part 50, 21 CFR Part 56, and/or 21 CFR Part 812).  
● All applicable laws and regulations, including, without limitation, data privacy laws and 
regulati ons.  
● Regulatory requirements for reporting adverse events defined in Section 9.3 of this 
protocol.  
● I agree to ensure that all associates, colleagues, and employees assisting in the conduct of 
the study are informed about their obligations in meeting the ab ove commitments.  
● I agree to maintain adequate and accurate records in accordance with 21 CFR 312.62 and 
to make those records available for inspection in accordance with 21 CFR 312.68.  
 
I further authorize that my personal information may be processed and  transferred in accordance 
with the uses contemplated in this protocol.  
 
 
 
  
Signature [CONTACT_789]      [INVESTIGATOR_57444] (print or type)  
 
 
 
Investigator’s Title  
 
 
 
Location of Facility (City, State/Province)  
 
  

 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 5 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
1.4 Statement of Compliance  
The study will be carried out in accordance with International Council for Harmonisation Good 
Clinical Practice (ICH GCP) and the following:  
● [LOCATION_002] (US) Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) applicable to clinical studies (45 
CFR Part 46, 21 CFR Part 50, 21 CFR Part 56, and/or 21 CFR Part 812).  
 
Investigators and clinical study staff who are responsible for the conduct, management, or 
overs ight of this clinical trial have completed Human Subjects Protection and ICH GCP Training 
as documented in master trial documents maintained by [CONTACT_57481], Inc.  
 
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all subject materials will be  
submitted to the Institutional Review Board (IRB) for review and approval. Approval of both the 
protocol and the consent form must be obtained before any subject is enrolled. Any amendment 
to the protocol will require review and approval by [CONTACT_57482]. In addition, all changes to the consent form will be IRB -approved; a determination 
will be made regarding whether a new consent needs to be obtained from subjects who provided 
consent, using a previously approved consent form.  
 
1.5 Study Reference Information  
 
Study -Related Responsibilities  
The sponsor will perform all study -related activities except for those delegated to Curebase 
(CRO), Jeff Botbyl (biostatistics) and Nandini Murthy (regulatory). These vendors will p erform 
these activities in full or in partnership with the sponsor.  
 
Coordinating Investigators  
metaMe will select two Signatory Coordinating Investigators from the investigators who 
participate in the study. Selection criteria for this investigator will i nclude significant knowledge 
of the study protocol, the treatment protocol, expertise in the therapeutic area, and expertise in 
the conduct of clinical research as well as study participation. The Signatory Coordinating 
Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_57445].  
 
2 PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
 
2.1 Synopsis  
Title:  A Randomized, Double -Blinded, Comparator -Controlled, Parallel -Group 
Study to Evaluate the Efficacy and Safety of Self -administered Digital Gut -
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 6 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
Directed Hypnotherapy (GDH) for the Treatment of Adult Subjects with 
Symptomatic Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS).  
 
Study Design:  EASITx is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_57446] (Regulora), a novel digital 
therapeutic which delivers the North Carolina GDH treatment protocol to 
IBS subjects. EASITx tests the hypothesis that the digital version of the 
North Carolina GDH treatment protocol is safe and, relative to a 
comparator treatment platform, enables a clinically significant reduction in 
abdominal pain intensity and other symptoms of IBS. EASITx is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_57447], and digital GDH is classified as Software as a 
Medical Device  (SaaMD).  
 
The North Carolina GDH treatment protocol consists of 7  unique GDH 
scripts, each approximately 30 minutes in length and a single practice 
session, approximately 13 minutes in length. Each script has been converted 
to a video/audio recording allo wing for administration via a mobile device, 
tablet or personal computer, mimicking the frequency and duration of 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] -administered GDH.  
 
The EASITx study will apply state -of-the-art IBS and behavioral research 
methodology including use of a fully di gital treatment platform, a 
comparator that allows subjects to be blinded to the treatment hypothesis, 
and a data collection (ePRO) system which creates a double blind, 
eliminating the potential for investigator bias. The comparator treatment 
platform will  be identical to the GDH treatment platform except that muscle 
relaxation (MR)  video/a udio recordings equal in treatment duration and 
frequency of administration will be substituted for the GDH video/audio 
recordings. MR was chosen as the control after con sultation with the FDA.  
 
The EASITx study is [ADDRESS_62526] 
phases.  
● Phase 1: A 4 -week pre -treatment run -in assessment period (weeks 
minus 4 through minus 1)  
● Phase 2: A 12 -week treatment period (weeks 1 through 12)  
● Phas e 3: A [ADDRESS_62527] -treatment assessment period (weeks 13 
through 16)  
● Phase 4: A [ADDRESS_62528] -treatment long -term extension (LTE) 
during which time subjects will be required to complete two [ADDRESS_62529] -treatment (wee ks 35 
through 38) and [ADDRESS_62530] -treatment (weeks 61 through 64).  
 
Participation begins with the completion of an online prescreening 
eligibility survey via Curebase, a clinical research software platform. 
Subjects who pass prescreening will be consent ed online and scheduled for 
a baseline visit with a study physician. At this visit, their IBS diagnosis will 
be confirmed, inclusion and exclusion criteria will be applied, and subject -
facing surveys administered. Subjects will be trained on the use of the  
electronic patient reported outcomes tool (ePRO) and daily collection of 
IBS pain and stool symptoms.  
 
The Phase [ADDRESS_62531] 
the minimally required level of IBS symptom severity.  
 
Once the run -in is completed, ineligible subjects will be inf ormed , and 
eligible subjects will receive an “Onboarding Call” from a member of the 
Curebase study staff. The Onboarding Call will occur as soon as possible 
after the Phase 1 run -in period (at least 1 day but not more than 14 days). 
This call will be used to inform subjects of eligibility, confirm participation, 
create a user account, confirm access to the platform, and provide training 
on the use of the metaMe treatment platform. During the Onboarding call, 
subjects will select a treatment day and time tha t is maintained throughout 
treatment (Phase 2). Phase 2 will start on the next occurrence of the chosen 
weekday. Subjects will be randomized 1:1 into the 2 treatment groups by a 
firewalled Curebase staff member who will enter the treatment group 
assignment  on the metaMe platform. A software switch will directly initiate 
the assigned treatment allocation.  
 
The study is double -blinded, which in the context of EASITx means that 
subjects will not be aware of which treatment (GDH or the comparator) is 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62532] knowledge of group assignments (see Section 7.2.1). Subjects 
will complete treatment, per their group assignment and all subsequent data 
collection will be done without human int ervention via the Curebase 
platform.  
 
The Phase [ADDRESS_62533] will be compensated for 
participation and data collection based on a pre -defined schedule with a 
maximal milestone determined compensation of $525 ( Section 5.5).  
 
ePRO symptom data and outcomes surveys will be collected according to a 
pre-defined schedule ( Table 1 ). 
Objectives:  Primary Objective  
The primary objective of this study is to demonstrate that in adults 
with Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS), an all -digital Gut -Directed 
Hypnotherapy (GDH) treatment program (Regulora) is superior in 
reducing abdominal pain intensity relative to an all -digita l modified 
Jacobsonian Muscle Relaxation (MR) treatment program.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 9 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
 
Secondary Objectives  
● To demonstrate that Regulora has a positive impact on relief of IBS 
symptoms, quality of life, workplace performance (presenteeism 
and absenteeism), and psychological distress relative to MR therapy.  
● To determine the durability of Regulora in relief of IBS  symptoms, 
quality of life, workplace performance (presenteeism and 
absenteeism), and psychological distress relative to MR therapy.  
 
Exploratory Objective  
The exploratory objective of this study is to investigate predictors of 
treatment success using the PHQ -[ADDRESS_62534] Scale (TIS).  
Endpoints:  
Primary Endpoint : The primary endpoint of this study is abdominal pain 
intensity. The Instrument is a 0 -10 numeric rating scale (NRS, 0= no pain, 
10= worst pain). The subject is asked to record their “ worst abdominal pain 
over the past 24 -hours” . An Abdominal Pain Intensity Responder is 
defined as a subject whose daily abdominal pain intensity averaged over the 
4 weeks of Phase 3 (weeks 13 through 16) is 30% reduced compared to the 
daily abdominal pain intensity averaged over the 4 weeks of Phase  1 (weeks 
-4 through -1). 
 
Secondary Efficacy Endpoints : The secondary efficacy endpoints of this 
study include:  
● Overall mean change from Phase 1 to Phase 3 and Phase 1 to Phase 
4 (LTE) in:  
o Abdominal pain intensity  
o Abdominal pain frequency  
o Irritable Bowel Syndrome -Quality of Life questionnaire 
(IBS -QOL)  
o Daily stool consistency (IBS -D and IBS -M) 
o Daily stool frequency (IBS -C) 
o Workplace Productivity and Activity Impairment 
questionnaire (WPAI)  
● 12-week trends during Phase 2 in:  
o Abdominal pain intensity  
o Abdominal pain frequency  
o Daily stool consistency  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 10 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
o Daily stool frequency  
 
Secondary Safety Endpoints: Safety and tolerability will be evaluated by 
[CONTACT_57483].  
 
Exploratory Endpoints:  
● Prediction of treatment success using the North Carolina Thought 
Impact Scale (TIS)  
● Predi ction of treatment success using the PHQ -4 
● Treatment adherence (number of sessions completed)  
● Concomitant IBS Medication  
● Blinding Assessment  
● Satisfaction questions  
● IBS-Adequate relief (IBS -AR) 
 
Study 
Population:  Subjects will include men and women of all ethnic and racial groups 
between [ADDRESS_62535] meet Rome IV Diagnostic 
Criteria (3) for IBS as established by a licensed physician.  
 
Number of 
Subjects:  To meet the goal of 380 randomized subjects and 300 evaluable subjects 
(estimated maximum 20% study dropout rate)  we will recruit patients from 
study physician clinic populations (physicians will be authorized to screen 
their own subject population for eli gibility) and subjects who have been 
recruited and prescreened via online, digital channels.  We estimate needing 
to pre -screen several thousand subjects to recruit 760 for enrollment in 
Phase 1 (baseline assessment and eligibility screening). We expect ~50 % 
will fail eligibility screening (see Sec. 6.2 Inclusion Criteria ) providing a 
minimum of 380 subjects for phase 2 (treatment).  
 
Inclusion 
Criteria:  To be eligible to participate in this study, an individual must meet all of the 
following criteria, which are assessed at the Baseline Screening  event:  
1. Provision of signed and dated informed consent form  
2. Stated willingness to comply with all study procedur es and 
availability for the duration of the study  
3. Male or female, aged 18 -70 
4. Confirmation of the IBS and IBS subtype diagnosis by a study 
physician using Rome IV diagnostic criteria (see Appendix A ) 
5. Possess iOS or Android smartphone or iOS tablet (iPad) released in 
[ADDRESS_62536] also meet all of the following 
criteria:  
1. Average “Worst Daily Pain Severity” of >3 on a 11 -point numeric 
rating scale (NRS) over the full 28 -day symptom tracking period  
2. Consistent submission of Pain Severity scores via the Curebase app 
(data submitted on 70% or more of days in the symptom tracking 
window)  
 
Exclusion 
Criteria:  An individual who meets any of the following criteria will be excluded 
from participation in this study:  
1. Evidence of current structural intestinal abnormalities that better 
explain the subject’s IBS symptoms (e.g., celiac disease, 
inflammatory bowel disease – Crohn’s Disease and ulcerative 
colitis, prior abdominal surgeries such as weight loss surgery or 
bowel resection)  
2. Medication use, other illnesses or conditions that can explain their 
gastrointestinal symptoms e.g., regular narcotic  use or dependency, 
OTC stimulant laxative dependence (e.g., progressively larger doses 
of senna or bisacodyl containing compounds are needed to produce 
a bowel movement), radiation to the abdomen.  
3. Diagnosed and/or treated for a malignancy within the past  5 years 
(other than localized basal or squamous cell carcinomas of the skin)  
4. Current psychotherapy, hypnotherapy, or cognitive behavioral 
therapy (CBT) for IBS  
5. Inability to commit to completing all treatment sessions  
6. Have an unstable extraintestinal condition whose immediate or 
foreseeable treatment needs would realistically interfere with study 
demands, e.g., ability to participate in online treatment sessions o r 
follow daily diary.  
7. Active: post -traumatic stress disorder, depression associated with 
high risk of suicidal behavior, psychotic or delusional disorders, 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62537] of the study  
 
Description of 
Facilities 
Enrolling 
Subjects:  The EASITx study intends to recruit a highly diverse subject population. To 
reach these subjects, geographically diverse clinics across no fewer than 10 
U.S. states will be enlisted as well as the option for remote virtual study 
participation. Study physic ians will include office -based primary care 
physicians (PCPs) and community -based gastroenterologists. All study staff 
will be trained in Good Clinical Practice, the EASITx study protocol and 
the use of Curebase (clinical research software).  
 
Description of 
Study 
Intervention:  The metaMe Health digital GDH treatment (Regulora) is an IBS -specific 
treatment for use on a smartphone, tablet, or personal computer. The GDH 
treatment module was adapted from a standardized scripted therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] -
administered GDH proto col referred to as the North Carolina Protocol. The 
North Carolina protocol was developed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Olafur Palsson at the 
University of North Carolina and has been used for over [ADDRESS_62538] administered treatment. metaMe health has licensed the pr otocol 
from the inventor for exclusive use through any electronic means.  
 
Duration of 
Treatment:  12 weeks  
Period of 
Evaluation:  Total of 28 weeks of active evaluation: Phase 1 (4 weeks of run -in 
assessment), Phase 2 (12 weeks of treatment and assessment), Phase 3 
(4 weeks of run -out assessment), Phase 4 (two 4 -week follow -up 
assessments at weeks 35 -38 and weeks 61 -64). 
 
Subject 
Duration:  68 weeks  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 13 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
Statistical 
Analyses:  Primary Endpoints  
The primary endpoint, proportion of overall pain intensity responders, will 
be compared between the GDH and MR treatment groups using a Cochran -
Mantel -Haenszel test adjusted for IBS subtype and gender. Safety will be 
summarized using descriptive statistics . 
 
Secondary Endpoints  
Average abdominal pain frequency and average abdominal pain intensity at 
Week [ADDRESS_62539] squares 
(LS) mean estimate of average abdominal pain i ntensity and LS mean 
difference and associated 95% CIs will be presented with corresponding p -
value.  
 
Additionally, change from baseline and at -assessment values of average 
abdominal pain frequency and average abdominal pain intensity will be 
analyzed at a ll 4-week assessment time periods with a mixed effects 
repeated measures model (MMRM).  
 
Average abdominal pain frequency and average abdominal pain intensity 
will be summarized descriptively by [CONTACT_57484].  
 
Stool consistency response will be  analyzed with methods similar to those 
used to assess the primary endpoint, as described in the Statistical Analysis 
Plan.  
 
IBS-QOL, WPAI, PHQ -4 will be analyzed with MMRM and summarized 
descriptively by [CONTACT_57485].  
 
See the Statistical Analysis  Plan for details regarding all analyses.  
 
Sample Size Justification  
In this study, a total of approximately 380 subjects will be randomized in a 
1:[ADDRESS_62540] 300 subjects 
complete their Week 13 -16 assessment (Pha se 3) for analysis. Three 
hundred (300) Phase [ADDRESS_62541] 90% power to detect 
an 18 percentage point difference in response rates between the GDH and 
comparator treatment groups at the 5% significance level. The study was 
powered ass uming that the comparator treatment group is expected to 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62542] a 26% response rate. To determine the expected 
response rate in the comparator treatment group, two studies of GDH 
reporting data that utilized dichotomous outcome measures were e xamined. 
The first ( 9) used an endpoint of % treatment responders (defined as a 
>50% reduction in IBS -SSS). In this study, 52% of subjects in the GDH 
group and 26% of subjects in the control group (usual care) were 
responders . In a more recent study by [CONTACT_57486] ( 11) these authors reported 
an adequate relief response rate of 40% in the GDH group compared to 
17% in the education -control group. We therefore have assumed that the 
response rate in t he comparator treatment group in this study is likely to be 
between 17 -26%.  
 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 15 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
2.2 Schema  
The study schema can be found in Figure 1 , indicating the flow of actions. The blue flow 
elements correspond to time points in the Schedule of Activities (SoA) presented in Table 1 . 
 
Figure 1  Study Schema  
 
Abbreviations: GDH=gut -directed hypnotherapy; IBS=irritable bowel syndrome; LTE=long -term extension; 
QOL=quality of life.  
  

 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 16 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
2.3 Schedule of Activities  
The complete schedule of study activities, often referred to as a “Time and Events” (T+E) table, 
is presented  in Table 1 . Please observe the following when interpreting it:  
● The Phase 1 run -in period  will start the day after the Baseline Visit.  
● The Onboarding Call  will occur as soon as possible (at least 1 day but not more than 14 
days) after the Phase [ADDRESS_62543] on the next mutually 
agreeable non -holiday weekday.  
● Randomization occurs on the day of the Onboarding call, which we defin e as “Day 0” in 
our framework.  
● Phase 2 (treatment) will begin no more than 7 days after the Onboarding call.  
● As part of ensuring the above schedule of activities are completed in a timely manner and 
in accordance with the protocol, the study team shall uti lize phone call, email, and text -
based reminders sent to the study subjects.  
 
Please refer to Section 8  for a detailed description of assessments described in Table 1 . 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 17 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
 
 Online 
Screeni
ng Baseline 
Visit  Run-In 
Period  
(weeks -
4 to -1) Onboard
ing Call  
day 0  Treatment 
Period  
(weeks 1 -
12) Run-
Out 
Period  
(weeks 
13-16) LTE 1:  
(weeks 
35-38) LTE 2:  
(weeks 
61-64) 
Informed 
Consent  X        
Diagnosis  
(Rome IV)   X       
Inclusion 
Exclusion 
Criteria   X       
Abdominal 
Pain Severity    Daily   Daily  Daily  Daily  Daily  
Randomizatio
n    X     
Screening & 
Onboarding     X     
Treatment 
Adherence 
Data (Wistia)      Continuous 
import     
Stool 
Consistency    Daily   Daily  Daily  Daily  Daily  
Stool 
Frequency    Daily   Daily  Daily  Daily  Daily  
Adverse Event 
Reports    X X X X X X 
IBS QOL   X    Once at 
week  16 Once at 
week  38 Once at 
week  64 
TIS  X      
WPAI   X   Once at 
week 8  Once at 
week  16 Once at 
week  38 Once at 
week  64 
Concomitant 
medication 
assessment   X 
(checked   Once at 
week 8  Once at 
week  16 Once at 
week  38 Once at 
week  64 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 18 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
by 
[CONTACT_5936] ) 
PHQ -4  X    Once at 
week  16 Once at 
week  38 Once at 
week  64 
Satisfaction 
Survey       Once at 
week  16   
Blinding 
assessment       Once at 
week  16   
 
Table 1  Schedule of Activities  
 
Abbreviations: IBS QOL=Irritable Bowel Syndrome Quality of Life Questionnaire; LTE=long -term extension; 
PHQ -4=Patient Health Questionnaire -4; TIS=North Carolina Thought Impact Scale; WPAI =Workplace 
Productivity and Activity Impairment Questionnaire.  
Parti cipants are asked to complete their Baseline Surveys within 7 days of enrollment, which include IBS 
QOL, PHQ4, TIS, and WPAI.  
  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 19 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1 ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION   
1.1 Contacts  2 
1.2 Approval by [CONTACT_57487]  3 
1.3 Investigator Agreement  4 
1.4 Statement of Compliance  5 
1.5        Study Reference Information                  5 
2 53 273.1 283.2 283.3 293.3.1  293.3.2  303.3.3  304 314.1 324.1.1  324.1.2  324.1.3
 324.2 324.2.1  324.2.2  324.2.3  335 335.1 345.2 365.2.1  365.2.2  365.2.3  365.3 365.3.1
 366 366.1 366.2 376.3 386.4 396.5 397 407.1 407.1.1  407.2 447.2.1  447.2.2
 457.2.3  467.3 467.4 478 478.1 488.2 488.3 499 499.1 509.1.1  519.1.2  519.1.3
 519.1.4  519.1.5  519.1.6  519.1.7  519.1.8  529.2 529.2.1  529.2.2  539.3 539.3.1  539.3.2  549.3.3
 [IP_ADDRESS]  [IP_ADDRESS]  [IP_ADDRESS]  [IP_ADDRESS]  [IP_ADDRESS]  [IP_ADDRESS]
 579.3.[ADDRESS_62544] OF ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITION OF TERMS  
Abbreviation  Definition or Term  
AE adverse event  
BSFS  Bristol Stool Form Scale  
CBT  cognitive behavioral therapy  
CI confidence interval  
CONSORT  Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials  
eCRF  electronic case report form  
Enrolled  
ePRO  A participant is enrolled  when he/she signs the informed consent.  
electronic patient -reported outcome  
FGID  functional gastrointestinal disorder  
GCP  Good Clinical Practice  
GDH  gut-directed hypnotherapy  
GEE  generalized estimating equations  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act  
IBS irritable bowel syndrome  
IBS-QOL  Irritable Bowel Syndrome Quality of Life questionnaire  
ICH International Council for Harmonisation  
ITT Intent -to-Treat  
LS least squares  
LTE long-term extension  
MedDRA  Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities  
MMRM  mixed effects repeated measures  
NRS  numeric rating scale  
Participant  
PHQ -4 Synonymous with “Subject”.  
Patient Health Questionnaire -4 
PP Per Protocol  
PRO  patient -reported outcome  
Randomized  
 
Regulora  
SaaMD  A participant is randomized  when he/she is assigned to the Regulora 
or comparator arm of the study.  
metaMe Health’s implementation of all -digital GDH for IBS.  
Software as a Medical Device  
SAE  serious adverse event  
SADE  
SUADE  
SAP serious adverse device effect  
serious unanticipated adverse device effect  
statistical analysis plan  
SoA schedule of activiti es 
SOC  System Organ Class  
SOP standard operating procedures  
Subject  
 
TIS A person who has interacted with the EASITx study as a potential 
participant. A subject may or may not be enrolled or randomized.  
North Carolina Thought Impact Scale  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62545] Productivity and Activity Impairment questionnaire  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 24 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
3  INTRODUCTION  
3.1 Background  
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) is the most common functional gastrointestinal disorder (FGID), 
affecting approximately 10% of the US adult population ( 1). IBS is characterized by [CONTACT_57488]. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_57448], which define the three main subtypes: IBS -constipation (IBS -C), IBS -
diarrhea (IBS -D), and IBS -mixed (IBS -M). A fourth subtype, IBS-undefined (IBS -U), occurs in 
<5% of IBS patients and defines a group of subjects who do not fall into the [ADDRESS_62546] IBS (2). IBS has significa nt effects on quality of life, 
work performance (presenteeism), and work attendance (absenteeism) ( 3,4,5). 
 
IBS is often referred to as a functional disease becaus e X-ray studies, blood tests, and intestinal 
endoscopy exams are normal. However, upon careful analysis, IBS patients have an increased 
likelihood of hypersensitive visceral sensory nerve function, abnormalities in the gut 
microbiome, and central pain proc essing. These are important components of the bidirectional 
brain -gut control pathway referred to as the brain -gut axis, which is dysfunctional in IBS patients 
(6). IBS is associated with a number of co -morbid psychological d isorders (somatization, 
catastrophization, depression, stress, and anxiety) that place an additional strain on subjects and 
further affect the function of the brain -gut axis ( 7). 
 
The treatment of IBS has traditionally includ ed recommendations for dietary changes and over -
the-counter medicines, which have modest to no effect on symptoms and do not change the 
course of the disease. Pharmaceutical drug development has tended to focus on druggable 
molecular targets that for the m ost part are not implicated in the pathophysiology of the 
syndrome but that allow for pharmacologic manipulation of intestinal symptoms. The current 
class of IBS medicines all work locally within the gut and fail to address the psychological 
drivers of IBS  and the alterations in the brain -gut axis. Moreover, in clinical studies and medical 
practice these drugs have significant side -effects and are marginally effective at best for the 
treatment of the full constellation of IBS symptoms, particularly abdomina l pain ( 8). In contrast 
to the modest efficacy observed with pharmaceuticals, non -pharmacologic behavioral treatments 
that target the psycho -social co -morbidities and brain -gut axis dysfunction have shown high rates 
of treatm ent response (discussed below).  
 
3.2 Study Rationale  
Gut-directed hypnotherapy (GDH) is a form of hypnotherapy that is tailored to address the 
symptoms of IBS. There is a growing body of evidence demonstrating the usefulness of 
hypnotherapy for a wide range of  conditions ( 9). Recent large randomized controlled trials have 
demonstrated that therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] -administered GDH is effective for the treatment of IBS with 
enduring effects on both abdominal pain and gut symptoms ( 10,11,12). Nevertheless, widespread 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 25 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
use of GDH has been limited despi[INVESTIGATOR_57449] ( 13). The reasons for the limited use stem largely from a lack of physician training 
in hypnother apy, a limited number of trained hypnotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_41259] a limited number of 
hypnotherapy training programs ( 14). There is also the issue of therapi[INVESTIGATOR_57450].  
 
The body of scientific evidence supporting the efficacy of GDH in IBS is derived from over 
[ADDRESS_62547] -administered GDH, with a reported 50% reduction in gastrointestinal 
symptom severity and abdominal pain severity (reviewed in 10). The efficacy of GDH in the 
treatment of IBS has been recently confirmed in a large multicenter randomized controlled trial 
that examined a standardized GDH protocol, administered either in individual sessions or in 
group sessions, and c ompared to an IBS education control ( 12). At one -year post treatment, 41% 
of subjects in the individual therapy and 50% of subjects in the group therapy met the primary 
endpoint of adequate relief of symptoms compared to 23% of subjects in the control group. GDH 
was statistically superior to control in both the individual and group hypnotherapy groups 
demonstrating the flexibility of GDH treatment across treatment environments.  
 
In long -term follow -up studies, GDH has shown s ustained effectiveness for up to 5 years after a 
single course of treatment ( 15). Recent advances in neuroscience and neuroimaging have 
provided tools needed to unravel the complex central nervous system effects of hypnosis ( 9). It 
has been suggested that the mechanisms responsible for hypnotherapy -induced improvements in 
chronic pain, anxiety and mood arise from hypnotic induction and a re -focusing of attention 
away from the immediate environmen t towards an imaginative involvement. The use of 
metaphor, parable and story is used to communicate imagery, direct messages, and indirect 
messages that facilitate the reprograming of the subliminal function of the unconscious mind. In 
other words, since m ost people with IBS are vigilant and focused on their symptoms, 
communicating with the unconscious brain entails getting the conscious brain to allow direct 
dialogue with the subconscious brain, the critical manager of automatic functions such as pain 
perception. Hypnotherapy provides a hypothetical mechanism for linking the conscious with the 
unconscious, which in turn facilitates cognitive restructuring, changes in automatic functions 
involved in gut function and amelioration of associated psychosocial di sorders. Data from a 
controlled study measuring fMRI signals in IBS patients pre and post -GDH supports this theory 
and demonstrates that GDH results in normalization of brain activation and fMRI signals, 
supporting a role for GDH above and beyond improveme nts in mood ( 16).  
 
3.3 Risk/Benefit Assessment  
3.3.[ADDRESS_62548] been 
proposed based on the observation that subjects with dissociative diso rders (i.e., multiple 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 26 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
personality disorder) have an enhanced hypnotizability and under hypnosis may adopt an 
alternate identity or personality state ( 17-19). Elicitation of an alternate personality state and/or 
repressed memories, which are often past traumatic events, can be a painful experience for 
subjects. At the same time, it is important to note that hypnosis is used to treat dissociative 
disorder and the closely related syndrome of post -traumatic stress disorder ( 20). Therefore, the 
standard approach to minimizing the risk in hypnotherapy studies requires exclusion of subjects 
with these psychiatric conditions. In a revie w examining data from 7 hypnotherapy trials on 
ClinicalTrials.gov, it was found that studies that use these exclusion criteria had low rates of 
treatment -related adverse events (AEs) (<1% non -serious AEs) and no serious adverse events 
(SAEs) ( 20). Of the treatment -related AEs, there were 2 cases of disturbing images and thoughts 
and 2  cases of nightmares. A recent large European study confirmed these results: in [ADDRESS_62549] -administered GDH there were n o SAEs or AEs that were deemed 
related to treatment ( 12).  
 
It is also believed that the hypnotizability of subjects with active co -morbid psychiatric/mood 
disorders may be diminished and available literature indicates that s ubjects with these conditions 
should generally be excluded from clinical trials.  
 
Finally, there are anecdotal therapi[INVESTIGATOR_57451], lightheadedness and 
disorientation that tend to spontaneously resolve within a short period after post -hypnotherapy 
arousal. As a precaution, subjects will be told to find a quiet place to vi ew the treatment sessions 
and not to undergo treatment while driving or performing other tasks.  
 
3.3.[ADDRESS_62550]-administration.  
 
3.3.3 Assessment of Potential Risks and Benefits  
The risks of this study are minimal. The primary risks include:  
● Possible temporary discomfort from answering personal questions regarding subject 
health.  
● The possibility that subjects may not experience substantial reduction of symptoms or 
those symptoms may worsen.  
● The possibility that subjects may feel sleepy or drowsy for a short while after treatment  
● The possibility that subject muscles may feel tight o r ache for a short while after 
treatment.  
 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62551]. Lucy Pun.  
 
The secondary risks include answering symptom survey questions on a daily basis for 7 total 
months, which may seem burdensome. On the other hand, some volunteers find recording daily 
symptoms useful and informative.  
 
Potential benefits include:  
● Free evaluation of IBS from health care professionals.  
● Free treatment for IBS.  
● Possibility of reduction in the frequency, duration, and severity of IBS and related 
problems.  
● Relaxation and a sense of well -being  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 28 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
4 OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS  
4.1 Study Objectives  
4.1.1 Primary Objective  
The primary objective of this study is to demonstrate that in adults with Irritable Bowel 
Syndrome (IBS), an all -digital Gut -Directed Hypnotherapy (GDH) treatment program 
(Regulora) is superior in reducing abdom inal pain intensity relative to an all -digital 
modified Jacobsonian Muscle Relaxation (MR) treatment program.  
 
4.1.2 Secondary Objective  
The secondary objectives of this study are:  
● To demonstrate that Regulora has a positive impact on relief of IBS symptoms, quality of 
life, workplace performance (presenteeism and absenteeism), and psychological distress 
relative to MR therapy.  
●  To determine the durability of Regulora in relief of IB S symptoms, quality of life, 
workplace performance (presenteeism and absenteeism), and psychological distress 
relative to MR therapy.  
 
4.1.[ADDRESS_62552] Scale (TIS).  
 
4.2 Study Endpoints  
For details on assessments and analyses, refer to Section 9 and Section 10 , respectively.  
 
4.2.1 Primary En dpoint  
The primary endpoint of this study is abdominal pain intensity. The Instrument is a 11 -point 
numeric rating scale (0= no pain, 10= worst pain). The subject is asked to record their “ worst 
abdominal pain over the past 24 -hours” . An Abdominal Pain Int ensity Responder is defined as a 
subject whose daily abdominal pain intensity averaged over the 4 weeks of Phase 3 (weeks 13 
through 16) is 30% reduced compared to the daily abdominal pain intensity averaged over the 4 
weeks of the Phase 1 (weeks -4 throug h -1). 
 
4.2.2 Secondary Endpoints  
The secondary efficacy endpoints of this study include:  
● Overall mean change from Phase 1 to Phase 3 and Phase 1 to Phase 4 (LTE) in:  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 29 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
o Abdominal pain intensity  
o Abdominal pain frequency  
o Irritable Bowel Syndrome -Quality of Life questionnaire (IBS -QOL)  
o Daily stool consistency (IBS -D and IBS -M) 
o Daily stool frequency (IBS -C) 
o Workplace Productivity and Activity Impairment questionnaire (WPAI)  
● 12-week trends during Phase 2 in:  
o Abdominal pain intensity  
o Abdominal pain frequency  
o Daily stool consistency  
o Daily stool frequency  
 
Safety and tolerability will be evaluated by [CONTACT_57489].  
 
4.2.3 Exploratory Endpoints  
The exploratory Endpoints of this study are:  
● Prediction of treatment success using the North Carolina Thought Impact Sc ale (TIS) 
(23)  
● Prediction of treatment success using the PHQ -4 (24) 
● Treatment adherence (number of sessions completed)  
● Concomitant IBS Medication  
● Blinding Assessment ( 25) 
● Satisfaction questions  
● IBS-Adequate relief (IBS -AR)  
 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 30 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
5 STUDY DESIGN  
5.1 Overall Design  
EASITx is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_57446] (Regulora), a novel digital therapeutic that delivers the 
North Carolina GDH treatment protocol to IBS subjects. EASITx tests the hypothesis that the 
digital version of the North Carolina GDH treatment protocol is s afe and, relative to a 
comparator treatment platform, enables a clinically significant reduction in abdominal pain 
intensity and other symptoms of IBS. EASITx is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_57452], and digital 
GDH is classified as Software as a Medical Device (SaaMD).  
 
The North Carolina GDH treatment protocol consists of 7  unique GDH scripts, each 
approximately 30 minutes in length and a single practice session, approximately 13 minutes in 
length. Each script has been converted to a video/audio recording allo wing for administration via 
a mobile device, tablet, or personal computer, mimicking the frequency and duration of 
administration of therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] -administered GDH.  
 
The EASITx study will apply state -of-the-art IBS and behavioral research methodology 
including use of a fully digital treatment platform, a comparator allowing for subject -blinding to 
treatment hypothesis, and a data collection (ePRO) system that allows fo r a double blind, 
eliminating the potential for investigator bias. The comparator -treatment platform will be 
identical to the GDH treatment platform, except that muscle relaxation (MR) audio recordings 
equal in treatment duration and frequency of administr ation will be substituted for the GDH 
video/audio recordings. MR was chosen as the control after consultation with the FDA.  
 
Participation in the EASITx study will last 68 weeks and is divided into 4 phases:  
● Phase 1: A 4 -week pre -treatment run -in assessm ent period (weeks -4 through -1) 
● Phase 2: A 12 -week treatment period (weeks 1 through 12)  
● Phase 3: A [ADDRESS_62553] -treatment assessment period (weeks 13 through 16)  
● Phase 4: A [ADDRESS_62554] -treatment long term extension (LTE) during which time 
subjects will be required to complete two [ADDRESS_62555]-treatment (weeks 35 through 38) and [ADDRESS_62556] -treatment (weeks 61 through 
64).  
 
Participation begins with the completion of an online prescreening eligibility survey via 
Cure base, a clinical research software platform, followed by [CONTACT_57490]. 
Subjects who pass prescreening and sign the informed consent will attend a baseline visit with a 
study physician. At this visit, their IBS diagnosis will be confirmed, inc lusion and exclusion 
criteria will be applied, and experimental baseline endpoints will be collected in the form of 
subject -facing surveys.  
 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62557] them digitally via the Curebase ePRO 
from their mobile phone, tablet device, or personal computer. This run -in period will establish 
that subjects are committed to participation (by [CONTACT_57491] y and 
accurately input data into Curebase), and also establish that they have the minimally required 
level of IBS symptom severity.  
 
Once the run -in is completed, ineligible subjects will be informed. Eligible subjects will receive 
an “Onboarding Call” fro m a member of the Curebase study staff. This call will be used to 
inform subjects of eligibility, create a user account on the EASITx treatment website. Subjects 
will be randomized 1:[ADDRESS_62558] treatment allocation is initiated.  
 
In the EASITx randomization scheme, subjects will either receive the digital GDH intervention 
or the muscle relaxation therapy delivered through the same digital delivery platform 
(comparator treatment arm). As described in Section 7.2, the study is double -blinded such that 
subjects, metaMe staff, and investigators will  have no knowledge of group assignments (see 
designated firewalled exceptions in Section 7.2). Participants will complete treatment per their 
group assignment over the course of 12 weeks and track their symptoms daily via Curebase. All 
study activities may  be fully remote and can be completed from home. The baseline visit may be 
conducted in -person per the participant’s preference.  
 
The Phase 2 treatment period will include 7 unique sessions (GDH or MR) of ~30 minutes each, 
every other week over the 12 -week  treatment period. During treatment, a practice session (GDH 
or MR) will be made available to the subjects, with an email encouraging completion of practice 
on the 5th, 8th, and 11th day between treatment sessions. Subjects will be required to complete 
assessments according to the schedule in Table [ADDRESS_62559] -treatment assessment period (run -out period) and the Phase 4 
LTE will be compared to data collected in the Phase 1 pre -treatment assessment period (run -in 
period). Subjects will complete daily symptom assessments and addi tional instances of the 
concomitant medication check list, PHQ -4, IBS -QOL and WPAI outcomes surveys according to 
the schedule in Table 1 . 
 
The EASITx study seeks to enroll subjects from no fewer than 10 medical clinics across several 
U.S. states to capture a geographically diverse IBS population. Subjects will be recruited from 
existing practices and via online recruitment.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 32 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
5.2 Scientific Rationale for Study Design  
5.2.1 Rationale for Treatment Frequency  
The 7 digital GDH treatments that compose the North Carolina GDH protocol are administered 
every other week. The frequency of treatment administration in this study was chosen to mirror 
the protocol used in studies of the North Carolina protocol when admin istered by [CONTACT_2111][INVESTIGATOR_57453]-to-face treatment sessions ( 9, 27). The practice sessions are designed to be administered as 
needed to support engagement, however, there is no evidence that practi ce sessions modulate 
treatment outcome. The treatment frequency of the comparator control will exactly mirror the 
frequency of GDH treatments and practice sessions.  
 
5.2.2 Rationale for Comparator Control  
The Jacobsonian Muscle Relaxation (JMR) ( 9) protocol leverages a fully digital platform, which 
allows delivery in a video or audio format. This configuration allows for the blinding of subjects 
to the randomized treatment since muscle relaxation is a credible behavioral treatment.  Currently 
in the US, there are no approved digital behavioral therapeutics for the treatment of IBS.  
 
5.2.3 Rationale for Endpoints  
The primary and key secondary endpoints were derived from the FDA guidance on the 
development of pharmaceuticals for the treatme nt of IBS ( 28). The WPAI and IBS -QOL are 
validated measures for IBS. The PHQ -4 is a validated four -item questionnaire for anxiety and 
depression ( 24).  
 
5.3 Premature Termination or Suspension of Stu dy 
5.3.1 Criteria for Premature Termination or Suspension of the Study  
The study will be completed as planned unless either of the following criteria are satisfied that 
require temporary suspension or early termination of the study.  
a) Evidence of a serious clinical problem that would put subjects exposed to treatment 
(either GDH or MR) at risk  
b) Significant violation of Good Clinical Practice (GCP) that compromises the ability to 
achieve the primary study objectives  
 
 
 
[ADDRESS_62560] events for the study. These events are:  
 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 33 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
1. Online pre -screening assessment  includes a brief inclusion and exclusion criteria and 
technology assessment (subjects are eligible if they use an iOS or Android smartphone or 
iOS (iPad) tablet released in 2015 or later).  
2. Baseline Screening/Study Physician Visit. The subject’s IBS diagno sis and general 
medical history is confirmed, and complete inclusion/exclusion criteria are applied to 
assess preliminary eligibility.  
3. Day 0 Screening.  After the 4 week symptom tracking (Phase 1) the subject’s full 
eligibility for the study is confirmed us ing data from symptom tracking completed over 
those 4 weeks. Subjects that fail to screen -in will be notified that they are ineligible. 
Subjects that screen -in will be scheduled for a Day 0 phone call and informed of their 
eligibility.  
 
The relationship be tween the 3 screening events and Phase 1 symptom tracking is shown in 
Figure 2 . 
 
Figure 2  Study Screening  
 
 
Abbreviations: IBS=irritable bowel syndrome.  
 
Only subjects who meet the screening criteria for both screening events will be permitted to 
initiate treatment in the study.  
 
6.[ADDRESS_62561] meet all of the following criteria, 
which are assessed at the Baseline Screening  event (see previous section):  
1. Provision of signed and dated informed consent form  
2. Stated willingness to comply with all study procedures and availability for the duration of 
the study  
3. Male or female, aged 18 -70 
4. Confirmation of the IBS and IBS subtype diagnosis by a study physician using Rome IV 
diagnostic criteria (see Appendix A ) 
5. Possess an iOS or Android smartphone or an iOS tablet (iPad) released in [ADDRESS_62562] the data used for research purposes.  
 
 
 
 
 
On-line preliminary 
Eligibility  
Device Eligibility  
Schedule Baseline 
Screening  
Study Physician 
Baseline Screening  
Confirm IBS diagnosis by 
[CONTACT_57492] 1: Symptom 
Tracking  
Subjects contribute daily 
IBS symptom data for 4 
weeks via Curebase.  
Day 0 Screening  
Symptom data from 
Phase -1 is checked for  
1) symptom severity  
2) subject’s ability to 
reliably input data  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62563] also meet the following criteria:  
1. Average “Worst Daily Pain Severity” of >3 on an 11 -point NRS over the full 28 -day 
symptom tracking period  
2. Consistent submission of Pain Severity scores via the Curebase app (data submitted on 
70% or more of days in the symptom tracking window)  
 
This study attempts to achieve excellent representa tion of women and minorities in the enrolled 
population, and there are no restrictions on eligibility based on the subject’s sex, gender, or race. 
Please see Section 5.5  for information about how women and minorities will be recruited into the 
study.  
 
6.3 Exclusion Criteria  
An individual who meets any of the following criteria will be excluded from participation in this 
study:  
1. Evidence of current structural intestinal abnormalities that better explain the subject’s 
IBS symptoms (e.g., celiac disease, inflammatory bowel disease – Crohn’s Disease and 
ulcerative colitis, prior abdominal surgeries such as weight loss surgery or bowe l 
resection).  
2. Medication use, other illnesses or conditions that can explain their gastrointestinal 
symptoms e.g., regular narcotic use or dependency, OTC stimulant laxative dependence 
(e.g., progressively larger doses of senna or bisacodyl containing com pounds are needed 
to produce a bowel movement), radiation to the abdomen.  
3. Diagnosed and/or treated for a malignancy within the past 5 years (other than localized 
basal or squamous cell carcinomas of the skin).  
4. Current psychotherapy, hypnotherapy, or cognit ive behavioral therapy (CBT) for IBS  
5. Inability to commit to completing all treatment sessions.  
6. Have an unstable extraintestinal condition whose immediate or foreseeable treatment 
needs would realistic ally interfere with study demands, e.g., ability to part icipate in 
online treatment sessions or follow daily diary.  
7. Active: post -traumatic stress disorder, depression associated with high risk of suicidal 
behavior, psychotic or delusional disorders, dissociative disorders, or gross cognitive 
impairment. This exclusion does not apply to anxiety or bipolar disorder . 
8. Subje cts that report a current gastrointestinal infection or an infection within the [ADDRESS_62564] to race, gender, or age.  
 
6.4 Screen Failures  
Screen failures are defined as subjects who consent to participa te in the clinical study but are not 
subsequently randomly assigned to the study intervention or entered in the study. A minimal set 
of screen failure information is required to ensure transparent reporting of screen failure subjects, 
to meet the Consolida ted Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) publishing requirements 
and to respond to queries from regulatory authorities. The primary reason for screen failure, 
demographics and other minimal information is recorded in the eCRF using the following 
categor ies: 
● AE 
● Did not meet inclusion criteria or did meet exclusion criteria (specify reason)  
● Significant protocol deviation  
● Lost to follow -up during baseline screening  
● Voluntary withdrawal (specify reason)  
● Study termination  
 
Subject ID numbers assigned to subje cts who fail screening will not be reused for a different 
subject. Individuals who do not meet the criteria for participation in this study (screen failure) 
because of a conflicting psychological treatment for IBS, either for IBS or another condition 
refer enced in the exclusion criteria (e.g. gastrointestinal infection) may be rescreened after the 
period of time indicated in the exclusion criteria (See Section 5.3 ). Rescreened subjects should 
be assigned the same subject number as for the initial screening.  
 
6.[ADDRESS_62565] a confirmed 
diagnosis of IBS via the Rome IV diagnostic criteria. To meet the enrollment goal of 
approximately 380 randomized subjects  and 300 evaluable subjects (estimated maximum 20% 
study dropout rate) patients will be recruited from participating clinic populations (study 
physicians will be authorized to screen their own subject population for eligibility) and subjects 
who have been recruited and prescreened via online, digital channels.  
 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 36 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
Planned traditional recruitment channels include:  
● Distribution of flyers to our clinics  
● Distribution of flyers to university health centers  
● Informational outbound phone calls to subjects from study staff  
● Referrals by [CONTACT_57493]:  
● Social media community groups  
● Facebook  
● Craigslist  
● Instagram  
 
It is desirable to enroll many minorities and women and create a diverse population. 60 -65% of 
IBS subjects are female. No special action will be employed to ensure adequate female 
enrollment.  
 
Subjects will be compensated for participation in the study.  
 
Participants will receive their compensation payments via Curebase so long as they continue to 
contribute data consistently. Payments will be withheld for subjects that fail to complete >[ADDRESS_62566] -administered GDH protocol referred to as the North Carolina Protocol ( 10,27). 
The North Carolina protocol has been licensed by [CONTACT_57494] ([CONTACT_57574]) for exclusive use through any electronic means.  
 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62567] 
suggestion ( 27). The North Carolina protocol consists of 7 unique treatment sessions each lasting 
~[ADDRESS_62568] suggestions targeted at somatic control and perception mechanisms that 
influence IBS symptoms. The treatment sessions are iterative and progressively build r elaxation 
skills, which are required to maximally incorporate the disease -specific aspects of treatment. 
Subjects become familiar with the use of hypnotherapy tools such as counting and the use of 
imagery focused on the senses, i.e., touch, smell, sight an d hearing (see Appendix B for scripts of 
the 7  sessions). As treatment sessions progress, direct suggestion and metaphor are used to 
overcome the exaggerated response to pain signals imparted by [CONTACT_57495].  
 
The comparator c ontrol group will listen to digital video/audio recordings of 7 guided muscle 
relaxation (MR) sessions of approximately equivalent length to the GDH sessions (see Appendix 
D for session scripts), as well as a daily practice session approximately equivalent  in length to 
the GDH practice sessions (see  Appendix  E for script) ( 9). Guided MR was chosen as the 
comparator control treatment after consultation with the FDA because of (a) the ease with which 
it can be adapted to a digita l format and support the creation of a comparator treatment and (b) 
credibility as a treatment for IBS albeit with limited demonstrated efficacy ( 9). 
 
The GDH and MR treatment modules consist of seven ~[ADDRESS_62569] reader prov ided hypnotherapy -appropriate speech patterns (inflection, pause, 
and tone). Once therapy is initiated, subjects receive all 7  treatment sessions, every other week 
for a total treatment period of 12 weeks. During the 13 days between treatment sessions, a s hort 
audio session referred to as a “practice session” is made available to subjects. There is a single 
practice session script for each of the two treatment arms lasting 15  minutes. Subjects receive 
text message and email reminders with a recommendation t o complete a minimum of three 
practice sessions during the 13 days between treatments. Practice sessions are recommended but 
not required (see Appendix C and Appendix E:  Daily Practice Sessions).  
 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62570] starts and stops a treatment or practice module is captured 
by [CONTACT_57496]. The software also tracks treatment sessions and only allows subjects 
to access treatments in sequence. The metaMe treatment platform on the EAGLEFISH app 
contains these major functional elements:  
1. Treatment videos/audios  
2. A secure cloud -based data repository.  
3. A simple user interface (UI) with an arrow play button that starts the treatment session. 
(see Figure 3)   
 
In addition to the EAGLEFISH app, subjects enrolled in the EASITx study will be required to 
enter study data i n a second platform. The Curebase platform is for data collection and 
administers the daily ePRO and provides access to periodic surveys. Subjects will be introduced 
to the Curebase platform at the baseline screening clinic visit by [CONTACT_57497] f. Study 
staff will explain the use of the app and the process by [CONTACT_57498].  
 
After completion of the 4 -week run -in period (Phase 1), subjects will be informed of eligibility, 
and eligible subjects will be scheduled for a d ay 0 phone call (scheduled as soon as possible but 
no more than 14 days from completion of the run -in period). On the day [ADDRESS_62571]’s preferred day of the week, 
time of day and start date for treatment. Curebase staff will enter the treatment schedule and 
randomization code (blinded treatment allocation) into a secure metaMe portal that automatically 
triggers the assigned treatment and the subject -specific treatment reminder and scheduling 
system. Curebase staff will assist subjects in accessing the metaMe digital platform by [CONTACT_57499] a metaMe login username [CONTACT_57572]. Subjects will be  guided through the login process and 
directed to the navigation menu. The navigation menu contains the following items:  
1. The home button  
2. Account information  
3. Treatment schedule  
4. Logout  
5. Help section. Contains a link to watch or read a transcript to the intro video (see below), 
FAQ and contact [CONTACT_57500].  
 
The treatment process will commence within 7 days of the day 0 call and will be init iated by 
[CONTACT_57501] -generated text and email reminders of upcoming treatment sessions. Subjects will be sent 
an email reminder 24 hours and 1 hour before each session, and a text message reminder 5 
minutes before each session. Subjects will be able to access t he treatment app via a hyperlink in 
these messages or directly by [CONTACT_57502]. Once in the app, subjects will 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 39 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
initiate treatment by [CONTACT_57503] (see User Guide 
and Figure 3) . The first thing subjects will see is a short 3 -minute intro video that explains the 
following details of treatment:  
 
1. Treatment session length  
2. The treatment reminder system, which uses emails and text messages to alert subjects of 
upcoming treatment sessions and to remind subjects to complete treatment.  
3. The process for rescheduling and managing missed treatment sessions (subjects have 3 
additiona l days to complete the treatment before they are considered a missed treatment)  
4. Rules on interrupted treatment sessions (subjects must start over from the beginning and 
have 3 opportunities to finish the treatment before they are considered a missed 
treatm ent)  
5. The recommended minimum number of practice sessions is 3 over the 13 days between 
treatments.  
 
There are two intro videos customized to each of the two treatments. They differ in the 
treatment -specific instructions; in the case of the GDH treatment,  the video has specific 
instructions on how to manage re -alerting after hypnotherapy (see Appendix F ). In the case of 
the MR treatment, subjects are given guidance on how to manage muscle -specific complaints 
(see Appendix G ) After the completion of the treatment session, subjects will be instructed to 
click a button indicating they have completed the session. This button appears upon completion 
of 100% of the length of the treatment session. A sess ion is also considered completed if greater 
than 95% of the video is played and no button is pressed by [CONTACT_57504]. 
Subjects who miss their scheduled treatment will have [ADDRESS_62572] experience with the EAGLEFISH app is illustrated in the User Guide and briefly in 
Figure 3 . 
 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 40 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
Figure 3  metaMe Treatment Visual Narrative  
 EAGLEFISH User Interface (UI)  
When subjects open the EAGLEFISH app, the main screen 
appears. The large arrow button, when clicked, is used to access 
treatment and practice sessions. The first time the button is 
pressed, the patient will view the introduction video, which is 
required vi ewing before the first treatment session and optional 
thereafter. The app is programmed so that the appropriate content 
(a treatment or practice session) is displayed each day. Subjects 
are prevented from re -taking treatment sessions, and subjects 
cannot a ccess practice sessions on days they have a treatment 
available (the assigned treatment day plus 3 days in the case that 
subjects miss treatment on their assigned treatment day). Subjects 
will be required to complete the treatment/practice session in a 
single sitting. If the subject is interrupted during treatment, the 
subject may press the “begin again” button, which starts the 
session over from the beginning. In this case, subjects will be 
required to re -start the treatment/practice session from the 
begin ning. Subjects will have 3 days after the initial treatment day 
to complete treatment sessions. After the treatment/practice 
session video has played to 100% of its length, subjects may 
indicate that they have completed the session by [CONTACT_7474] 
“Comp lete Session” button. A session is also considered 
completed if greater than 95% of the video is played and no button 
is pressed by [CONTACT_57504].  
 
7.2 Measures to Minimize Bias: Blinding and Randomization  
7.2.[ADDRESS_62573] 
practical strategy for preventing study bias. The EASITx study incorporates this blinding 
strategy coupled with state -of-the-art IBS and behavioral research methodology.  
 
The comparator -treatment platform will be identical to the GDH treatment platform, except that 
muscle relaxation (MR) audio recordings equal in treatment duration and frequency of 

 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 41 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
administration will be substituted for the GDH video/audio recordings. The comparator control 
group will listen to digital audio recordings of 7 guided muscle relaxation (MR) sessions of 
approximately equivalent lengt h to the GDH sessions (see Appendix D for session scripts), as 
well as a daily practice session approximately equivalent in length to the GDH practice sessions 
(see Appendix E for script) (9). Guided MR was chosen as the comparator control treatment after 
consultation with the FDA because of (a) the ease with which it can be adapted to a digital 
format and support the creation of a comparator treatment and (b) credibility as a treatment for 
IBS albeit with limited demonstrated efficacy (9). The goal of this  blinding strategy is to present 
two treatments that are credible to the study participants, who are themselves unaware of what 
the other study arm is, whether their assigned treatment (GDH or MR) is the one under study 
being compared to the other arm, or indeed whether both are active treatments being compared to 
each other.  
 
The data collection (ePRO) system creates a double blind and eliminates the potential for 
investigator bias. metaMe staff and investigators will not have knowledge of group assignmen ts, 
with the following exceptions:  
● An independent statistician who will formulate the randomization tables.  
● A firewalled Curebase staff member who will enter the treatment group assignment on 
the metaMe platform.  
● A firewalled metaMe staff member (the CTO ) who will monitor technical aspects of the 
study to ensure technical compliance to the protocol and in this capacity may have access 
to participant randomization assignments.  
 
 
7.2.2 Randomization Code Creation and Procedure  
Following successful completion of the run -in period, subjects will be randomized 1:1 to either 
GDH or comparator MR treatment. Randomization will be stratified by [CONTACT_57505]. 
Eight separate randomization schedules will be generated to account for the stratification 
(Male/IBS IBS -C, Male/IBS -D, Male/IBS -M, Male/IBS -U, Female/IBS -C, Female/IBS -D, 
Female/IBS -M, Female/IBS -U). Additionally, continuous monitoring of enrollment will occur to 
ensure that at least approximately 20% of the randomized po pulation is male and at least 
approximately 25% of the randomized population includes each of the three major IBS subtypes 
(IBS -C, IBS -D, and IBS -M). Screening of female subjects will be discontinued if approximately 
[ADDRESS_62574] randomized 
approximately 90 subjects . Finally, if randomization into the rare IBS -U subtype reaches 20 total 
subjects, enrollment will be discontinued for that subtype.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 42 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
 
The randomization schedule will be prepared by [CONTACT_57506]. As this is a doubl e-blind study, only unblinded personnel (unblinded statistician, Curebase 
randomization staff) will have access to the randomization schedule before official unblinding of 
treatment assignment post database lock.   
 
Randomization will occur during the “Onbo arding Call” when a member of the Curebase 
randomization staff will enter the treatment group allocation on the metaMe platform. No subject 
will be randomized into this study more than once. All randomization information will be stored 
in a secured area, a ccessible only by [CONTACT_4144].  
 
7.2.[ADDRESS_62575] ID (email address) on metaMe servers. 
Linking usage data to email address is a necessa ry part of the metaMe notification and treatment 
tracking system. Usage data is used to generate adherence information that is in turn used to send 
reminders and prompts for a missed treatment session. Note that most other subject notifications 
like appoin tment reminders are generated based on the treatment schedule, not real -time 
adherence data. The adherence data is also used to ensure that the proper treatment content is 
available at the correct time and in the correct sequence. For example, the app may use the data 
from Wistia to determine if a session has been completed on the scheduled day; if it is not, the 
session remains available to the subject throughout the treatment window. If the session is 
completed, a practice session is made available the fo llowing day. Each day, all adherence data is 
transferred to the Curebase platform and stored. Curebase will provide long -term, HIPAA 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62576] related contextual data, such as 
how much of the video was watched per attempt, whether the session was restarted at any point, 
whether the session was rescheduled, and whether the session was viewed late (after the 
scheduled day).  
 
7.4 Concomitant Therapy  
Requirements and proscriptions on concomitant therapy are outlined in the Inclusion/Exclusion 
Criteria ( Section 5.2  and Section 5.3 ). 
 
Concomitant medication is any drug given in addition to the study treatment. These may be 
prescribed by a physician or obtained by [CONTACT_57507]. Subjects will be allowed to continue use of any concomit ant IBS medications including 
probiotic supplements as permitted by [CONTACT_57508]. Subjects are 
required to maintain a stable dose during the treatment period unless otherwise advised by a 
physician. Changes to concomitant medi cations shall be evaluated at the predetermined 
timepoints. Dosage and frequency of treatment will be collected at the beginning of the study and 
again at week 8, 16, [ADDRESS_62577] 
DISCONTINUATION /WITHDRAWAL  
8.[ADDRESS_62578] from the study this should be recorded in the eCRF using the following 
categories (for screen failure subjects, refer to Section 5.4 ): 
1. Treatment discontinuation due to an AE. The subject has experience d an AE that in 
the opi[INVESTIGATOR_57454]/her continued participation in the study.  
2. Important protocol deviation. The discovery post randomization that the subject failed 
to meet protocol entr y criteria or did not adhere to protocol requirements, and 
continued participation poses an unacceptable risk to the subject’s health, following 
consultation with the sponsor or designee.  
3. Lost to follow -up. The subject stops responding to requests and rem inders for data 
collection or treatment and attempts to contact [CONTACT_57509]. 
Attempts to contact [CONTACT_39784]’s electronic source 
documents.  
4. Voluntary withdrawal. The subject (or subject’s legally accepta ble representative) 
wishes to withdraw from the study. The reason for withdrawal, if provided, must be 
recorded in the eCRF. Note: All attempts should be made to determine the underlying 
reason for the withdrawal and where possible, the primary underlying reason should 
be recorded (i.e., withdrawal due to an AE should not be recorded in the “voluntary 
withdrawal” category. Similarly, lack of efficacy should not be recorded in the 
“voluntary withdrawal” category).  
5. Study termination. The sponsor, IRB, or regu latory agency terminates the study.  
6. Subject is found to have a life -threatening medical illness or serious mental health 
disorder  
7. Any other clinical event or finding that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_57455], jeopardizes 
subject safety, privacy, or the scient ific validity of the study.  
 
8.[ADDRESS_62579]’s study participation at any time during the study 
when the subject meets the study termination criteria described in Section 8.1. In addition, a 
subject may discontinue his or her participation without giving a r eason at any time during the 
study. Should a subject’s participation be discontinued, the primary criterion for termination 
must be recorded by [CONTACT_093]. Subjects withdrawn by [CONTACT_57510]/exc lusion criteria or technical issues in the Curebase software that 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62580] wishes to and/or should continue 
in the study. Subjects that do not respond to contact [CONTACT_57511] 3 will be classified as described in the Statistical Analysis Plan .
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 46 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
Study Assessments and Procedures  
8.4 Efficacy Assessments  
The efficacy of GDH will be established using a set of patient -reported outcomes (PROs). These 
include PROs  to capture:  
● Abdominal Pain  
● Stool Consistency  
 
The primary endpoint of EASITx is abdominal pain, and as such the most important PRO 
instrument in the study is the Abdominal Pain Daily Survey.  
 
Stool frequency and consistency are secondary endpoints of EASITx, so the second -most 
important PRO instrument  in the study is the Daily Stool Consistency Diary, which uses the 
Bristol Stool Scale Form.  
 
Other PROs are assessed at baseline (Week -4), the final week of Phase 3 (week 16), and via the 
LTE questionnaires at [ADDRESS_62581] -treatment (week 38) and [ADDRESS_62582] -treatment (week 
64). These include:  
● IBS Quality of Life  
● TIS (measured at baseline only)  
● WPAI (also at week 8)  
● PHQ -4 
● Adequate Relief  
 
The Satisfaction Questions will be asked only during the last week of Phase 3 (week 16).  
 
Certain endpoints will b e calculated based on the data input via the PROs. These include:  
● Stool frequency  
● Pain frequency  
 
During the baseline visit, physicians will obtain questions regarding the subject’s medical 
history; for example, physicians will inquire about prior treatments for IBS and history of taking 
medications that may conflict with the eligibility criteria for t he study. However, no medical 
records or EMR -originating source documentation will be collected. The IBS diagnosis is 
established at the baseline visit via Rome IV criteria. There is no imaging or laboratory testing 
required in the study and all endpoints are obtained via PROs via the Curebase software.  
All subjects who enroll in EASITx will electronically sign a HIPAA Authorization Form, which 
permits the use of a pseudonymized form of their data to be used for research purposes.  
 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62583] abdominal pain score for the previous 24 -hour period using the 11 -point NRS of pain 
intensity.  
 
8.4.2 Daily Abdominal Pain Frequency  
The daily pain  frequency measurement is derived from the daily pain intensity measurement. 
Days where severity is >0 are considered a day with pain and are recorded as positive. Days with 
a score of 0 are days without pain.  
 
8.4.3 Daily Stool Consistency  
The daily stool cons istency measurement is based on the Bristol Stool Form Scale (BSFS). The 
BSFS is a scale with pi[INVESTIGATOR_57456]. 
The stool consistency is designated on the scale as 1 (separate hard lumps) to 7 (water y, no solid 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_6928]) and is recorded at approximately the same time each day by [CONTACT_57512][INVESTIGATOR_57457] ( 29).  
 
Subjects will be asked for the number of bowel movements in the previous 24 hours. For days 
where subjects report >[ADDRESS_62584] the daily number of bowel movements for the previous 24 -hour period.  
 
8.4.5 IBS-QOL  
The IBS -QOL is a 34 -item questionnaire ( 21). The items are summed and transformed to a 0 -
100-point scale. Higher scores in dicate better IBS quality of life. The mean IBS -QOL score 
measured at weeks 16, 38, and 64 will be used for comparison.  
 
8.4.6 WPAI  
The WPAI is a 6 -question survey of presenteeism and absenteeism ( 22). Because it has a recall 
period  of 7 days, it will be measured at the baseline screening visit, week 8, week 16, and again 
during the LTE at weeks 38 and 64.  
 
8.4.7 TIS 
The TIS is a 17 -item questionnaire of personal characteristics thought to be related to therapeutic 
response to clinical hypnosis ( 23). TIS will be measured at baseline in the pre -treatment run -in 
period and used to model outc omes at treatment completion.  
 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 48 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
8.4.8 PHQ -4 
The PHQ -4 is a simple 4 item measure of anxiety (2 items) and depression (2 items) ( 24). Each 
item is scored on a 4 -point (0 -3) NRS and the items are summed to give a total score ranging 
from 0 -12. The total score provides an assessment of psychological distress. The 2 -item anxiety 
and depression scales can also be scored and scores of 3 or greater are considered positive for 
screening purposes. The PHQ -4 will be measured at baseline in the Phase 1 pre -treatment run -in 
period, week 16 (Phase 3), week 38, and at week 64 in the LTE.  
 
8.4.9  Adequate Relief Question  
The following question will be asked during week 16, 38, and 64 via the Curebase data 
collection (ePRO) system:  
● On average, over the past [ADDRESS_62585] you had adequate relief of your IBS symptoms? 
(Y/N)  
 
8.4.[ADDRESS_62586] week of Phase 3 (week 16) via the 
Curebase data collection (ePRO) system:  
● Overall, how satisfied were you with the therapy you received? (1 -5 scale)  
● Would you recommend the therapy you received to someone with IBS? (Y/N)  
● Would you recommend using the therapy you received before trying a prescription drug? 
(Y/N)  
 
8.5 Safety and Other  Assessments  
Safety will be assessed using AE reporting (see Section 9.3 ). 
 
8.5.1 Concomitant Medication/Therapy  
Concomitant medications and treatment will be collected at the baseline screening visit, week 8 
and week 16. Concomitant medications and treatment us e will also be collected at week at 38 
and 64 in the LTE. The following information will be collected:  
1. Concomitant Medications  
a. Medication name  
b. Indication  
c. Medication form (e.g., tablet, capsule, etc.)  
d. Medication dose units (e.g., gram, IU, etc.)  
e. Medication schedule (e.g., QD, BID, etc.)  
f. Start date  
g. End date  
2. Non-medication Therapy  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 49 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
a. Indication  
b. Schedule/Frequency (daily, weekly, monthly, other)  
c. Type of therapy  
i. Physical therapy  
ii. Occupational therapy  
iii. Psychotherapy (talk therapy)  
iv. Cognitive Behavioral therapy (CBT)  
v. Counselling  
vi. Guided self -help  
vii. Behavioral activation  
viii. Mindfulness therapy  
ix. Other  
d. Start date  
e. End date  
 
8.5.[ADDRESS_62587] week of Phase 3 using the following question:  
Even if you do not feel you received benefit from your treatment program, do you believe 
the program you received could be beneficial to others with IBS?  
 
Answers  will be on a 7 -point NRS, with the following guidelines:  
1 – Definitely could not help others with IBS  
4 – May or may not help others with IBS  
7 – Definitely could help others with IBS  
 
Given that this study is hypothesis blinded, the blinding assessment is designed to assess the credibility 
of the treatment and the credibility of the comparator as a treatment for IBS.  
 
8.[ADDRESS_62588] clinical signs in subjects, whether or not related to the investigational medical device 
(21 CFR 312.32 (a)).  
 
In the context of the investigational device, an AE constitutes:  
● any unintentional, unfavorable clinical sign or symptom, including complications of IBS 
(but not IBS itself).  
● any new illness or disease or the deterioration of existing IBS  
 
1 ISO14155 and 21 CFR 812  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 50 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
● any clinically si gnificant deterioration in any clinical assessment or outcome measure  
● Any adverse event resulting from insufficiencies or inadequacies in the instructions for 
use, the deployment, the installation, the operation or any malfunction of the 
investigational me dical device. This includes any event that is a result of a use error or 
intentional abnormal use of the investigational medical device  
 
Pre-existing conditions (unless worsened significantly during treatment) or routine diagnostic 
and therapeutic procedures normally administered in the treatment of IBS do not constitute AEs.  
AEs will be collected from the time a subject signs the informed consent until study withdrawal, 
screen failure, or study completion.  
 
If the subject experiences a worsening or complication of an AE after ongoing treatment, the 
worsening or complication should be recorded as a new AE. Investigators should ensure that t he 
AE term recorded captures the change in the condition (e.g., “worsening of…”).  
 
In this study, it is possible that some subjects may experience a worsening of IBS symptoms. As 
the primary endpoint of this study, worsening of IBS symptoms is captured as part of the 
efficacy parameter. Worsening of IBS symptoms should not be considered an AE unless the 
worsening of the symptoms is associated with a cause other than the subject’s IBS.  
 
All AEs that occur in study subjects during the AE reporting period spec ified in the protocol 
must be reported, WHETHER OR NOT THE EVENT IS CONSIDERED RELATED TO THE 
STUDY TREATMENT.  
 
NONSERIOUS AEs are to be documented on the AE CRFs.  
 
8.6.2 Definition of Serious Adverse Events  
An AE that meets one or more of the following criteria /outcomes is classified as serious (term 
definitions follow):  
● Death  
● Is deemed life -threatening  
● Results in inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1324]  
● Results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity or substantial disruption of the 
ability to conduct normal life functions,  
● Results in a congenital anomaly/birth  defect  
● Important medical event  
 
Term definitions:  
Life-threatening  – Any AE that places the subject at immediate risk of death from the 
event as it occurred. A life -threatening event does not include an event that might have 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 51 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
caused death had it occurred in a more severe form but that did not create an immediate 
risk of death as it actually occurred.  
 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] – Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_57458] a minimum of 24 hours. A hospi[INVESTIGATOR_57459] a 
preexisting condition that has not worsened does not constitute an SAE (e.g. elective 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_272] a total knee replacement due to a preexisting condition of osteoarthritis 
of the knee that has not worsened during the course of t he study).  
 
Disability – Defined as a substantial disruption in a person’s ability to conduct normal 
life functions.  
 
Congenital Anomaly/birth defect : Congenital anomaly/birth defect in offspring, or led 
to fetal distress, or fetal death  
 
Important Medic al Event  – is an event that may not result in death, be life -threatening, 
or require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_49200], based upon appropriate 
medical judgment of the study physicians, the event may jeopardize the subject and may 
require m edical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this 
definition. Examples of such medical events include suicidality, psychosis, behavioral 
upset, or emergent medical condition requiring emergency hospi[INVESTIGATOR_57460].  
 
8.6.3 Classification of an Adverse Event  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Severity of Event  
For AEs not included in the protocol defined grading system, the following guidelines will be 
used to describe severity:  
 
● Mild – Events require minimal or no treatment and do not interfere with the subject’s 
daily activities or safety.  
● Moderate – Events result in a low level of inconvenience or concern with the therapeutic 
measures. Moderate events may cause some interference with  functioning or safety.  
● Severe – Events interrupt a subject’s usual daily activity and may require active medical 
treatment or intervention to ameliorate. Severe events are usually potentially life -
threatening or incapacitating. Of note, the term “severe” does not necessarily equate to 
“serious”.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Device related AEs  
Device -related adverse events are events directly attributable to the device itself.  
● Adverse Device Effect (ADE): Non -serious adverse event related to the use of an 
investigational medical device  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 52 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
● Serious Adverse Device Effect (SADE): Adverse device effect that has resulted in any of 
the consequences characteristic of a serious adverse even t. 
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Serious Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect  
Serious Unanticipated Adverse Device Effects (SUADEs) are any serious adverse effect on 
health or safety or any life -threatening problem or death caused by, or associated with, a device, 
if that effect, probl em, or death was not previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of 
incidence in the investigational plan.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Relationship to Study Intervention  
All AEs must have their relationship to study intervention assessed by a clinician who examines 
and eval uates the subject based on temporal relationship and his/her clinical judgment. The 
degree of certainty about causality will be graded using the categories below. In a clinical study, 
the study treatment must always be suspect.  
● Reasonable Possibility – A clinical event, including an abnormal clinical test result, 
whose temporal relationship to study treatment makes a causal relationship possible. 
(There is reasonable evidence to suggest a partial or direct causal relationship e.g ., the 
event occurred within a reasonable time after administration of the study treatment). 
Other factors may have contributed to the event (e.g., the participant’s clinical condition, 
other concomitant events).  
● No Reasonable Possibility – A clinical even t, including an abnormal clinical test result, 
whose temporal relationship to study treatment makes a causal relationship improbable 
(e.g., the event did not occur within a reasonable time after administration of the study 
treatment) and in which other the rapi[INVESTIGATOR_57461] (e.g., the participant’s clinical condition, other concomitant treatments).  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Anticipated AEs:  
The following are anticipated AEs that one or more scientific publications have previously 
ident ified as possibly related to GDH or MR therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]:  
● Headache  
● Drowsiness  
● Fatigue  
● GI discomfort  
● Muscle tightness  
● Muscle soreness  
 
The Sponsor will be responsible for determining whether an AE is device -related or not.  
 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 53 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Device malfunction  
Device malfunction denotes a failure of one or more of the components of digital app that could 
potentially result in lack of patient access to the  digital app, inconvenience. The manufacturer 
must confirm device failure.  
 
8.6.[ADDRESS_62589] presenting for medical care, or upon review by a study 
monitor.  
 
All AEs including not meeting the criteria for SAEs will be c aptured on the appropriate eCRF. 
Information to be collected includes event description, date of onset, clinician’s assessment of 
severity, relationship to study product (assessed only by [CONTACT_31278] a diagnosis), and date  of resolution/stabilization of the event. All AEs occurring while on 
study must be documented appropriately regardless of relationship. All AEs will be followed to 
adequate resolution.  
 
Any medical condition that is present at the time that the subject is  screened will be considered 
as baseline and not reported as an AE. However, if the study subject’s condition deteriorates at 
any time during the study, it will be recorded as an AE.  
 
Changes in the severity of an AE will be documented to allow an assessm ent of the duration of 
the event at each level of severity to be performed. AEs characterized as intermittent require 
documentation of onset and duration of each epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865].  
 
The study team will record all events with start dates occurring any time after informed consent 
is obtained through the end of Phase 4 (LTE) or until the end of study participation.  
Events will be followed for outcome information until resolution or stab ilization.  
 
8.6.5 Adverse Event and Serious Adverse Event Reporting  
The occurrence of AEs, SAEs, and Protocol Deviations (PDs) shall be reported through a 
unidirectional, HIPAA -compliant, web -based communication channel. Event reports may be 
initiated at any ti me by [CONTACT_57513]. All logging of event reports shall be 
retained for the duration of the study to provide proper documentation in accordance with FDA 
and ICH GCP requirements. The adverse event will be triaged based on subject content and 
urgency.  
 
In the event of an AE, SAE, or PD, the message will be immediately sent to the Curebase team 
for determination of severity and relatedness to the investigational treatment. The study team will 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62590] as necessar y and create a final event report for logging 
within a specified timeframe. Reports containing AEs will be processed and documented.  
 
Reports containing SAEs shall be completed and filed per regulatory requirements. The 
information in a SAE report should be completed as fully as possible and contain at a minimum:  
● Subject ID number  
● Start date of the event  
● Description of the event  
● Study physician’s name  
● Investigator causality assessment  
● Investigator seriousness assessment  
 
If safety information not available at the time of the first report becomes available at a later date, 
the study team member should submit follow -up safety information to Curebase. All SAEs 
should be followed up until resolution or permanent outcome of the  event. The timelines and 
procedure for follow -up reports are the same as those for the initial report. Detailed study 
reporting procedures shall be standardized as documented in a formal Safety Monitoring Plan.
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 55 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
9 Statistical Considerations  
A Statistical Ana lysis Plan (SAP) will be prepared and finalized before unblinding of subjects’ 
treatment assignment. This document will provide further details regarding the definition of 
analysis variables and analysis methodology to address all study objectives. A blind ed data 
review will be conducted before unblinding of subject’s treatment assignment. This review will 
assess the accuracy and completeness of the study database, subject evaluability, and 
appropriateness of the planned statistical methods.  
 
9.[ADDRESS_62591] whose daily abdomina l pain intensity averaged over the 4 weeks of Phase 3 
(weeks 13 through 16) is 30% reduced compared to the daily abdominal pain intensity averaged 
over the 4 weeks of the Phase 1 run -in (weeks -4 through -1).  
 
The proportion of responders in each treatmen t group in the Intent -to-Treat (ITT) population will 
be estimated along with corresponding two -sided 95% confidence intervals (CIs). For this study 
the null and alternative hypotheses that will be tested are:  
● H0: P1 = P2  
● H1: P1 ≠ P2  
Where P1 and P2 are the proportion of responders in GDH and Comparator treatment groups, 
respectively.  
 
9.2 Sample Size Determination  
In this study, 380 subjects will be randomized in a 1:[ADDRESS_62592] 300 subjects comple te their Week 13 -16 assessment for analysis. Three hundred (300) 
subjects completing Phase [ADDRESS_62593] 90% power to detect an 18 percentage point 
difference in response rates between the GDH and comparator treatment groups at the 5% 
significanc e level. The study was powered assuming that the comparator treatment group is 
expected to demonstrate a 26% response rate. To determine the expected response rate in the 
comparator treatment group, two studies of GDH reporting data that utilized dichotomo us 
outcome measures were examined. The first ( 9) used an endpoint of % treatment responders 
(defined as a >50% reduction in IBS -SSS). In this study, 52% of subjects in the GDH group and 
26% of subjects in the control group (u sual care) were responders. A more recent study by [CONTACT_57514] (12) reported an “adequate relief” response rate of 40% in the GDH group compared to 17% in 
the Edu control group. It is believed the response rate in the comparat or treatment group in this 
study is likely to be ~26%.  
 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 56 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
9.3 Populations for Analyses  
Enrolled Population : The enrolled population will include all subjects who sign informed 
consent and meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria.  This population will be used for 
evaluation of demographics and baseline characteristics.  
Intent -to-Treat (ITT) Population : The ITT population will include all subjects who are 
randomized to treatment. Subjects that are replaced due to failed inclusion/exclusion 
criteria or technical issues in the Curebase software will be excluded. This population will 
be used for the evalua tion of efficacy and all safety analyses.  
Per Protocol (PP) Population : The PP population will consist of all subjects in the ITT 
population with no major protocol deviations that may affect efficacy. This population will 
be used as a supportive analysis o f the primary endpoint.  
 
9.4 Statistical Analyses  
9.4.1 General Approach  
The SAS System, Version 9.4 (or higher), will be used for all analyses, unless otherwise 
specified. Continuous variables (e.g., age) will be summarized using the number of observations 
(n), mean, standard deviation (SD), median, minimum, and maximum. Categ orical variables 
(e.g., sex, race) will be summarized using the number of observations (n) and percentage in each 
category.  
 
All data used in analyses and/or collected during the study will be provided in listings.  
Subjects withdrawn prior to end of Phase 3 (Weeks 13 -16) assessment period will be considered 
as prematurely withdrawn. All available data for subjects who prematurely withdraw from the 
study will be included in all analyses. All 4 -week assessment periods in MMRM and GEE 
models will include:  Pha se 1 (weeks minus 4 through minus 1), Phase 2 weeks 1 -4, Phase 2 
weeks 5 -8, Phase 2 weeks 9 -12, Phase 3 (weeks 13 -16), LTE Period 1 (weeks 35 through 38), 
and LTE period 2 (weeks 61 through 64). At timepoints during the study that require [ADDRESS_62594] 50% of the required assessments must be 
collected to be able to derive the average daily abdominal pain intensity and like endpoints. 
Study withdrawals, reasons for withdrawal, and missing assessment collections wi ll be 
summarized.  
 
Analyses of treatment will be performed using two different approaches to account for missing 
data during the treatment phase:  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 57 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
1. At-assessment Analysis: Missing values at post -baseline assessments will not be replaced 
and will be regarded as missing in analyses.  
2. Multiple Imputation: Missing values at post -baseline assessments will be imputed using 
the multiple imputation method.  
 
Additional details of the statistical methods are provided in the SAP.  
 
9.4.2 Analysis of the Primary Efficacy Endpoint(s)  
The primary endpoint, proportion of overall pain intensity responders is defined as a subject 
whose daily abdominal pain intensity average d over the 4 weeks of Phase 3 (weeks 13 through 
16) is 30% reduced compared to the daily abdominal pain intensity averaged over the 4 weeks of 
Phase 1 (weeks -4 through -1) (27). Responders will be compared between the GDH and  
comparator treatment groups using a Cochran -Mantel -Haenszel test adjusted for IBS subtype and 
gender. If the resulting p -value is less than 0.[ADDRESS_62595] 10 percentage points, then it will be co ncluded that the primary endpoint 
has been met.  
 
9.4.3 Analysis of the Secondary Efficacy Endpoint(s)  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Abdominal Pain Intensity  
Average abdominal pain intensity will be calculated as the average of the daily abdominal pain 
intensity scores recorded by [CONTACT_20908]. Averages will be calculated for each week and for 
each 4 -week assessment period (i.e., Phase 1 [Week -4 to -1,], P hase 3 [Week 13 – 16], etc.).  
Average abdominal pain intensity at Week [ADDRESS_62596] squares (LS) 
mean estimate of average abdominal pain intensi ty and LS mean difference and associated 95% 
CIs will be presented with corresponding p -value.  
Additionally, change from baseline and at -assessment values of average abdominal pain intensity 
will be analyzed at all 4 -week assessment time periods with a mix ed effects repeated measures 
model (MMRM). The model will include treatment, time period, IBS subtype, gender, and 
treatment by [CONTACT_57515] a random effect. The 
unstructured covariance matrix will be used to model the within -participant correlation. Using 
the ESTIMATE and LSMEANS statements within PROC MIXED, the model -based LS means 
and LS mean differences (GDH minus comparator) and associated 95% CIs for each time period 
and overall will be estimated.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 58 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
Avera ge abdominal pain intensity will be summarized descriptively by [CONTACT_57516].  
 
Additionally, overall pain intensity response at all 4 -week assessment time periods will be 
analyzed with a random effects generalized estimating equations (GEE) with a logit link. The 
model will include treatment, time period, IBS subtype, gender, and tre atment by [CONTACT_57517] a random effect. The unstructured covariance matrix 
will be used to model the within -subject correlation. Using the ESTIMATE and LSMEANS 
statements within PROC GLIMMIX, the model -based respo nder rates and odds ratio (GDH 
relative to comparator) and associated 95% CIs for each time period and overall will be 
estimated.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Average Abdominal Pain Frequency  
Average abdominal pain frequency is defined as the average number of days during the [ADDRESS_62597] squares 
(LS) mean estimate of average abdominal pain frequency and LS mean difference and associated 
95% CIs wi ll be presented with corresponding p -value.  
 
Additionally, change from baseline and at -assessment values of average abdominal pain 
frequency will be analyzed at all 4 -week assessment time periods with a mixed effects repeated 
measures model (MMRM). The mod el will include treatment, time period, IBS subtype, gender, 
and treatment by [CONTACT_57518] a random effect. The 
unstructured covariance matrix will be used to model the within -subject correlation. Using the 
ESTIMA TE and LSMEANS statements within PROC MIXED, the model -based LS means and 
LS mean differences (GDH minus comparator) and associated 95% CIs for each time period and 
overall will be estimated.  
 
Average abdominal pain frequency will be summarized descriptiv ely by [CONTACT_57516].  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Stool Consistency  
Stool Consistency will be calculated using the BSFS. The BSFS is recorded at approximately the 
same time each day. Subjects will be asked for the number of bowel movements in the previous 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62598] stool in the preceding 24 hour period. 
Extreme stool consistency is defined as 1, 2, 6, or 7 on the BSFS, while BSFS scores of 3,4 and 5 
are considered within the normal range. The BSFS scores will be grouped as 1, 2 (Group 1), 3,4,5 
(Group 2) and 6,7 (Group 3). For participants in the IBS -D and IBS -M subtypes, a stool 
consistency response is defined as having a greater than or equal to 50% reduction from baseline 
(Phase 1) in the number of days with a BSFS score of 6 or 7.  Stool consistency response for the 
IBS-D and IBS -M subtypes will be analyzed with methods similar to those used to assess the 
primary endpoint described in Section 10.4.2 . 
 
Additionally, change from baseline in the percentage of days with a BSFS s core in Group 2 will  
will be analyzed at all 4 -week assessment time periods with a mixed effects repeated measures 
model (MMRM). The model will include treatment, time period, IBS subtype, gender, and 
treatment by [CONTACT_57518] a random effect. The 
unstructured covariance matrix will be used to model the within -subject correlation. Using the 
ESTIMATE and LSMEANS statements within PROC MIXED, the model -based LS means and 
LS mean differences (GDH minus comparator) an d associated 95% CIs for each time period and 
overall will be estimated.  
 
The percentage of the number of days with a BSFS score in each BSFS group will be 
summarized descriptively by [CONTACT_3148], IBS subtype and time period.  
 
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Stool Frequency  
Analyses of daily stool frequency will only include participants with IBS -C.   
Daily stool frequency will be calculated as the average number of stools per day during each 4 -
week assessment period. Only days during which an assessment is recorded will be i ncluded in 
the calculation of average stool frequency.  
For participants in IBS -C subtype, a stool frequency response is defined as an increase from 
baseline (Phase 1) of >1 bowel movement per day. Stool frequency response for IBS -C 
participants will be an alyzed with methods similar to those used to assess the primary endpoint 
described in Section 10.4.2 . 
Change from baseline and at -assessment values of daily stool frequency will be analyzed at all 4 -
week assessment time periods with a mixed effects repeate d measures model (MMRM). Separate 
models will performed for each IBS subtype. The model will include treatment, time period, 
gender, and treatment by [CONTACT_57515] a random 
effect. The unstructured covariance m atrix will be used to model the within -participant 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 60 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
correlation. Using the ESTIMATE and LSMEANS statements within PROC MIXED, the model -
based LS means and LS mean differences (GDH minus comparator) and associated 95% CIs for 
each time period and overall wil l be estimated.  
Daily stool frequency will be summarized descriptively by [CONTACT_57484].  
[IP_ADDRESS]  IBS-QOL  
The IBS -QOL is a [ADDRESS_62599] correlation. Using the ESTIMATE and LSMEANS statements within PROC MIXED, the 
model -based LS means and LS mean differences (GDH m inus comparator) and associated 95% 
CIs for each week and overall will be estimated.  
 
IBS-QOL score will be summarized descriptively by [CONTACT_57485].  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Workplace Presenteeism and Absenteeism  
The Workplace Productivity and Activity Impairment Question naire (WPAI) is a 6 -question 
survey of presenteeism and absenteeism and it will be measured at the Baseline visit, week 8, 16, 
38, and 64.  
 
Percent overall work impairment due to problem and percent activity impairment due to problem 
will be analyzed simi larly to IBS -QOL.  
 
Percent work time missed due to problem, percent impairment while working due to problem, 
percent overall work impairment due to problem and percent activity impairment due to problem 
will be summarized descriptively by [CONTACT_57519] k. 
 
9.4.4 Exploratory Analyses  
The following exploratory endpoints will be detailed out in the statistical analysis plan.  
● PHQ -4 
● TIS 
● IBS-AR 
● Blinding question  
● Satisfaction questionnaire  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 61 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
● Treatment adherence  
● Concomitant medication usage  
 
9.4.5 Safety Analyses  
All AEs will be coded to System Organ Class (SOC) and Preferred Term using Medical 
Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA). The number and percentage of subjects that 
experience at least one AE, grade 3 -5 AEs, related AEs, SAEs, and related SAEs will  be 
summarized by [CONTACT_1570]. Additionally, AEs will be summarized by [CONTACT_57520].  
 
9.4.6 Baseline Descriptive Statistics  
Demographic and baseline characteristics will be listed and summarized descriptively by 
[CONTACT_1570].  
 
9.4.7 Planned Interim  Analyses  
There are no planned interim analyses.  
 
9.4.8 Sub-Group Analyses  
The primary and secondary endpoint analyses will be conducted in the following subgroups:  
● Gender  
● IBS subtype  
● Age group (<=median, > median)  
● Concomitant medication  
o On IBS drug therapy vs not on IBS drug therapy  
o IBS-C on IBS drug therapy vs IBS -C not on IBS drug therapy  
o IBS-D on IBS drug therapy vs IBS -D not on IBS drug therapy  
Further details will be provided in the statistical analysis plan.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62600]’s personal and personal health information for 
purposes of conducting the study. The informed consent form further explains the nature of the 
study, its objectives, and potential risks and benefits, as well as the date informed consent are 
given. Th e informed consent form will detail the requirements of the subject and the fact that he 
or she is free to withdraw at any time without giving a reason and without prejudice to his or her 
further medical care.  
 
The PI/Sponsor is responsible for the prepara tion, content, and IRB approval of the informed 
consent form. The informed consent form must be approved by [CONTACT_1201]. The informed consent 
must be written in a language fully comprehensible to the prospective subject. It is the 
responsibility of the investi gator or delegated staff to explain the detailed elements of the 
informed consent form to the subject.  
 
Curebase will use an electronic consent platform (eConsent) to facilitate the consent process. The 
eConsent will be introduced to subjects as part of an  on-line pre -screening interview. The pre -
screening process requires subjects to create an account and login that allows ongoing access to 
their secure Curebase platform account. Once subjects pass their pre -screening they will be able 
to review the eConse nt, HIPAA Authorization, and the Experimental Subjects’ Bill of Rights 
using their own personal electronic devices, like a phone, tablet, or computer. During the 
subject’s review they will be provided an opportunity to discuss the content of the eConsent w ith 
study personnel via email or telephone.  
 
Subjects will have the option to delay document signing and proceed to the study visit where 
they can further discuss the consent with the study physician prior to signing. Each subject will 
be required to electronically sign the study informed consent, HI PAA Authorization, and the 
Experimental Subjects’ Bill of Rights before they are allowed to participate in the study. After 
signing each document, subjects will be sent digital PDFs of their documents for their personal 
records. The original informed conse nt form will be stored in the eCRF. In the case of revisions 
to the informed consent form, subjects will be contact[CONTACT_57521]. The date the revised consent was obtained will be recorded 
with the eC onsent.  
 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 63 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
10.1.2  Study Discontinuation and Closure  
metaMe reserves the right to terminate or suspend the study at any time for any reason. 
Circumstances that may warrant termination or suspension include, but are not limited to:  
● Determination of unexpected, signi ficant, or unacceptable risk to subjects  
● Insufficient compliance to protocol requirements  
● Data that are not sufficiently complete and/or evaluable  
Study may resume once concerns about safety, protocol compliance, and data quality are 
addressed, and satisfy  the sponsor, IRB, and/or Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  
 
10.1.[ADDRESS_62601] screene d or enrolled 
in the study. All data from subjects will be collected, managed, and securely stored by [CONTACT_57481]. 
Curebase stores all data in a secure cloud server (AWS) and complies with HIPAA and GDPR 
standards, including but not limited to: password prote ction, platform encryption, and [ADDRESS_62602]’s sensitive information. In order to maintain subject confidentiality, subjects will not 
be identified by [CONTACT_57522] (or 
designee), but will be identified by a clinic number and subject number.  
 
metaMe Health, Inc. will collect and store PHI. This information is needed to correctly target 
treatment notification, treatment reminders, and to administer the treatment. There will be no 
data link between PHI and treatment allocation or data used to det ermine treatment compliance 
(see Section 6.3 ). metaMe Health  stores all data in a secure cloud server (AWS) and complies 
with HIPAA and GDPR standards, including but not limited to password protection and platform 
encryption. To maintain subject confidenti ality, subjects will not be identified by [CONTACT_57523] (or designee), but will be identified by 
a clinic number and subject number.  
 
Refer to Section 10.1.6  for additional information on how data wil l be collected and secured.  
 
10.1.4  Clinical Monitoring  
Curebase will provide clinical monitoring during the study to ensure that:  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62603] of the study is in compliance with the currently approved 
protocol/amendment(s), with GCP, and with the applicable regulatory requirements.  
 
Refer also to Sections 11.1.5  and 11.1.6  for additional details.  
 
10.1.5  Quality Assurance and Quality Control  
Quality control (QC) procedures will be implemented beginning with the data entry system. Data 
QC checks will be remotely run on the database and shall be generated on an ongoing basis to 
verify the accuracy and integrity of data being collected. Any missing data or data anomalies will 
be communicated to the investigators for clarification and resolution.  
 
Following written standard operating procedures (SOPs), the monitor will verify that the clinical 
study is conducted and data are generated, documented (recorded), and reported in compliance 
with the protocol, ICH GCP and applicable regulatory requirements.  
 
The investigators will provide direct access to all study related records, source dat a/documents, 
and reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by [CONTACT_456], and inspection by [CONTACT_57524].  
 
10.1.[ADDRESS_62604]’s eCRF, the time and date stamp tracks the person entering or 
updati ng eCRF data and creates an electronic audit trail. The Investigators and Curebase are 
responsible for all information collected on subjects enrolled in this study.  
 
Curebase will provide clinical monitoring during the study to ensure that:  
1. The rights and well -being of human subjects are protected  
2. The reported study data are accurate and complete  
3. The conduct of the study is in compliance with the currently approved 
protocol/amendment(s), with GCP, and with the applicable regulatory requiremen ts. 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62605] coding of AEs, medical history, and concurrent medical conditions using the 
Medical Dictionary for Regulatory Activities (MedDRA). Drugs will be coded using the 
World Health Organization Drug Dictionary (WHO).  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Data Collection Instruments  
Cureb ase will provide eCRFs to each subject who signs an informed consent and completes the 
clinic visit screening. These forms are used to transmit the information collected in the 
performance of this study to sponsor and regulatory authorities. After completi on of the entry 
process, computer logic checks will be run to identify items, such as inconsistent dates, missing 
data, and questionable values. Queries may be issued by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_57462]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_57463] e -sign the appropriate eCRFs as indicated. Furthermore, the investigator must 
retain full responsibility for the accuracy and authenticity of all data entered on the eCRFs. The 
completed eCRFs are the s ole property of the sponsor and should not be made available in form 
to third parties, except for authorized representatives of appropriate governmental regulatory 
authorities.  
 
Investigators and their representatives will be required to complete a trainin g on using the 
Curebase platform prior to working with subjects, including how to enter data correctly, how to 
enter protocol deviations and AEs, and how to correct mistakes. Trainings will be tracked by 
[CONTACT_57525] -specific activation logs. Followin g written SOPs, the study monitors will 
verify that the clinical study is conducted and data are generated, documented, and reported in 
compliance with the protocol, ICH GCP, and applicable regulatory requirements.  
 
Study personnel at each research clinic will enter data corresponding to a subject’s visit into the 
protocol -specific eCRF. If a correction is required for an eCRF, the time and date stamps track 
the person entering or updating eCRF data and creates an ele ctronic audit trail. The Investigator 
is responsible for all information collected on subjects enrolled in this study. All data collected 
during the course of this study must be reviewed and verified for completeness and accuracy by 
[CONTACT_737].  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Data  Management Procedures  
All data will be entered into Curebase, which is a validated database. The Curebase team or 
delegate will be responsible for data processing, in accordance with procedural documentation. 
Database lock will occur once quality assuranc e procedures have been completed. All procedures 
for the handling and analysis of data will be conducted using good computing practices meeting 
FDA guidelines for the handling and analysis of data for clinical trials.  
 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 66 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Data Quality Control and Reporting  
Quality control (QC) procedures will be implemented beginning with the data entry system. 
After the data has been entered into the Curebase database, a system of computerized data 
validation checks will be implemented and applied to the database every 2 we eks. Query reports 
pertaining to missing data or data discrepancies will be forwarded to the Investigators, clinical 
team and study monitors for clarification/resolution. A Curebase representative will follow up to 
ensure that the corrections are completed  and documented appropriately. The study database will 
be updated in accordance with the resolved queries. Following completion of the study data 
collection, Curebase will provide a thorough quality control review of all records. Finalized data 
will then b e designated for database lock prior to statistical analysis. In addition, following 
written standard operating procedures (SOPs), the monitor will verify that the clinical study is 
conducted and data are generated, documented (recorded), and reported in c ompliance with the 
protocol, ICH GCP and applicable regulatory requirements.  
 
The investigators will provide direct access to all study related records, source data/documents, 
and reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by [CONTACT_456], and insp ection by [CONTACT_57524].  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Archival of Data and Record Retention  
The database is safeguarded against unauthorized access by [CONTACT_1627]. 
Appropriate backup copi[INVESTIGATOR_57464] m aintained. 
Databases are backed up by [CONTACT_57526].  
 
At critical junctures of the protocol (e.g., production of interim reports and final reports), data for 
analysis are lock ed and cleaned per established procedures.  
 
All data pertaining to a clinical study, including protected health information (PHI), will be 
retained for the duration of the study, and for 2 years thereafter, in compliance with International 
Conference on H armonisation (ICH) E6 Section 4.9.5 and specified in ICH E6 (Section 8) until 
at least [ADDRESS_62606], during the cli nical study and for 2 years 
thereafter. Although Curebase respects the rights of its users to be forgotten, Curebase is also 
bound by [CONTACT_57527], and to fulfill 
monitoring obligations.  
 
MetaMe  Health reserves the right to keep the pseudonymized data retrieved from Curebase for 
the entire duration the company is functioning and active. MetaMe Health will keep this 
information in a private and secure internal database.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Monitoring  
Electronic monitoring visits will be conducted by [CONTACT_57528], Inc according to 
the U.S. CFR Title 21 Parts 50, 56, and 312 and ICH Guidelines for GCP (E6). Study 
investigators will provide direct access to all clinical records, study sourc e data/documents, and 
reports for the purpose of monitoring and auditing by [CONTACT_456], and inspection by [CONTACT_21229]. By [CONTACT_12570], the Investigator grants permission to Curebase 
and appropriate regulatory authorities to conduct monitoring and/or auditing of all appropriate 
study documentation.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Protocol Deviations  
A protocol deviation is any noncompliance with the clinical study protocol and ICH GCP 
requirements. The noncompliance may be either on the part of the subject , the investigator, or the 
study research staff. As a result of deviations, corrective actions are to be developed by [CONTACT_57529].  
 
These practices are consistent with ICH GCP:  
● 4.5 Compliance with Protocol, sections 4.5. 1, 4.5.2, and 4.5.3  
● 5.1 Quality Assurance and Quality Control, section 5.1.1  
● 5.[ADDRESS_62607] (IRB) per their policies. The study physicians 
and study monitors are responsible for knowing and adhering to the reviewing IRB requirements.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Clinical Trial Res ults Disclosure  
metaMe will post the results of clinical trials on ClinicalTrials.gov and/or other publicly 
accessible websites, as required by [CONTACT_57530]/standard, applicable laws, and/or regulations.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  Publication and Data Sharing Policy  
Curebase will provide metaMe with all data collected during the study. After study completion, 
only metaMe may make study information available to other study investigators or to regulatory 
agencies, except as required b y law or regulation. Except as otherwise allowable in the clinic 
research agreement, any public disclosure (including publicly accessible websites) related to the 
protocol or study results, other than study recruitment materials and/or advertisements, is t he sole 
responsibility of the sponsor. metaMe reserves the right to publish any data from the study 
without the consent of investigators. Manuscript authorship for any peer -reviewed publication 
will appropriately reflect contributions to the production and  review of the document.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62608] of irritable bowel syndrome: Prevalence and effect on health -related 
quality of life. Rev in Gastro Dis. 2013(2):S3 -S11. 
2. Ford AC, Bercik P, Morgan DG, Bolino C, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_57465] -Sanchez MI, Moayyedi P. Validat ion 
of the Rome III criteria for the diagnosis of irritable bowel syndrome in secondary care. 
Gastroenterology. 2013(145):1262 -70. 
3. Leong SA, Barghout V, Birnbaum HG. The economic consequences of irritable bowel 
syndrome: A US employer perspective. Arch Int ern Med. 2003(163):[ADDRESS_62609] AC. Global prevalence of and risk factors for irritable bowel syndrome. 
A meta -analysis. Clin Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012(10):712 -21. 
5. Lacy B, Patel H, Guerin A, Dea K, Scopel JL, Alaghband R, et al. Variation in care for 
participants with Irritable bowel syndrome in the [LOCATION_002]. PLOS One. 2016 
(http://DOI:10:1371/journal.pone.0154258  ).  
6. Mayer EA, Til lisch K. The Brain -Gut Axis in abdominal pain syndromes. Ann Rev of 
Medicine. 2011(62):381 -96. 
7. Lackner JM. The role of psychosocial factors in functional gastrointestinal disorders. 
Quigley, Hongo, Fukuda (eds): Functional and GI Motility Disorders. 2014(3 3):[ADDRESS_62610] AC. Pharmacotherapy for irritable bowel syndrome. J Clin Med. 
2017(6):101. ( http://dx.doi:10:3390/jcm6110101 )  
9. Blanchard EB, Greene B, Scharff L, Schwarz -McMorris SP. Relaxation training as a 
treatment for Irritable Bowel Syndrome. Biofeedback and Self Regul. 1993;18:125 -132. 
10. Palsson O. Hypnosis treatment of gastrointestinal disorders: A comprehensive review of 
the empi[INVESTIGATOR_33727]. Am J of Clinical Hypnosis. 2015(58):[ADDRESS_62611] J, Keefer L, Brenner DM, Firth RS, Gudleski GD, et al. 
Improvement in gastrointestinal symptoms after cognitive behavior therapy for refractory 
irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2018(155):47 -57. 
12. Flik CE, Laan W, Zuithoff NPA, van Rood YR, Smout A, Wuesten B, et al. Efficacy of 
individual and group hypnotherapy in irritable bowel syndrome (IMAGINE): a 
multicenter randomized controlled trial. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2018 
(http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S2468 -1253(18)[ZIP_CODE] -8) 
13. Drossman D, Camilleri M, Mayer EA, Whitehead WE. AGA Technical review on 
irritable bowel syndrome. Gastroenterology. 2002(123):2108 -31.  
14. Yeh et al. Disseminating  hypnosis to health care settings: Applying the RE -AIM 
framework. Psychol Conscious (Am Psychol Assoc). 2014(2):213 -28.  
15. Gonsalkorale K, Miller V, Afzal A, Whorwell PJ. Long term benefits of hypnotherapy 
for irritable bowel syndrome. Gut. 2003(52):[ADDRESS_62612] of 
hypnotherapy and educational intervention on brain response to visceral stimulus in the 
irritable bowel syndrome. Aliment Pharmacol Ther. 2013(37):1184 -97. 
17. American Psychiatr ic Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition.  
18. Powell RA, Gee TI. The effects of hypnosis on dissociative identity disorder: A 
reexamination of the evidence. Can J Psychiatry. 1999(44):914 -916. 
19. Myerson J, Konichezy MA. Out -of-illness experience: Hypnotically induced dissociation 
as a therapeutic resource in treating people with obstinate mental disorders. Amer J of 
Psycho. 2009(63):133 -146. ( Https://doi.org/10.1176/appl.psychotherapy.2009.63.2.133 ) 
20. Hauser W, Hagl M, Schmierer A, Hansen E. The efficacy, safety and applications of 
medical hypnosis. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2016(113):289 -96. 
21. Patrick D, Drossman D, Frederick I, Dicesare J, Puder K: Quality of life in persons with 
irritable bowel syndrome: development and validation of a new measure. Dig Dis Sci 
1998, 43:400 –411. 
22. Reilly MC, Zbrozek AS, Dukes E: The validity and reproducibility o f a work 
productivity and activity impairment measure. PharmacoEconomics 1993; 4(5):[ADDRESS_62613] Scale: A measure of 
subconscious connectedness. American Journal of Clinical Hypnosis 2019 (in press).  
24. Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JBW, Löwe B. An ultra -brief screening scale for 
anxiety and depression: the PHQ -4. Psychosomatics 2009;50:613 -621. 
25. Bang H, Flaherty SP, Kolahi J, Park J. Blinding assessment in clinical trials: A review of 
statistical metho ds and a proposal of blinding assessment protocol. Clin Res and Reg 
Affairs, 2010;27(2):42 -51 
26. Williamson A. What is hypnosis and how might it work? Palliat Care. 2019 Jan 
31;12:1178224219826581. doi: 10.1177/1178224219826581.  
27. Palsson O. Standardized hypnos is treatment for irritable bowel syndrome: The North 
Carolina protocol. Int J Clin Exp Hyp. 2006(54):51 -64. 
28. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance for Industry: Irritable Bowel Syndrome. 
https://w ww.fda.gov/media/[ZIP_CODE]/download , accessed July 2019.  
29. Lewis SJ, Heaton KW. Stool form scale as a useful guide to intestinal transit time. Scand 
J Gastro. 1997; 32:920 –924. 
30. Palsson OS, Baggish JS, Turner MJ, Whitehead WE. IBS patients show frequent 
fluctuati ons between loose/watery and hard/lumpy stools: implications for treatment. Am 
J Gastroenterol. 2012 Feb;107:[ADDRESS_62614] pain 
anywhere in your 
abdomen?  0. Never (Skip to end of questionnaire)  
1. Less than one day a month  
2. One day a month  
3. Two to three days a month   
4. Once a week  
5. Two to three days a week  
6. Most days  
7. Every day  
8. Multiple times per day or all the time  
2. How often did this 
pain in your abdomen 
happen close in time 
to a bowel movement 
-- just before, during, 
or soon after? 
(Percent of times 
with pain)  0. %0 or Never   
1. 10%   
2. 20%   
3. 30%    
4. 40%   
5. 50%   
6. 60%   
7. 70%   
8. 80%   
9. 90%   
10. 100%  
3. How often did 
your stools become 
either softer than 
usual or harder than 
usual when you had 
this pain? (Percent of 
times with pain)  0. %0 or Never   
1. 10%   
2. 20%   
3. 30%    
4. 40%   
5. 50%   
6. 60%   
7. 70%   
8. 80%   
9. 90%   
10. 100%  
4. How often did 
your stools become 
either more frequent 
than usual or less 
frequent than usual 
when you had this 0. %0 or Never    
1. 10%   
2. 20%   
3. 30%    
4. 40%   
5. 50%   
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 72 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
pain? (Percent of 
times with pain)  6. 60%   
7. 70%   
8. 80%   
9. 90%   
10. 100%  
5. Has it been 6 
months or longer 
since you started 
having this pain?  0. No  
1. Yes  
 
Rome IV Scoring  
Irritable Bowel Syndrome  
Must fulfill the following criteria for the past 3 months:  
1. Recurrent abdominal pain  
Q1 = at least weekly  
2. Pain is associated with two or more of the following criteria:  
a. Related to defecation  
Q2 = at least 30% of occasions  
b. Associated with a change in frequency of stool  
Q3 = at least 30% of occasions  
c. Associated with a change in form (appearance) of stool  
Q4 = at least 30% of occasions  
1. Symptom onset at least 6 months prior to diagnosis   
Q5 = yes  
 
APPENDIX B   GUT-DIRECTED HYPNOTHERAPY SESSION SCRIPTS  
IBS Session One  
Now please make yourself as comfortable as you can in your chair. Find a relaxed position so 
that you can sit comfortably and with minimum effort and without having to move around. Just 
try to make yourself as comfortable as you can and sit in a relaxed po sition.  
I would like to ask you to look up at the ceiling and find a spot there to look at. It doesn't matter 
what spot it is. Just find one spot or place in the ceiling to look at. And keep your eyes on that 
spot for a little while, as we start this relax ation exercise. In a moment I am going to start 
counting to three, and I would like to ask you to keep looking up at the spot while I count. With 
each number of the count, your eyelids may become heavier and start to push down and close. 
However, some peop le's eyes do not close as quickly as those of others - and it is possible that it 
might not happen in your case. And that is all right. There is no need to be concerned if that does 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62615] to enjoy hypnosis.  
Keep looking at the spot in the ceiling ... that's right ... ... and keep your eyes still like that ... 
keep them up there, focused on the spot. Good. Focus you r attention on the spot and pay close 
attention to what I am going to say: As you keep looking at the spot, allow your whole body to 
begin to relax - just by [CONTACT_57531], relaxing. Relax your body and keep looking at the spot, 
concentrate on it. Rela x your whole body, allow it to be limp and heavy and relaxed, ... limp ... 
and heavy ... and relaxed. Notice if you can feel the tension leave your muscles ... and notice 
how your body becomes more limp and heavy. Just relax and keep focusing on the spot a nd 
listening to my voice. And as you relax your body, as you let go more and more... you will soon 
notice that your eyelids also begin to feel heavy ... heavier... and heavier... Just concentrate on 
the spot in the ceiling and on my voice. One. Heavier ...  and heavier. Your eyelids may already 
be pushing down, sinking down under their own heavy weight, sinking down ... as heavy as large 
shields made of lead, heavy as lead ... as you let go ... as you let go and relax, your eyelids 
become heavier ... perhaps  they are already beginning to push down ... feel the heaviness in your 
eyelids as you allow yourself to relax more and more ... relax more and more ... becoming heavy 
and relaxed, comfortably heavy and relaxed ... two ... you can try to keep staring at th e spot a 
little bit longer, but it may be getting very difficult, as your eyelids are becoming sooo heavy, too 
heavy for that, and your eyes may be beginning to close already. For some people this happens 
quickly, for others it happens more slowly ... but the eyelids become heavier and heavier. Pay 
attention to your eyelids ... and as you concentrate on them you probably become more aware of 
them than you usually are, ... you may even be more aware of the feeling in your eyelids than 
you have ever been befo re ... feel how heavy and tired your eyelids are ... and as you do, you 
probably notice that they are getting still heavier, still heavier ... they sink down and close all by 
[CONTACT_1029], under their own heavy weight ... three, your eyes want to close as yo u just let go and 
relax, heavier ... closing ... heavier and heavier, feel them getting heavier, ... closing all by 
[CONTACT_1029] ... closing all by [CONTACT_1029] ... closing ... closing now. Allow your eyes to close now 
... just let them close.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62616] to close 
them and let go. You can close your eyes now and relax. Close your eyes now and let go and 
relax.  
That's good ... Eyes completely closed. You can just keep your eyes closed until  I tell you to 
open them. It is easier to relax now that your eyes are closed. Just continue to listen to my voice 
and relax ... Relax and focus on what I am saying to you ... Relax your right hand ... allow all the 
muscles in your right hand to become com pletely limp and relaxed ... completely limp and 
relaxed ... Your right hand becomes completely relaxed as you think about the muscles in the 
hand relaxing... your right hand becomes completely relaxed ... and let that relaxation spread up 
your arm ... rel ax your left hand, too ... relax your left hand also ... concentrate on each part of 
your body as I talk about it. Maybe you can even pi[INVESTIGATOR_57466], see it in your mind even though your 
eyes are closed, see in your mind your body relaxing more and more ... re lax your left hand ... 
notice the growing feeling of relaxation in your left hand as it spreads up your left arm, relaxing 
the arm also ... allow all of the muscles to become limp and soft and smooth ... limp and soft and 
smooth. Both of your hands and bot h arms are gradually becoming more and more relaxed, limp 
and relaxed ... limp and relaxed. Now relax your shoulders ... and your neck ... relax all the 
muscles in your shoulders and in your neck ... except those that are needed to keep you in a 
comfortabl e position ... Relax your shoulders ... relax your shoulders ... your shoulders can 
become soft and loose ... soft and loose ... and allow the relaxation to spread down your body ... a 
wave of relaxation washes down your body ... all the way down your body , relaxing every part of 
your body ... all the way down into your feet. All the way down your body. Your whole body 
relaxes more and more ... more and more ... allow your whole body to become limp and loose 
and relaxed. Relax your left foot even more ... y our left foot is limp and heavy and comfortably 
relaxed ... and your left leg ...relaxed ... and now your right foot ... and your right leg ... Relax 
your whole body.  
You are breathing more and more freely and deeply now as your body relaxes, you breathe f reely 
and deeply. Allow your whole body to relax. Relax your whole body. As we continue, your body 
will perhaps begin to feel a little numb ... and it may also feel heavier and heavier ... But this will 
be a comfortable feeling of heaviness and numbness .. . On the other hand, your body may begin 
to feel lighter, as if it were weightless, and you might experience a sensation of floating. No 
matter what happens, whether you become heavy or light, whether you feel like you are floating 
or gently sinking, it wi ll be an enjoyable and pleasant feeling that goes along with a state of deep, 
comfortable relaxation.  
In this relaxed state, your mind and your thoughts also become more relaxed and quiet. While 
you are in this state, there is no need to care about what is going on around you ... it is easier just 
to withdraw and turn your attention inside ... nothing is i mportant now except enjoying relaxing 
and listening to what my voice is saying to you. Nothing else matters right now ... not a care or 
concern in the world ... this is an opportunity to just let go and enjoy a deep, carefree and 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62617] to do is to relax and listen to my voice 
... Even my voice may soon begin to feel like it is coming to you from a distance ... and that's 
fine. But no matter how deeply hypnotized or relaxed you will feel yourself become, you will 
always continue to hear me, and my words will continue to  affect you like in an automatic way.  
You are going to become even more relaxed ... still more relaxed, as we continue. I would like 
you to realize however, that you will be able to shift in your seat or to put your head in a more 
comfortable position if y ou need to, and this will not disturb your concentration or relaxation at 
all, and you will continue to be in the hypnotic state until I tell you to wake up.  
As you may know, people are better able to imagine things and pi[INVESTIGATOR_57467] t hey are in a relaxed state ... like you are now. I would like you now to pi[INVESTIGATOR_57468]. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103] a staircase ... see yourself standing at the top of a grand staircase that goes 
down in front of you ... a grand staircase covered with a thick  and luxurious red carpet... 
Concentrate on this and see it clearly in your mind. This is a strong marble staircase with twenty 
steps, covered with a luxurious, thick, soft, red carpet. Imagine yourself standing barefoot at the 
top of this staircase ... an d feel the softness and the warmth of the carpet under your feet ... it is 
so thick that your feet sink deeply into it. Feel it now under your feet, so soft and thick ... At the 
right side of the staircase there is an old, strong wooden banister going all the way down. You 
might want to reach out in your mind and touch the banister with your fingers. Feel how hard 
and solid the wood is, polished smooth by [CONTACT_57532] ... You also notice, as you stand there at 
the top of the staircase, that next to the banist er, the marble steps are not covered by [CONTACT_57533]. 
Just out of curiosity, you might want to put your foot out to the right for a moment, in your mind, 
and touch the marble there at the top of the staircase. Touch the marble on the side of the 
staircase wi th your foot. Feel how cool and hard and smooth it is ... so cool and hard and smooth 
under your foot... and notice how this feeling contrasts with the softness and the warmth of the 
carpet as you put your foot back on it.  
Now you will start to go down thi s staircase as I count each step. And as you go down the stairs, 
your body can automatically relax more and more all over with every number. And at the same 
time, you will probably find your mind quieting down into a comfortable focused and relaxed 
hypnoti c state more and more with every step you take down.... One, take the first step down, 
and feel the wonderful softness of the carpet under your feet as you stand there on the first step 
below ... As I continue to count, you will go down one step further wi th each number, and at the 
same time going deeper and deeper into the hypnotic state effortlessly and automatically. Deeper 
and deeper with every number. Not everyone sees things as clearly in their mind. And it is all 
right if you do not see the staircase  very clearly, you will still continue to go deeper and deeper 
into the hypnotic state with each number I count up to twenty. Whatever you experience is fine. 
But most likely, you can see the steps clearly in front of you going down, covered by [CONTACT_57534], 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62618] of deep comfort and relaxation ... twenty! You take the last step down, down 
onto th e carpeted floor. Let your whole body relax. Just allow your whole body to let go and 
relax completely ... Relax completely, and listen to my words.  
As you sit and relax and allow your whole body to be at ease, something positive and healthy 
and powerful i s beginning to happen inside you. Your intestines are becoming much less 
sensitive to pain and discomfort, as a healthy, soothing wave of change spreads deep inside your 
body. Perhaps you can pi[INVESTIGATOR_57469] ... maybe you can pi[INVESTIGATOR_57470] a wave of medication that spreads down from your stomach and all the way down 
through your intestines, coating your intestines with a strong protective coating ... a coating that 
protects you from discomfort inside. Maybe you can fe el a sense of healthy soothing comfort that 
spreads all through your intestines, making them less and less sensitive to irritation and pain. Or 
perhaps you pi[INVESTIGATOR_57471] a wave of light inside you... or 
maybe you even feel  it inside you like a wave of comfortable warmth spreading down from your 
stomach all through your intestines. But regardless of the way you experience it, the effect of it is 
like your intestines are being coated ... coated completely inside with a health y and strong 
protective coating ... a strong protective coating that makes them immune to irritation, and 
protects you from being upset inside. This strong protective coating lets only the pleasant 
sensations get through.  
These pleasant and healthy changes  are beginning to happen inside your body right now - and 
they will continue steadily after you wake up from this hypnotic state in a little while - these 
changes will improve your health and well -being more and more from this day, more and more 
every day.  You may - or you may not - notice these changes immediately, but they will come 
even when you do not pay any attention to them. Your stomach and intestines will feel less and 
less sensitive to discomfort, always less and less sensitive, and more and more comfortable, from 
one day to the next, beginning right now, today, until you are able to enjoy healthy comfort 
inside all the time. It will probably feel like this strong protective coating inside your intestines is 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62619] step up the stairs ... nineteen ... another step up the stairs ... 
eighteen ... <CONTINUE SLOW COUNT BACKWARD> ... three ... now you are close to 
waking up ... two ... yo u are about to wake up ... and one ... you wake up and open your eyes 
now. Wide awake! Fully awake.  
 
IBS Session Two  
Now please make yourself comfortable in your chair, resting your hands in your lap. Find a 
position that you can keep comfortably with minimum effort. Good. In a moment I am going to 
ask you once again to find a spot on the ceiling and just concentrate on it. But first, take a deep 
breath, a very deep breath, inhale ... and hold your breath ... hold it ... and exhale very slowly, 
and as you do, relax your body ... That's right. Now we are ready to begin.  
All right, now look at the spot in the ceiling ... ke ep looking at it, concentrate on it and listen to 
my words ... and at the same time relax your whole body ... let your body become limp and 
heavy ... and soon, as I count from one to three, your eyelids will become heavier and heavier, 
one ... they become heavier and heavier ... feel the heaviness in your eyelids, they become heavy 
as if they are made of lead as I continue the count ... keep relaxing your body, making it limp and 
heavy, and keep staring at the spot if you can ... but your eyelids may just b e getting too heavy 
for that ... sooo heavy ... and they may already be pushing down, pushing down and closing as I 
count to three, heavier and heavier with each number ... two ... relax your whole body, allowing 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62620] in your hands ... are they warm or cold? ... are they light or heavy?  
... are they tense or relax ed? ... and while you are paying such close attention to your hands ... 
allow all the muscles in your hands to relax ... feel all the muscles in your hands becoming softer 
and more relaxed... softer and more relaxed ... more and more relaxed ... soft and l oose and 
relaxed ... and also relax all the muscles in your forearms, allow all the muscles in your forearms 
to become soft and relaxed... relax every muscle in your forearms ... and upper arms, too, let all 
the tension leave your arms and hands completely , allow them to be limp, and heavy and loose, 
limp and loose ... heavy and limp. Let your arms rest, heavy and comfortably limp.  
Now focus your attention on your shoulders ... let the relaxation spread from your arms into your 
shoulders, making the muscles  of your shoulders loose and soft and relaxed. Your shoulders 
relax more and more ... And let the relaxation spread on further now, down your body from the 
shoulders. It may feel as if waves of relaxation are washing down your body ... wave after wave 
... with each breath you take you relax more and more ... wave after wave ... breath after breath ... 
you breathe freely ... and deeply ... freely and deeply ... let the waves of relaxation sweep down 
your whole body with each breath you take, all the way down  your body, relaxing your whole 
body more and more ... more and more ... relax your chest ... relax your stomach ... relax your 
buttocks and thighs ... allow the relaxation to spread all over your body ... down into your legs ... 
your legs become heavy and  limp ... heavy and limp ... and your feet relax also ... relax your feet 
more and more ... your right foot completely relaxed ... relax your right foot completely ... and 
now allow your left foot to also become totally relaxed ... the left foot also comfo rtably relaxed.  
Your whole body becomes comfortably relaxed. Your whole body continues to become more 
and more relaxed as I continue to talk.  
I am now going to count slowly from one to twenty. With each number in the count, you will 
find yourself going dow n deeper and deeper into a deep and comfortable and relaxing hypnotic 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62621] walk across the floor and stand in front of 
the door. Notice the door, pay close attention to it now... notice  what it is made of ... and notice 
the door handle, what kind of door handle it is. In a moment, when you open the door and step 
outside, you will step out onto a beach. A beautiful, sunny beach. Now in your mind, open the 
door and step outside. Step outsi de. You are now on the beach. You can see it and feel it now 
clearly. See the intense beautiful blue of the sky ... and the bright yellowish white sun shining 
high above you. There is not a single cloud in the sky ... Notice the shimmering of the sunlight 
on the water. You can feel the heat of the sun on your face and on your clothes. The sand is hot 
under your feet. Feel the hot dry sand under your feet and between your toes as you walk along 
the beach. And smell the air. Notice if you can smell anything? Perhaps it is a salty smell ... 
maybe you can smell seaweed? This is a pleasant place where everything looks so relaxed and 
happy. Look around you there on the beach. Maybe there are people there in the distance, further 
down the beach, playing happi[INVESTIGATOR_57472] h a ball or a Frisbee. This is a carefree and relaxed place. 
And listen now, you can probably hear the sounds of the beach if you concentrate. Notice what 
the sounds are. Maybe you can hear seagulls,... or maybe you can faintly hear the laughter of 
people playing in the distance ... or perhaps you can even hear the little sounds of the water 
lappi[INVESTIGATOR_57473]. Now walk down to the edge of the water. Walk on the hot beach sand 
down to the water. As you come down to the edge of the water ... you can f eel the sharp change 
from hot dry sand to wet, cool sand that sticks to your feet. Now step into the water just a little 
bit, until it reaches your ankles ... Feel the comfortable coolness of the clear water as tiny waves 
wash around your ankles ... Feel t he refreshing coolness of the water. And see how wonderfully 
clear and beautifully blue the water is. Look out over the water ... as far as you can see. There are 
fishing boats out there in the distance ... sitting lazily on the horizon ... See the boats o ut there in 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62622] more and more, leaving you more comfortable and healthy every day) . 
And now you can just let the whole beach scene dissolve gradually in your mind as I count 
slowly back from twenty to one. At the count of one you will open your eyes and you will be 
wide awake, in your normal state of wakefulness. You will be relaxed and  refreshed and not have 
any uncomfortable or unpleasant aftereffects. Twenty ... (CONTINUE SLOW COUNT 
BACKWARDS) ... three ... now you are close to waking up ... two ... you are about to wake up 
... and one ... wake up! Wide awake.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62623] lie there resting on your lap ... notice 
how they feel ... notice whether they are warm or cool ... light or heavy ... are they tense or 
relax ed?... And as you pay such close attention to your hands, let all the little muscles in the 
hands relax ... feel all the muscles in your hands becoming softer and more relaxed ... softer and 
more relaxed ... feel your fingers relaxing ... and your hands be coming heavy and more and more 
relaxed ... and now let that relaxation spread up into your forearms ... relax all the muscles in 
your forearms ... the forearms heavy and relaxed, and the upper arms, too, let all the tension 
leave your arms and hands and al low them to become limp ... limp and heavy ... heavy and limp.  
Let the relaxation spread further up your arms all the way up into your shoulders. Let the 
relaxation spread deep into your shoulders, relaxing all the muscles of your shoulders. Let these 
wave s of relaxation spread all through the muscles of your shoulders, replacing any tension with 
a soft and loose feeling of relaxation ... Your shoulders, soft and loose ... soft and loose and 
comfortable. Feel your shoulders becoming more and more limp and r elaxed ... more and more 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62624], there is 
large and comfortable -looking bed in the corner. See the big bed there in the corner? You can see 
it clearly now if you concentrate. Notice in particular the comforter on the bed. Notice the color 
and the old -fashioned pattern. Now walk over to this comfortable -looking bed. Walk up to the 
bed and stand in front of it. And as you do, you can probably fee l the warmth from the fire on 
your face -- because you are closer to the fireplace now. And you can just lie down on this 
comfortable bed now. Just lie down on this wonderfully soft bed and relax. Relax completely 
there in the warmth and comfort of the log  cabin, far up in the mountains, far away from all cares 
and concerns. Relax your whole body completely. Relax completely. Relaxing inside a warm, 
safe comfortable mountain cabin like this, nothing can disturb your comfort. The thick walls 
protect you from  all discomfort. Even though the storm is howling outside, you can barely notice 
it in the safe comfort of the log cabin.  
In the same way, you are protected more and more every day from pain and discomfort in your 
stomach and bowels. You are becoming less and less sensitive to discomfort or pain until nothing 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62625] any unpleasant or uncomfortable aftereffects. Twenty... 
<CONTIN UE SLOW COUNT BACKWARD>... three... now you are close to waking up... 
two... you are about to wake up, your eyes are opening, one... Wide awake.  
IBS Session Four  
Please make yourself comfortable in your chair. Find a comfortable position so that you can be  at 
ease without having to move around. Good. Let your body begin to relax, and like before, find a 
spot in the ceiling -- one spot to look at. Simply concentrate on the spot and as you listen to my 
words, and continue to relax your body ... Relax your bod y. I will now begin the count from one 
to three, and with each number your eyelids will most likely become heavier and heavier until 
they close. Listen to my words and keep looking at the spot. But as I count, just allow the 
heaviness to come into your eye lids, and when they feel like closing, just allow it to happen. One 
- relax your body, relax your muscles, allow your body to become heavy and limp, heavy and 
limp ... and as you do that, your eyelids also become heavier and heavier, heavier and heavier, 
and soon they will start pushing down, pushing down with more and more force as the heaviness 
in your eyelids grows and grows. Let your body become more and more relaxed and limp and 
heavy. Relaxed and limp and heavy. Simply allow this to begin to happen to  you in an automatic 
way. You do not have to help it along, and there is no need to resist it, either, all you have to do 
is to let go - let go and allow your body to become limp like a rag doll, heavy and limp and 
relaxed. And as this happens, as the comf ortable feeling of limp heaviness begins to grow 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62626] close your eyes completely... close your eyes completely and allow yourself to 
let go and drift into a relaxed hypnotic state. That's good. You are able to relax even more deeply 
now that your eyes are closed. Now I would like you to concentrat e your thoughts on your hands 
and listen to my words. As you focus your attention on your hands ... you can feel them more ... 
You may even be able to see your hands in your mind's eye ... and while you are paying close 
attention to the hands ... so aware of every sensation and feeling in them ... let the hands relax 
even further ... let all the muscles in the hands relax just by [CONTACT_57535] ... 
beginning in the fingers ... feel how all the muscles in your fingers becoming smoother and soft er 
and more relaxed ... more and more loose and relaxed ... as you think about them relaxing ... 
more and more relaxed ... allow this limp feeling of relaxation to take over in your fingers... your 
fingers relax more and more... and now, let the relaxation  spread up into your hands .... feel the 
hands grow heavier and heavier as the tension disappears and they become limp and comfortably 
relaxed ... it may feel, as we continue, almost like you are turning off switches in your nervous 
system, making each bod y part completely heavy and inactive, comfortably heavy and loose and 
relaxed, as you concentrate on that part. Now relax the muscles in your forearms ... relax every 
muscle in your forearms ... just turn the tension and activity in them off -in-your-mind, relax them 
completely, they are not needed at all right now ... they can let go and rest ... and relax the upper 
arms, too, let all the tension leave your arms and hands completely, allow them to be limp ... 
completely limp and loose ... your arms and hand s limp and loose and heavy. Allow the arms to 
just hang down from your shoulders, and let your hands just lie there still and heavy. It may feel 
almost like your arms and hands are made of heavy rubber, lying there limp and comfortably 
relaxed.  
Now turn your attention to your shoulders ... let the comfortable relaxation begin to spread into 
your shoulders, transforming the muscles in your shoulders into a soft and relaxed mass ... feel 
the muscles in your shoulders becoming soft and smooth, so so ft and loose, as the relaxation 
spreads all over the shoulder muscles from the arms ... relax your shoulders more and more ... 
relieving you of any tension and stiffness. Your shoulders settle down into this soft state of 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62627] 
evaporates, you can breathe more easily ... freely and deeply... Relax the muscles in your back ... 
let your whole back share in this feeling of soft comfort taking over ... Your whole back more at 
ease ... loose and relaxed. Allow the relaxation to flow on down your body ... down into your 
thighs ... the muscles of your thighs become soft and loose, and l et the relaxation spread on down 
your legs ... your legs become heavy ... heavy and limp ... heavy and limp .... All the muscles in 
your legs becoming soft and loose, making the legs feel heavier and heavier ... and allow your 
feet to relax, also ... relax  your feet more and more ... your right foot completely relaxed ... every 
muscle soft and loose ... relax your right foot completely ... and now allow your left foot to also 
become totally relaxed ... soft and loose and relaxed.  
Your whole body becomes com fortably relaxed. Your whole body continues to become more 
and more relaxed, comfortably warm and heavy and relaxed, your body continues to become 
even more relaxed all over as we continue ...  
Now I would like you to imagine something and see it clearly in  your mind. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_57474], imagine yourself standing in front of an open elevator door. As you stand 
there, you can see the inside of the elevator. This is a large and luxurious elevator. See the 
beautiful wood­ paneled walls. This is an elevator like they have in the most expensive and 
luxurious hotels. There is a comfortable -looking padded bench in the elevator. A bench to sit on. 
In your mind, go inside the elevator and sit down on the bench. Go inside and sit down on the 
bench. I f you look around you, as you sit there in this luxurious elevator you can see the light 
panel on the wall with the numbers from one to twenty. Notice that the number one is lit up at 
the moment. I am now going to begin to count slowly from one to twenty i n a moment. 
Concentrate your attention on the number panel. I will count slowly from one to twenty in a 
moment, and with each number in the count from two to twenty the corresponding number will 
light up on the elevator wall panel and you will find yoursel f going down, down deeper and 
deeper, automatically and effortlessly, going down into a deep and comfortable and relaxing 
hypnotic state. Not everybody pi[INVESTIGATOR_57475], and even if you do not see 
this very clearly, that is all righ t. You will still go deeper and deeper with every number in the 
count. But most likely, you can see the light panel in front of you now. Notice the color, what it 
is made of, and so on. Concentrate on this. One... the elevator door is closing, it closes an d you 
are now ready to sink safely and comfortably down into a deep hypnotic sleep. . . two, you can 
feel yourself beginning to move gently down in the elevator, down deeper into the hypnotic state 
as you relax more and more... your body relaxes even more. .. and will become even more relaxed 
with every number in the count... three ... see the lights changing on the elevator light board ... 
lighting up one number after another as you go down, sink gently deeper and deeper down into 
the hypnotic state... four ... five... you go deeper into the hypnotic state with each number and 
relax more and more in an automatic way... six... see the numbered lights changing as you go 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62628] and rough. You can turn around now  and enjoy the relaxed comfort of nature in 
bloom in this quiet and secluded garden. The air smells so fresh and wonderful in this garden, 
blended with the fragrance of exotic flowers. Smell the fresh and fragrant air... And look in front 
of you. There is a path in front of you, made of smooth, gray stone slabs that curves across the 
soft green grass of the lawn, weaving between the trees and bushes. See the path there in front of 
you. Now walk down the path; you can feel the hard and smooth stone slabs und er your feet. As 
you walk lazily down the path between the bushes and trees, you can see a variety of colorful 
plants on both sides... red, white, blue, and yellow plants. The colors are so bright and vivid, set 
against the bright green of the grass, and t he slightly darker green leaves of the bushes. If you 
stop for a moment there on the path, you can perhaps reach out and touch the leaves of the bush 
there right next to you to your left. Reach out in your mind with your hand and touch the leaves. 
Feel the  leaves. Feel how the leaves have a slightly rubbery texture, and how they are smoother 
on the upper surface and rougher on the underside ... Now you can just let go of the leaves again, 
and continue down the path. Continue on, wandering further down the p ath. You may not have 
noticed it, but now when you pay attention to it, you can feel the warmth of the sun on your face. 
Feel how comfortably warm your face is from the rays of the sun high in the sky. And notice 
how, as you walk on further along the path,  your face is sometimes a little cooler for a moment 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62629] experienced bowel discomfort or pain before, you will probably 
be surprised to realize that you only feel pleasant warm, soothing sensations. Gradually it will 
begin to feel mo re and more like nothing can upset or irritate your intestines anymore. As you 
carry this peaceful warm feeling with you deep inside your body, you become more comfortable 
and healthy every day. More comfortable and healthy every day, undisturbed and peace ful inside 
like this beautiful secluded garden.  
Now continue walking through the garden, down the path, between the trees and the bushes, 
enjoying the colorful plants... <LONGER PAUSE>... As you go on further, and come around a 
bend in the path, you can su ddenly see the brick wall and the open elevator there further up the 
path in front of you again. You have gone a whole circle on the path, the path weaves through 
the garden in a big circle. Just stand there for a moment on the path, relax and absorb the 
tranquility of this beautiful garden. In a moment, when you step into the elevator again, and I 
begin to count back from twenty to one, you can carry this peaceful feeling of relaxation with 
you.... allowing the body to keep that comfortable healthy feeling  even after you are fully awake.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62630] any uncomfortable or unpleasant aftereffects.  
See the elevator once again in front of you... and walk up to the open elevator door. Step inside 
the elevator and sit down on the bench. You can see the elevator door closing now. Twenty... 
Now the elevator starts moving, beginning to carry you back to the waking  state. At the count of 
one you will be awake. Nineteen... <CONTINUE SLOW COUNT BACKWARD>... three... now 
you are closer to waking up... two... now you are about to wake up... one now you wake up and 
open your eyes. Wide awake.  
IBS Session Five  
Please make  yourself as comfortable as you can in your chair, finding a position that you can 
keep comfortably with minimum effort. Good. Look up at the spot in the ceiling and let your 
body begin to relax. Just concentrate on the spot and listen to my words, and at the same time 
relax your body. I will now begin the count once again from one to three, like always before, and 
with each number your eyelids will probably become heavier and heavier until they close. All 
you have to do is to listen to my words, relax your  body and keep looking at the spot. One ... 
relax your body, allow it to become heavy and limp, heavy and limp, ... your muscles all over 
your body becoming soft and loose, and as you relax, your eyelids also begin to feel heavier and 
heavier, heavier and heavier, and soon they will start pushing down, pushing down with more 
and more force as the heaviness in your eyelids grows and grows. Let your body become more 
and more relaxed and limp and heavy. Relaxed and limp and heavy. Simply allow this to begin 
to happen to you in an automatic way, all by [CONTACT_5071]. Just let go, let go and allow your body to 
become limp like a rag doll, heavy and limp and relaxed. And as this happens, your eyelids will 
feel more and more heavy until they close all by [CONTACT_1029], all b y themselves and you will drift 
comfortably into a deep hypnotic state. Two Now take a deep breath, a very deep breath, inhale 
... and hold ... hold your breath ... and exhale very slowly, and as you do, feel the tension leave 
the body so it becomes even m ore relaxed ... even more relaxed and heavy. Your eyes become 
more and more tired and your eyelids become heavier, still heavier. Feel the heaviness in your 
eyelids growing more and more, as if they are weighted and the weights are becoming heavier 
and hea vier, forcing the eyelids down. Down, down, Three, your eyelids close all by [CONTACT_1029], 
all by [CONTACT_1029]. Closing ... closing, heavier and heavier. Your eyes are closing completely, 
closing completely now.  
  Even if your eyes have not closed completely y et, that is all right. It does not matter. And 
there is no need to strain your eyes more. You can just close your eyes now ... close your eyes 
and allow yourself to let go and drift into a relaxed hypnotic state. Let yourself sink into a 
comfortable and re stful state of hypnosis.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62631]. Your 
intestines can keep this healthy and comfortable feeling even after you wake up in a little while 
and go about your business: Your intestines can continue to stay calm and comfortable, far 
removed from all discomfort and immune to all pain ... as distant from any discomfort and 
disturbance as you feel when you are far away out in nature: Healthy and undisturbed. After you 
wake up from this state in a little while, it will probably feel more and  more like no troubles can 
get to you inside, and that all discomfort is disappearing from your life more and more, day by 
[CONTACT_4475]. Bowel sensations that would have been painful before are no longer uncomfortable at all, 
you will hardly notice them, and they w ill not bother you any more than you are bothered by [CONTACT_57536].  
In a moment, I am going to start counting backward from twenty to one. For most of the count 
you will be  in the deeply relaxed state you are in now. As I begin to count down, you can just let 
the feeling of being in the boat gradually dissolve from your mind, and when I get down to one 
in the count, you will be wide awake with your eyes open, in your normal state of wakefulness. 
You will feel relaxed and refreshed, and you will not have any negative or uncomfortable 
aftereffects. Twenty... <CONTINUE SLOW COUNT BACKWARD>... three... you are now 
close to waking up... two... you are now almost awake... one now y ou wake up and open your 
eyes. Wide awake.  
IBS Session Six  
Please make yourself as comfortable as you can in your chair. Just find an easy position to relax 
in, a position that you can keep without having to move around too much. Good. Let your body 
relax,  and look up at the spot in the ceiling. Just concentrate on the spot and listen to my words, 
and at the same time relax your body. I will now begin the count once again from one to three, 
and as I do that, a heavy feeling will probably come into your eyel ids, and the eyelids will 
become heavier and heavier with each number until they sink down and you close your eyes. 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62632] allow yourself to turn within and enjoy the drowsy and cozy 
relaxation and mental calmness that you feel coming over you more and more with each 
number... seven.... feel the cloud carrying you down deeper ... eight … you may feel the cloud 
rocking you v ery gently and in a soothing way as it carries you down ... nine, and you may also 
feel how the cloud begins to turn slowly around as you go deeper ... spi[INVESTIGATOR_57476] a feather or a leaf falling very slowly through the ai r... rocking gently... 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_57477] ... as the cloud carries you safely into an even more profound state of hypnosis 
and relaxation... ten ... you are drifting down... drifting down, sinking safely and comfortably 
down into a carefree and comfortable st ate of hypnosis, eleven... twelve... thirteen... fourteen... 
you go still deeper... fifteen... sixteen ... seventeen... deeper and deeper ... eighteen... and your 
body and mind relax completely... relax completely... nineteen... twenty. You are now in a de ep 
and comfortable state of hypnotic relaxation. Just continue to enjoy the relaxation. Just continue 
to relax more and more.  
And as you continue to relax like that, allow yourself to slowly drift away from the here and 
now. Let yourself be carried away in your mind to a place of peace and serenity. Let your mind 
drift effortlessly toward this beautiful natural place of peace and  comfort. And you can see it 
taking shape in your mind now. You are standing in a small forest clearing on a grassy bank by a 
beautiful pond, on a wonderful sunny day. You are far out in nature, far away from everything 
and everybody. You are standing bare foot on the soft grassy bank. The grass feels a little ticklish 
against your feet, but in a comfortable way. The temperature is just right to be perfectly 
comfortable. You can see the sunlight shimmering brightly on the surface of the still pond ... and 
in the background you can hear the cheerful and relaxed sound of water running into the pond in 
a small waterfall, there to your right. Lie down in the soft grass on your back, on the bank of the 
pond, and look up into the bright blue sky. You can see small puffy clouds drifting slowly 
overhead, and below them, but still far up in the sky, you can see a bird, a falcon or an eagle, 
soaring high in the sky above you. For a moment, perhaps you can follow this graceful bird with 
your eyes ... as it soars effortle ssly ... floating on the gentle breeze high above you, circling lazily 
... until it drifts out of sight ... As you lie there comfortably in the grass on the soft bank of the 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62633] let yourself enjoy this soothing and relaxing feeling 
of comfortable relaxation spreading inside you, making your feel more and more healthy, until I 
begin  to talk to you again. Let the deep relaxation continue to fill you inside until I start talking 
again in a couple of minutes <SILENCE FOR TWO MINUTES>.  
In a moment, I am going to start counting slowly back from twenty to one. During most of the 
count, you  will still be in the deeply relaxed you are in. At the count of one, you will wake up 
and be fully awake, with your eyes open, in your normal waking state. After you wake up, you 
can allow the deep soothing feeling of comfort to stay with you inside your body. Your body will 
feel healthier inside in the coming days and weeks, like nothing can interfere with its feeling of 
healthy comfort. You will probably notice after your session today, that your intestines are more 
and more functioning with a healthy, s teady comfortable rhythm that does not cause you 
problems, a healthy natural rhythm that does not disturb your comfort... You are always 
becoming more and more comfortable inside in all situations.  
After you wake up, you will feel fine and not have any unp leasant after -effects. You will feel 
relaxed and refreshed and comfortable inside after you wake up. Ready: Twenty ... nineteen... 
<CONTINUE SLOW COUNT BACKWARD>... three... now you are closer to waking up... 
two... now you are about to wake up ... one now  you wake up and open your eyes. Fully awake. 
Wide awake.  
IBS Session Seven  
Please make yourself comfortable. Find a comfortable and relaxed position. And look up, like 
before, and find a spot on the ceiling to concentrate on. Let your body begin to relax. .. Relax 
your body. Relax all the muscles of your body. Allow it to become comfortably heavy and 
limp... Limp and loose. As I continue, and I count from one to three like always, your eyelids 
will gradually begin to feel heavier and will want to close, and  when you feel that heaviness, you 
can just allow your eyelids to sink down and let your eyes close by [CONTACT_57537] V 6.[ADDRESS_62634] to see in your mind's eye... a comfortable place you know. Allow the pi[INVESTIGATOR_57478]. It may take a few moments for 
this to come into focus. And it doesn't matter what place you see, any place which is or has been 
very comfortable to you is fine. See this place in your mind. Imagine yourself in this place, in a 
way which is comfor table to you. Feel yourself in this place, and allow the comfort and 
relaxation of this place to fill you... As you pi[INVESTIGATOR_57479], it gradually 
becomes more and more vivid and clear to you. Notice the details of this place. See it cl early. 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62635] any uncomfortable after -effects. Ready now: Twenty... nineteen... 
<CONTINUE SLOW COUNT BACKWARD>... three... now you are closer to waking up... 
two... now you are about to wake up... one now you wake up and o pen your eyes. Fully awake. 
Wide awake.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62636] let your whole body continue to relax 
more and more deeply until I start talking agai n. Let your whole body sink deeper down into this 
carefree state of comfort, more and more relaxed all over until I start speaking to you again in a 
minute.  
<ONE MINUTE PAUSE>  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62637] any negative or uncomfortable after -
effects from this exercise... Ready now ... five . .. four... three ... two ... now you are closer to 
waking up ... and one, open your eyes ... wide awake! Fully awake.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 103 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
APPENDIX D MUSCLE RELAXATION SCRIPTS  
Session One  
Now let’s begin. Close your eyes and we will start your treatment.”  
The first exercise I want you to do is to tense the muscles in your RIGHT LOWER ARM and 
RIGHT HAND by [CONTACT_7328] a fist and holding it until I tell you to release. Make a fist now, and 
clench it tightly and tense your RIGHT LOWER ARM at the same time and hold the tension in 
those muscles (narrator silent count 5 seconds), … and now release the tension in your muscles. 
As you tense your muscles study the tension in the back of your hand and in y our right lower 
arm – notice what the tension feels like. Now I want you to repeat that tensing in your right fist 
and right lower arm, until I tell you to release. BEGIN and keep them tense … and notice what 
the tension feels like (narrator silent count f or 5 seconds), and now release the tension in your 
muscles.  
Notice the difference between the tension and the 
relaxation.…………………………………………………………………………………………
……………  
What we are doing is teaching your brain to distinguish better and better between a state of 
tension and relaxation in different muscle groups by [CONTACT_57538], so that the brain becomes more effective at releasing all tension from those muscles.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your LEFT LOWER ARM and L EFT HAND by [CONTACT_7328] 
a fist and holding it until I tell you to release. BEGIN. Study the tensions in the back of your 
hand and in your left lower arm, Notice what those tensions feel like. (narrator silent count for 5 
seconds) and now release the muscles. No tice the difference in your muscles between the tension 
and the relaxation. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release. BEGIN (narrator 
silent count for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. And feel how the relaxed muscles feel 
differen t than when you were keepi[INVESTIGATOR_57480].  
Now this time I want you to tense BOTH FOREARMS AND BOTH HANDS at the same time 
and hold the tension steady until I tell you to release it. BEGIN Study the tensions in the back of 
your hands and in your lower arms, Notice what the tensions feel like (narrator silent count 5 
seconds) and now release the muscles. Notice the difference between the tension and the 
relaxation. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 
for 5 sec onds), and now release your muscles … paying close attention to what the relaxation 
feels like.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your RIGHT UPPER ARM by [CONTACT_57539] I tell you to 
release. BEGIN Study the tensions in the muscles of your arm study those te nsions (narrator 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 104 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
silent count 5 seconds) and then release the muscles. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell 
you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your LEFT UPPER ARM by [CONTACT_57540] I tell you to release. BEGIN Study 
the tensions in the muscles of your arm, study those tensions (narra tor silent count 5 seconds) 
and now release the muscles. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release your muscles.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in BOTH UPPER ARMS at the same time BEGIN 
Study the tensions in in your upper arms, study those tensions (narrator silent count 5 seconds) 
and then release the muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release 
BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now rel ease your muscles. Notice the difference 
between the tension and the relaxation.  
As you work on your muscles, notice how you can feel your muscles becoming loose and soft 
and relaxed.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your RIGHT LOWER LEG, particul arly in your calf and 
hold it until I tell you to release, BEGIN study the tensions in your right lower leg (narrator silent 
count 5 seconds), now release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you 
to release BEGIN (narrator silen t count 5 seconds), now release your muscles.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your LEFT LOWER LEG, particularly in your calf and 
hold it until I tell you to release, BEGIN study the tensions in your left lower leg (narrator silent 
count 5 seconds) , now release your muscles. Remember, When tensing your muscles, and then 
relaxing them, study the difference in feeling between the tension and the relaxation. Repeat this 
one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now 
release your muscles. muscles.  
This time I want you to tense BOTH LOWER LEGS at the same time and hold it until I tell you 
release, BEGIN study the tensions in your lower legs (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now 
release your muscles. Rep eat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release your muscles.  
You can feel the comfortable sensation of your muscles relaxing and as the tension in your 
muscles resolves and they becom e soft and loose.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your THIGHS by [CONTACT_57541] I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now 
release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds).  
Now I want you to tense the muscles in your ABDOMINAL REGION by [CONTACT_57542] I tell you to release BEGIN (na rrator 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 105 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
silent count 5 seconds), now release abdominal muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it 
until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds).  
Now, feel your muscles as they become loose and relaxed.  
Next I want you to tense the  muscles in your CHEST by [CONTACT_57543] a deep breath and holding it 
BEGIN. Hold your breath (narrator silent count 5 seconds) now let it out slowly. And now, let 
your breathing be regular and relaxed.. Repeat this one more time when I tell you to begin, 
takin g a deep breath and holding it until I tell you to release it BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 
seconds), and now breathe out … and then letting your breathing be regular and relaxed.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your SHOULDERS and UPPER BACK by [CONTACT_57544] I tell you to release 
BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. Repeat this one more 
time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator  silent count 5 seconds), and now 
release. And feel the sensation of relaxation that comes into the shoulders and upper back and 
how it is different than the tension you felt before.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in the BACK OF YOUR NECK by [CONTACT_57545], and keep those muscles tense until I tell you to 
release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release. Repeat this one more time and 
hold the tension steady until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and 
now release.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles AROUND YOUR MOUTH by [CONTACT_57546]. Hold the 
tension until I tel l you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release. Repeat 
this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), 
and now release.  
By [CONTACT_57547], the various muscles that you have been working on sho uld be feeling more loose and 
relaxed than before, and you can let them stay that way … comfortably soft and loose.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in the region around your EYES by [CONTACT_57548]. Notice what the tension f eels like around your eyes and in your upper face, 
study those tensions and hold the tension until I tell you to release (narrator silent count 5 
seconds) now release. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent  count 5 seconds), and now release.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your LOWER FOREHEAD by [CONTACT_57549]. Frown and knit your eyebrows together. BEGIN Pay close 
attention to the tension around your eyes and in you r lower forehead study those tensions until I 
tell you to release (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release. Repeat this one more time and 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 106 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
hold the tension steady until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and 
now release.  
his time I want you to tense the muscles in your UPPER FOREHEAD by [CONTACT_57550]. Lift your eyebrows up high, Wrinkling your forehead, and 
pay close attention to the tension in your upper forehead and hold the tens ion until I tell you to 
release, BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds) and now relax the muscles, noticing how 
different they feel as they relax. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release 
BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), a nd now release.  
Now I want you to tense all of the muscles in your body and hold the tension steady until I tell 
you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now relax all the muscles in your body 
together. Just let them release all the tension and become soft and relaxed. Notice how your body 
feels different now that it lets go of all the tension, and all the muscles become soft and loose. I 
am going to help you achieve a deeper state of muscle relaxation now by [CONTACT_57551] 1 to 5. 
As I count you can let muscles all over your body becoming even more soft and loose.  
1…………………your muscles are feeling more soft and relaxed, 
…………………..2………………..your muscles are releasing any remaining tension 
…………………………………………………… 3……………….4……………… 
……………………5.  
When you are ready you can get yourself back into a normal state. Remember, only through 
practice can your brain become more aware of your muscles, how they respond to tension and 
how you can relax them. Training your muscles to respond differently is like any trai ning. 
Practicing consistently is the key.   
Session Two  
Now let’s begin. Close your eyes and we will start your treatment.  
The first exercise I want you to do is to tense the muscles in your RIGHT LOWER LEG, 
particularly in your calf and hold it until I tell you to release, BEGIN study the tensions in your 
right lower leg (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release your mus cles. Repeat this one more 
time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release 
your muscles.  
What we are doing is teaching your brain to distinguish better and better between a state of 
tension and relaxation in different muscle groups by [CONTACT_57538], so that the brain becomes more effective at releasing all tension from those muscles.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your LEFT LOWER LEG, particularly in your calf  and 
hold it until I tell you to release, BEGIN study the tensions in your left lower leg (narrator silent 
count 5 seconds), now release your muscles. Remember, When tensing your muscles, and then 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 107 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
relaxing them, study the difference in feeling between the tension and the relaxation. Repeat this 
one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now 
release your muscles.  
This time I want you to tense BOTH LOWER LEGS at the same time and hold it until I tell you 
release, BEGIN study the tensions in your lower legs (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now 
release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release your muscles.  
As you work on your muscles, notice how you can feel your muscles becoming loose and soft 
and relaxed.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your THIGHS by [CONTACT_57541] I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now 
release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds).  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your RIGHT LOWER ARM and RIGHT HAND by 
[CONTACT_7328] a fist and h olding it until I tell you to release. Make a fist now, and clench it tightly and 
tense your RIGHT LOWER ARM at the same time and hold the tension in those muscles 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), … and now release the tension in your muscles. As you ten se 
your muscles study the tension in the back of your hand and in your right lower arm – notice 
what the tension feels like. Now I want you to repeat that tensing in your right fist and right 
lower arm, until I tell you to release. BEGIN and keep them tens e … and notice what the tension 
feels like (narrator silent count for 5 seconds), and now release the tension in your muscles.  
Notice the difference between the tension and the 
relaxation.…………………………………………………………………………………………
………………..  
Next I want you to tense  the muscles in your LEFT LOWER ARM and LEFT HAND by [CONTACT_7328] 
a fist and holding it until I tell you to release. BEGIN. Study the tensions in the back of your 
hand and in your left lower arm, Notice what those tensions feel like. (narrator silent count for 5  
seconds) and now release the muscles. Notice the difference in your muscles between the tension 
and the relaxation. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release. BEGIN (narrator 
silent count for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. And f eel how the relaxed muscles feel 
different than when you were keepi[INVESTIGATOR_57480].  
Now this time I want you to tense BOTH FOREARMS AND BOTH HANDS at the same time 
and hold the tension steady until I tell you to release it. BEGIN Study the tensions in the ba ck of 
your hands and in your lower arms, Notice what the tensions feel like (narrator silent count 5 
seconds) and now release the muscles. Notice the difference between the tension and the 
relaxation. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to relea se BEGIN (narrator silent count 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 108 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles … paying close attention to what the relaxation 
feels like.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your RIGHT UPPER ARM by [CONTACT_57539] I tell you to 
release. BEGIN Study the tensions in the muscles of your arm study those te nsions (narrator 
silent count 5 seconds) and then release the muscles. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell 
you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your L EFT UPPER ARM by [CONTACT_57540] I tell you to release. BEGIN Study 
the tensions in the muscles of your arm, study those tensions (narrator silent count 5 seconds) 
and now release the mus cles. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release your muscles.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in BOTH UPPER ARMS at the same time BEGIN 
Study the tensions in in your upper arms , study those tensions (narrator silent count 5 seconds) 
and then release the muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release 
BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. Notice the difference 
between th e tension and the relaxation.  
You can feel the comfortable sensation of your muscles relaxing and as the tension in your 
muscles resolves and they become soft and loose.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in the BACK OF YOUR NECK by [CONTACT_57552], and keep those muscles tense until I tell you to 
release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release. Repeat th is one more time and 
hold the tension steady until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and 
now release.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your SHOULDERS and UPPER BACK by [CONTACT_57553] I tell you to release 
BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. Repeat this one more 
time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now 
release. And fee l the sensation of relaxation that comes into the shoulders and upper back and 
how it is different than the tension you felt before.  
Now, feel your muscles as they become loose and relaxed.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your CHEST by [CONTACT_57543] a deep breath and holding it 
BEGIN. Hold your breath (narrator silent count 5 seconds) now let it out slowly. And now, let 
your breathing be regular and relaxed.. Repeat this one more time when I tell you to begin, 
taking a deep breath and holding it until I  tell you to release it BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 
seconds), and now breathe out … and then letting your breathing be regular and relaxed.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 109 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
Now I want you to tense the muscles in your ABDOMINAL REGION by [CONTACT_57554] c ausing pain and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator 
silent count 5 seconds), now release abdominal muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it 
until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds).  
Next I want you to tense  the muscles AROUND YOUR MOUTH by [CONTACT_57546]. Hold the 
tension until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release. Repeat 
this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), 
and now release.  
By [CONTACT_57547], the various muscles that you have been working on should be feeling more loose and 
relaxed than before, and you can let them stay that  way … comfortably soft and loose.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in the region around your EYES by [CONTACT_57548]. Notice what the tension feels like around your eyes and in your upper face, 
study those tensions and hold the tension until I tell you to release (narrator silent count 5 
seconds) now release. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in  your LOWER FOREHEAD by [CONTACT_57549]. Frown and knit your eyebrows together. BEGIN Pay close 
attention to the tension around your eyes and in your lower forehead study those tensions until I 
tell you to release (narrator sile nt count 5 seconds), now release. Repeat this one more time and 
hold the tension steady until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and 
now release.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your UPPER FOREHEAD by [CONTACT_57555]. Lift your eyebrows up high, Wrinkling your 
forehead, and pay close attention to the tension in your upper forehead and hold the tension until 
I tell you to release, BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds) and now  relax the muscles, noticing 
how different they feel as they relax. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to 
release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release.  
Now I want you to tense all of the muscles in your body and hold  the tension steady until I tell 
you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now relax all the muscles in your body 
together. Just let them release all the tension and become soft and relaxed. Notice how your body 
feels different now that it le ts go of all the tension, and all the muscles become soft and loose. I 
am going to help you achieve a deeper state of muscle relaxation now by [CONTACT_57551] 1 to 5. 
As I count you can let muscles all over your body becoming even more soft and loose.  
1………… ………your muscles are feeling more soft and relaxed, 
…………………..2………………..your muscles are releasing any remaining tension 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 110 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
…………………………………………………… 3……………….4……………… 
……………………5.  
When you are ready you can get yourself back into a normal state. Remember, only through 
practice can your brain become more aware of your muscles, how they respond to tension and 
how you can relax them. Training your muscles to respond differently is like any training. 
Practicing consistently is the key.  
Session Three  
Now let’s begin. Close y our eyes and we will start your treatment.  
The first exercise I want you to do is to tense the muscles AROUND YOUR MOUTH by 
[CONTACT_57556]. Hold the tension unt il I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 
seconds), now release. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release.  
What we are doing is teaching your brain to distinguish better and better between a state of 
tension and relaxation in different muscle groups by [CONTACT_57538], so that the brain becomes more effective at releasing al l tension from those muscles. 
muscles.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in the region around your EYES by [CONTACT_57548]. Notice what the tension feels like around your eyes and in your upper face, 
study those tensions and ho ld the tension until I tell you to release (narrator silent count 5 
seconds) now release. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your LOWER FOREHEAD by [CONTACT_57549]. Frown and knit your eyebrows together. BEGIN Pay close 
attention to the tension around your eyes and in your lower forehead study those tensions until I 
tell you to release (narrator si lent count 5 seconds), now release. Repeat this one more time and 
hold the tension steady until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and 
now release.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your UPPER FOREHEAD by [CONTACT_57557] r 
eyebrows upward and wrinkling your forehead. Lift your eyebrows up high, Wrinkling your 
forehead, and pay close attention to the tension in your upper forehead and hold the tension until 
I tell you to release, BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds) and now relax the muscles, noticing 
how different they feel as they relax. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to 
release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release.  
 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 111 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
Now I want you to tense the muscles in your ABDOMINAL REGION  by [CONTACT_57542] I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator 
silent count 5 seconds), now release abdominal muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it 
until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrat or silent count 5 seconds). Release your muscles.  
As you work on your muscles, notice how you can feel your muscles becoming loose and soft 
and relaxed.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your CHEST by [CONTACT_57543] a deep breath and holding it 
BEGIN. H old your breath (narrator silent count 5 seconds) now let it out slowly. And now, let 
your breathing be regular and relaxed.. Repeat this one more time when I tell you to begin, 
taking a deep breath and holding it until I tell you to release it BEGIN (narr ator silent count 5 
seconds), and now breathe out … and then letting your breathing be regular and relaxed.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your SHOULDERS and UPPER BACK by [CONTACT_57558] I tell you to release 
BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. Repeat this one more 
time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now 
release. And feel the sensation of rela xation that comes into the shoulders and upper back and 
how it is different than the tension you felt before.  
You can feel the comfortable sensation of your muscles relaxing and as the tension in your 
muscles resolves and they become soft and loose.  
Next I  want you to tense the muscles in the BACK OF YOUR NECK by [CONTACT_57552], and keep those muscles tense until I tell you to 
release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release. Repeat this one  more time and 
hold the tension steady until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and 
now release.release your muscles.  
 to tense the muscles in your RIGHT LOWER ARM and RIGHT HAND by [CONTACT_7328] a fist and 
holding it until I tell you to release. Make a fist now, and clench it tightly and tense your RIGHT 
LOWER ARM at the same time and hold the tension in those muscles (narrator silent count 5 
seconds), … and now release the tension in your muscles. As you tense your muscles study the 
tension in the back of your hand and in your right lower arm – notice what the tension feels like. 
Now I want you to repeat that tensing in your right fist and right lower arm, until I tell you to 
release. BEGIN and keep them tense … and notice what the ten sion feels like (narrator silent 
count for 5 seconds), and now release the tension in your muscles.  
Notice the difference between the tension and the 
relaxation.…………………………………………………………………………………………
…………  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62638] and holding it until I tell you to release. BEGIN. Study the tensions in the back of your 
hand and in your left lower arm, Notice what those tensions feel like. (narrator silent count for 5 
seconds) and now release the mu scles. Notice the difference in your muscles between the tension 
and the relaxation. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release. BEGIN (narrator 
silent count for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. And feel how the relaxed muscles feel  
different than when you were keepi[INVESTIGATOR_57480].  
Now this time I want you to tense BOTH FOREARMS AND BOTH HANDS at the same time 
and hold the tension steady until I tell you to release it. BEGIN Study the tensions in the back of 
your hands and in your low er arms, Notice what the tensions feel like (narrator silent count 5 
seconds) and now release the muscles. Notice the difference between the tension and the 
relaxation. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 
for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles … paying close attention to what the relaxation 
feels like.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your RIGHT UPPER ARM by [CONTACT_57539] I tell you to 
release. BEGIN Study the tensions in the muscles of your arm study those te nsions (narrator 
silent count 5 seconds) and then release the muscles. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell 
you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your L EFT UPPER ARM by [CONTACT_57540] I tell you to release. BEGIN Study 
the tensions in the muscles of your arm, study those tensions (narrator silent count 5 seconds) 
and now release the mus cles. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release your muscles.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in BOTH UPPER ARMS at the same time BEGIN 
Study the tensions in in your upper arms , study those tensions (narrator silent count 5 seconds) 
and then release the muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release 
BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. Notice the difference 
between th e tension and the relaxation.  
Now, feel your muscles as they become loose and relaxed.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your RIGHT LOWER LEG, particularly in your calf and 
hold it until I tell you to release, BEGIN study the tensions in your right lower leg (narrator silent 
count 5 seconds), now release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you 
to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release your muscles.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your LEFT L OWER LEG, particularly in your calf and 
hold it until I tell you to release, BEGIN study the tensions in your left lower leg (narrator silent 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 113 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
count 5 seconds), now release your muscles. Remember, When tensing your muscles, and then 
relaxing them, study the  difference in feeling between the tension and the relaxation. Repeat this 
one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now  
release your muscles.  
By [CONTACT_57547], the various muscles that you have been working on s hould be feeling more loose and 
relaxed than before, and you can let them stay that way … comfortably soft and loose.  
This time I want you to tense BOTH LOWER LEGS at the same time and hold it until I tell you 
release, BEGIN study the tensions in your lower legs (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now 
release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell  you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your THIGHS by [CONTACT_57541] I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds ), now 
release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds).  
Now I want you to tense all of the muscles in your body and hold the tension steady until I tell 
you to release BEGIN ( narrator silent count 5 seconds), now relax all the muscles in your body 
together. Just let them release all the tension and become soft and relaxed. Notice how your body 
feels different now that it lets go of all the tension, and all the muscles become so ft and loose. I 
am going to help you achieve a deeper state of muscle relaxation now by [CONTACT_57551] 1 to 5. 
As I count you can let muscles all over your body becoming even more soft and loose.  
1…………………your muscles are feeling more soft and relaxed, 
………… ………..2………………..your muscles are releasing any remaining tension 
…………………………………………………… 3……………….4……………… 
……………………5.  
When you are ready you can get yourself back into a normal state. Remember, only through 
practice can your brain become more aware of your muscl es, how they respond to tension and 
how you can relax them. Training your muscles to respond differently is like any training. 
Practicing consistently is the key.  
Session Four  
Now let’s begin. Close your eyes and we will start your treatment.”  
The first ex ercise I want you to do is to tense the muscles in your ABDOMINAL REGION by 
[CONTACT_57559] I tell you to 
release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release abdominal muscles. Repeat this 
one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds).  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.[ADDRESS_62639] by [CONTACT_57543] a deep breath and holding it 
BEGIN. Hold your breath (narrator silent count 5 seconds) now let it out slowly. And now, let 
your breathing be regular and relaxed.. Repeat this one more time when I tell you to begin, 
taking a deep breath and holding it until I tell you to release it BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 
second s), and now breathe out … and then letting your breathing be regular and relaxed.  
As you work on your muscles, notice how you can feel your muscles becoming loose and soft 
and relaxed.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your SHOULDERS and UPPER BACK b y hunching 
your shoulders up towards your ears and holding them tense like that until I tell you to release 
BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. Repeat this one more 
time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narr ator silent count 5 seconds), and now 
release. And feel the sensation of relaxation that comes into the shoulders and upper back and 
how it is different than the tension you felt before.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in the BACK OF YOUR NECK by [CONTACT_57560], and keep those muscles tense until I tell you to 
release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release. Repeat this one more time and 
hold the tension steady until I tell you to rele ase BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and 
now release.  
You can feel the comfortable sensation of your muscles relaxing and as the tension in your 
muscles resolves and they become soft and loose.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your RIGHT LO WER LEG, particularly in your calf and 
hold it until I tell you to release, BEGIN study the tensions in your right lower leg (narrator silent 
count 5 seconds), now release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you 
to release BEGI N (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release your muscles.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your LEFT LOWER LEG, particularly in your calf and 
hold it until I tell you to release, BEGIN study the tensions in your left lower leg (narrator silent  
count 5 seconds), now release your muscles. Remember, When tensing your muscles, and then 
relaxing them, study the difference in feeling between the tension and the relaxation. Repeat this 
one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narra tor silent count 5 seconds), now 
release your muscles.  
This time I want you to tense BOTH LOWER LEGS at the same time and hold it until I tell you 
release, BEGIN study the tensions in your lower legs (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 115 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell  you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your THIGHS by [CONTACT_57541] I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds ), now 
release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds). release your muscles.  
Now, feel your muscles as they become loose and relaxed.  
Now I want you to tense the muscles in y our RIGHT LOWER ARM and RIGHT HAND by 
[CONTACT_7328] a fist and holding it until I tell you to release. Make a fist now, and clench it tightly and 
tense your RIGHT LOWER ARM at the same time and hold the tension in those muscles 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), … and now release the tension in your muscles. As you tense 
your muscles study the tension in the back of your hand and in your right lower arm – notice 
what the tension feels like. Now I want you to repeat that tensing in your right fist and right 
lower a rm, until I tell you to release. BEGIN and keep them tense … and notice what the tension 
feels like (narrator silent count for 5 seconds), and now release the tension in your muscles.  
Notice the difference between the tension and the 
relaxation.…………………………… ……………………………………………………………
…………  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your LEFT LOWER ARM and LEFT HAND by [CONTACT_7328] 
a fist and holding it until I tell you to release. BEGIN. Study the tensions in the back of your 
hand and in your left lower arm, Notice what th ose tensions feel like. (narrator silent count for 5 
seconds) and now release the muscles. Notice the difference in your muscles between the tension 
and the relaxation. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release. BEGIN (narrator 
silent count  for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. And feel how the relaxed muscles feel 
different than when you were keepi[INVESTIGATOR_57480].  
Now this time I want you to tense BOTH FOREARMS AND BOTH HANDS at the same time 
and hold the tension steady until I tell y ou to release it. BEGIN Study the tensions in the back of 
your hands and in your lower arms, Notice what the tensions feel like (narrator silent count 5 
seconds) and now release the muscles. Notice the difference between the tension and the 
relaxation. Now  I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 
for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles … paying close attention to what the relaxation 
feels like.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your RIGHT UPPER ARM b y bringing your right 
hand up towards your shoulder and tensing the biceps muscle and hold it until I tell you to 
release. BEGIN Study the tensions in the muscles of your arm study those tensions (narrator 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 116 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
silent count 5 seconds) and then release the muscl es. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell 
you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your LEFT UPPER ARM by [CONTACT_57561] a nd tensing the biceps muscle until I tell you to release. BEGIN Study 
the tensions in the muscles of your arm, study those tensions (narrator silent count 5 seconds) 
and now release the muscles. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release BEG IN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release your muscles.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in BOTH UPPER ARMS at the same time BEGIN 
Study the tensions in in your upper arms, study those tensions (narrator silent count 5 seconds) 
and then r elease the muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release 
BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. Notice the difference 
between the tension and the relaxation.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles AROUND YOUR MOUTH by [CONTACT_57546]. Hold the 
tension until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release. Repeat 
this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), 
and now release.  
By [CONTACT_57547], the various muscles that you have been working on should be feeling more loose and 
relaxed than before, and yo u can let them stay that way … comfortably soft and loose.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in the region around your EYES by [CONTACT_57548]. Notice what the tension feels like around your eyes and in your upper face, 
study t hose tensions and hold the tension until I tell you to release (narrator silent count 5 
seconds) now release. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release.  
This time I want you t o tense the muscles in your LOWER FOREHEAD by [CONTACT_57549]. Frown and knit your eyebrows together. BEGIN Pay close 
attention to the tension around your eyes and in your lower forehead study those tensions until I 
tell you to release (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release. Repeat this one more time and 
hold the tension steady until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and 
now release.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your UPPER FORE HEAD by [CONTACT_57555]. Lift your eyebrows up high, Wrinkling your 
forehead, and pay close attention to the tension in your upper forehead and hold the tension until 
I tell you to release, BEGIN (narrator silent co unt 5 seconds) and now relax the muscles, noticing 
how different they feel as they relax. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to 
release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 117 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
Now I want you to tense all of the muscles  in your body and hold the tension steady until I tell 
you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now relax all the muscles in your body 
together. Just let them release all the tension and become soft and relaxed. Notice how your body 
feels di fferent now that it lets go of all the tension, and all the muscles become soft and loose. I 
am going to help you achieve a deeper state of muscle relaxation now by [CONTACT_57551] 1 to 5. 
As I count you can let muscles all over your body becoming even more soft and loose.  
1…………………your muscles are feeling more soft and relaxed, 
…………………..2………………..your muscles are releasing any remaining tension 
…………………………………………………… 3……………….4……………… 
……………………5.  
When you are ready you can get yourself back into a normal state. R emember, only through 
practice can your brain become more aware of your muscles, how they respond to tension and 
how you can relax them. Training your muscles to respond differently is like any training. 
Practicing consistently is the key.  
Session Five  
Now let’s begin. Close your eyes and we will start your treatment.”  
 
The first exercise I want you to do is to tense the muscles in your RIGHT LOWER ARM and 
RIGHT HAND by [CONTACT_7328] a fist and holding it until I tell you to release. Make a fist no w, and 
clench it tightly and tense your RIGHT LOWER ARM at the same time and hold the tension in 
those muscles (narrator silent count 5 seconds), … and now release the tension in your muscles. 
As you tense your muscles study the tension in the back of your  hand and in your right lower 
arm – notice what the tension feels like. Now I want you to repeat that tensing in your right fist 
and right lower arm, until I tell you to release. BEGIN and keep them tense … and notice what 
the tension feels like (narrator silent count for 5 seconds), and now release the tension in your 
muscles.  
Notice the difference between the tension and the 
relaxation.…………………………………………………………………………………………
………  
What we are doing is teaching your brain to distinguish better and better between a  state of 
tension and relaxation in different muscle groups by [CONTACT_57538], so that the brain becomes more effective at releasing all tension from those muscles.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your LEFT LOW ER ARM and LEFT HAND by [CONTACT_7328] 
a fist and holding it until I tell you to release. BEGIN. Study the tensions in the back of your 
hand and in your left lower arm, Notice what those tensions feel like. (narrator silent count for 5 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 118 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
seconds) and now release the  muscles. Notice the difference in your muscles between the tension 
and the relaxation. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release. BEGIN (narrator 
silent count for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. And feel how the relaxed muscles f eel 
different than when you were keepi[INVESTIGATOR_57480].  
Now this time I want you to tense BOTH FOREARMS AND BOTH HANDS at the same time 
and hold the tension steady until I tell you to release it. BEGIN Study the tensions in the back of 
your hands and in your lower arms, Notice what the tensions feel like (narrator silent count 5 
seconds) and now release the muscles. Notice the difference between the tension and the 
relaxation. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent cou nt 
for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles … paying close attention to what the relaxation 
feels like.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your RIGHT UPPER ARM by [CONTACT_57562] I tell you to 
release. BEGIN Study the tensions in the muscles of your arm study those tensions (narrator 
silent count 5 seconds) and then release the muscles. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell 
you to release BEGIN (narrator sil ent count for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your LEFT UPPER ARM by [CONTACT_57540] I tell you to release. BEGIN Study 
the tension s in the muscles of your arm, study those tensions (narrator silent count 5 seconds) 
and now release the muscles. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release your muscles.  
This time I want  you to tense the muscles in BOTH UPPER ARMS at the same time BEGIN 
Study the tensions in in your upper arms, study those tensions (narrator silent count 5 seconds) 
and then release the muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to rel ease 
BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. Notice the difference 
between the tension and the relaxation.  
As you work on your muscles, notice how you can feel your muscles becoming loose and soft 
and relaxed.  
Next I want y ou to tense the muscles in your RIGHT LOWER LEG, particularly in your calf and 
hold it until I tell you to release, BEGIN study the tensions in your right lower leg (narrator silent 
count 5 seconds), now release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you 
to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release your muscles.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your LEFT LOWER LEG, particularly in your calf and 
hold it until I tell you to release, BEGIN study the tensions  in your left lower leg (narrator silent 
count 5 seconds), now release your muscles. Remember, When tensing your muscles, and then 
relaxing them, study the difference in feeling between the tension and the relaxation. Repeat this 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 119 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now 
release your muscles  
This time I want you to tense BOTH LOWER LEGS at the same time and hold it until I tell you 
release, BEGIN study the tensions in your lower legs (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now 
release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release.  
You can feel the comfortable sensation of your muscles relaxing and as the tension in yo ur 
muscles resolves and they become soft and loose.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your THIGHS by [CONTACT_57541] I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now 
release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I  tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds). release your muscles.  
Now I want you to tense the muscles in your ABDOMINAL REGION by [CONTACT_57542] I tell you to release BEGIN ( narrator 
silent count 5 seconds), now release abdominal muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it 
until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds).  
Now, feel your muscles as they become loose and relaxed.  
Next I want you to tense th e muscles in your CHEST by [CONTACT_57543] a deep breath and holding it 
BEGIN. Hold your breath (narrator silent count 5 seconds) now let it out slowly. And now, let 
your breathing be regular and relaxed.. Repeat this one more time when I tell you to begin, 
taking a deep breath and holding it until I tell you to release it BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 
seconds), and now breathe out … and then letting your breathing be regular and relaxed.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your SHOULDERS and UPPER BACK by [CONTACT_57563] I tell you to release 
BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. Repeat this one more 
time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrat or silent count 5 seconds), and now 
release. And feel the sensation of relaxation that comes into the shoulders and upper back and 
how it is different than the tension you felt before.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in the BACK OF YOUR NECK by [CONTACT_57564], and keep those muscles tense until I tell you to 
release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release. Repeat this one more time and 
hold the tension steady until I tell you to releas e BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and 
now release.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles AROUND YOUR MOUTH by [CONTACT_57546]. Hold the 
tension until I t ell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release. Repeat 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 120 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), 
and now release.  
By [CONTACT_57547], the various muscles that you have been working on s hould be feeling more loose and 
relaxed than before, and you can let them stay that way … comfortably soft and loose.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in the region around your EYES by [CONTACT_57548]. Notice what the tension feels like around your eyes and in your upper face, 
study those tensions and hold the tension until I tell you to release (narrator silent count 5 
seconds) now release. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silen t count 5 seconds), and now release.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your LOWER FOREHEAD by [CONTACT_57549]. Frown and knit your eyebrows together. BEGIN Pay close 
attention to the tension around your eyes and in yo ur lower forehead study those tensions until I 
tell you to release (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release. Repeat this one more time and 
hold the tension steady until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and 
now release.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your UPPER FOREHEAD by [CONTACT_57555]. Lift your eyebrows up high, Wrinkling your 
forehead, and pay close attention to the tension in your upper forehead and hold the ten sion until 
I tell you to release, BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds) and now relax the muscles, noticing 
how different they feel as they relax. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to 
release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release.  
Now I want you to tense all of the muscles in your body and hold the tension steady until I tell 
you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now relax all the muscles in your body 
together. Just let them release all the tension and become soft and relaxed. Notice how your body 
feels different now that it lets go of all the tension, and all the muscles become soft and loose. I 
am going to help you achieve a deeper state of muscle relaxation now by [CONTACT_57551] 1 to 5. 
As I count you can let musc les all over your body becoming even more soft and loose.  
1…………………your muscles are feeling more soft and relaxed, 
…………………..2………………..your muscles are releasing any remaining tension 
…………………………………………………… 3……………….4……………… 
……………………5.  
When you are ready you can  get yourself back into a normal state. Remember, only through 
practice can your brain become more aware of your muscles, how they respond to tension and 
how you can relax them. Training your muscles to respond differently is like any training. 
Practicing consistently is the key.   
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 121 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
Session Six  
Now let’s begin. Close your eyes and we will start your treatment.”  
The first exercise I want you to do is to tense the muscles in your RIGHT LOWER LEG, 
particularly in your calf and hold it until I tell you to release, BEGIN study the tensions in your 
right lower leg (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release your mus cles. Repeat this one more 
time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release 
your muscles.  
What we are doing is teaching your brain to distinguish better and better between a state of 
tension and relaxation in different muscle groups by [CONTACT_57538], so that the brain becomes more effective at releasing all tension from those muscles.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your LEFT LOWER LEG, particularly in your calf  and 
hold it until I tell you to release, BEGIN study the tensions in your left lower leg (narrator silent 
count 5 seconds), now release your muscles. Remember, When tensing your muscles, and then 
relaxing them, study the difference in feeling between the tension and the relaxation. Repeat this 
one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now 
release your muscles.  
This time I want you to tense BOTH LOWER LEGS at the same time and hold it until I tell you 
release, BEGIN study the tensions in your lower legs (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now 
release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release.  
As you work on your m uscles, notice how you can feel your muscles becoming loose and soft 
and relaxed.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your THIGHS by [CONTACT_57541] I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5  seconds), now 
release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds).  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your RIGHT LOWER ARM and RIGHT HAND by 
[CONTACT_7328] a fist and holding it unt il I tell you to release. Make a fist now, and clench it tightly and 
tense your RIGHT LOWER ARM at the same time and hold the tension in those muscles 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), … and now release the tension in your muscles. As you tense 
your muscl es study the tension in the back of your hand and in your right lower arm – notice 
what the tension feels like. Now I want you to repeat that tensing in your right fist and right 
lower arm, until I tell you to release. BEGIN and keep them tense … and notic e what the tension 
feels like (narrator silent count for 5 seconds), and now release the tension in your muscles.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 122 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
Notice the difference between the tension and the 
relaxation.…………………………………………………………………………………………
………  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in you r LEFT LOWER ARM and LEFT HAND by [CONTACT_7328] 
a fist and holding it until I tell you to release. BEGIN. Study the tensions in the back of your 
hand and in your left lower arm, Notice what those tensions feel like. (narrator silent count for 5 
seconds) and now r elease the muscles. Notice the difference in your muscles between the tension 
and the relaxation. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release. BEGIN (narrator 
silent count for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. And feel how the relaxed  muscles feel 
different than when you were keepi[INVESTIGATOR_57480].  
Now this time I want you to tense BOTH FOREARMS AND BOTH HANDS at the same time 
and hold the tension steady until I tell you to release it. BEGIN Study the tensions in the back of 
your hands an d in your lower arms, Notice what the tensions feel like (narrator silent count 5 
seconds) and now release the muscles. Notice the difference between the tension and the 
relaxation. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 
for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles … paying close attention to what the relaxation 
feels like.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your RIGHT UPPER ARM by [CONTACT_57565] I tell you to 
release. BEGIN Study the tensions in the muscles of your arm study those tensions (narrator 
silent count 5 seconds) and then release the muscles. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell 
you to release BEGIN (na rrator silent count for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your LEFT UPPER ARM by [CONTACT_57540] I tell you to release. BEGIN Study 
the tensions in the muscles of your arm, study those tensions (narrator silent count 5 seconds) 
and now release the muscles. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release your muscles.  
This t ime I want you to tense the muscles in BOTH UPPER ARMS at the same time BEGIN 
Study the tensions in in your upper arms, study those tensions (narrator silent count 5 seconds) 
and then release the muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release 
BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. Notice the difference 
between the tension and the relaxation.  
You can feel the comfortable sensation of your muscles relaxing and as the tension in your 
muscles resolves  and they become soft and loose.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in the BACK OF YOUR NECK by [CONTACT_57552], and keep those muscles tense until I tell you to 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 123 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5  seconds), now release. Repeat this one more time and 
hold the tension steady until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and 
now release.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your SHOULDERS and UPPER BACK by [CONTACT_57566] I tell you to release 
BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. Repeat this one more 
time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 s econds), and now 
release. And feel the sensation of relaxation that comes into the shoulders and upper back and 
how it is different than the tension you felt before.  
Now, feel your muscles as they become loose and relaxed.  
Next I want you to tense the musc les in your CHEST by [CONTACT_57543] a deep breath and holding it 
BEGIN. Hold your breath (narrator silent count 5 seconds) now let it out slowly. And now, let 
your breathing be regular and relaxed.. Repeat this one more time when I tell you to begin, 
taking a d eep breath and holding it until I tell you to release it BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 
seconds), and now breathe out … and then letting your breathing be regular and relaxed.  
Now I want you to tense the muscles in your ABDOMINAL REGION by [CONTACT_57567] I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator 
silent count 5 seconds), now release abdominal muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it 
until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 se conds).  
Next I want you to tense the muscles AROUND YOUR MOUTH by [CONTACT_57546]. Hold the 
tension until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 se conds), now release. Repeat 
this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), 
and now release.  
By [CONTACT_57547], the various muscles that you have been working on should be feeling more loose and 
relaxed than before,  and you can let them stay that way … comfortably soft and loose.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in the region around your EYES by [CONTACT_57548]. Notice what the tension feels like around your eyes and in your upper face,  
study those tensions and hold the tension until I tell you to release (narrator silent count 5 
seconds) now release. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release.  
This time I wa nt you to tense the muscles in your LOWER FOREHEAD by [CONTACT_57549]. Frown and knit your eyebrows together. BEGIN Pay close 
attention to the tension around your eyes and in your lower forehead study those tensions until I 
tell you to release (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release. Repeat this one more time and 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 124 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
hold the tension steady until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and 
now release.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your UPPER FOREHEAD by [CONTACT_57555]. Lift your eyebrows up high, Wrinkling your 
forehead, and pay close attention to the tension in your upper forehead and hold the te nsion until 
I tell you to release, BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds) and now relax the muscles, noticing 
how different they feel as they relax. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to 
release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds),  and now release.  
Now I want you to tense all of the muscles in your body and hold the tension steady until I tell 
you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now relax all the muscles in your body 
together. Just let them release all the tensio n and become soft and relaxed. Notice how your body 
feels different now that it lets go of all the tension, and all the muscles become soft and loose. I 
am going to help you achieve a deeper state of muscle relaxation now by [CONTACT_57551] 1 to 5. 
As I coun t you can let muscles all over your body becoming even more soft and loose.  
1…………………your muscles are feeling more soft and relaxed, 
…………………..2………………..your muscles are releasing any remaining tension 
…………………………………………………… 3……………….4……………… 
……………………5.  
When yo u are ready you can get yourself back into a normal state. Remember, only through 
practice can your brain become more aware of your muscles, how they respond to tension and 
how you can relax them. Training your muscles to respond differently is like any tr aining. 
Practicing consistently is the key.   
Session Seven  
Now let’s begin. Close your eyes and we will start your treatment.”  
The first exercise I want you to do is to tense the muscles AROUND YOUR MOUTH by 
[CONTACT_57556]. Hold the tension until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator si lent count 5 
seconds), now release. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release.  
What we are doing is teaching your brain to distinguish better and better between a state of 
tension and relaxation in different muscle groups by [CONTACT_57538], so that the brain becomes more effective at releasing all tension from those muscles.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in the region around you r EYES by [CONTACT_57548]. Notice what the tension feels like around your eyes and in your upper face, 
study those tensions and hold the tension until I tell you to release (narrator silent count 5 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 125 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
seconds) now release. Repeat this one  more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your LOWER FOREHEAD by [CONTACT_57549]. Frown and knit your eyebrows toget her. BEGIN Pay close 
attention to the tension around your eyes and in your lower forehead study those tensions until I 
tell you to release (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release. Repeat this one more time and 
hold the tension steady until I tell yo u to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and 
now release.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your UPPER FOREHEAD by [CONTACT_57555]. Lift your eyebrows up high, Wrinkling your 
forehead, and pa y close attention to the tension in your upper forehead and hold the tension until 
I tell you to release, BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds) and now relax the muscles, noticing 
how different they feel as they relax. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to 
release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release.  
Now I want you to tense the muscles in your ABDOMINAL REGION by [CONTACT_57542] I tell you to release BE GIN (narrator 
silent count 5 seconds), now release abdominal muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it 
until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds).  
As you work on your muscles, notice how you can feel your muscles becoming loos e and soft 
and relaxed.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your CHEST by [CONTACT_57543] a deep breath and holding it 
BEGIN. Hold your breath (narrator silent count 5 seconds) now let it out slowly. And now, let 
your breathing be regular and relaxed.. Repe at this one more time when I tell you to begin, 
taking a deep breath and holding it until I tell you to release it BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 
seconds), and now breathe out … and then letting your breathing be regular and relaxed.  
Next I want you to ten se the muscles in your SHOULDERS and UPPER BACK by [CONTACT_57563] I tell you to release 
BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. Repeat this one more 
time an d hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now 
release. And feel the sensation of relaxation that comes into the shoulders and upper back and 
how it is different than the tension you felt before.  
You can feel the com fortable sensation of your muscles relaxing and as the tension in your 
muscles resolves and they become soft and loose.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in the BACK OF YOUR NECK by [CONTACT_57552], and keep those muscles tense until I tell you to 
release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release. Repeat th is one more time and 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 126 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
hold the tension steady until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), and 
now release.  
 to tense the muscles in your RIGHT LOWER ARM and RIGHT HAND by [CONTACT_7328] a fist and 
holding it until I tell you to release. Mak e a fist now, and clench it tightly and tense your RIGHT 
LOWER ARM at the same time and hold the tension in those muscles (narrator silent count 5 
seconds), … and now release the tension in your muscles. As you tense your muscles study the 
tension in the b ack of your hand and in your right lower arm – notice what the tension feels like. 
Now I want you to repeat that tensing in your right fist and right lower arm, until I tell you to 
release. BEGIN and keep them tense … and notice what the tension feels like  (narrator silent 
count for 5 seconds), and now release the tension in your muscles.  
Notice the difference between the tension and the 
relaxation.…………………………………………………………………………………………
…………  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your LEFT LOWER ARM and LEFT HA ND by [CONTACT_7328] 
a fist and holding it until I tell you to release. BEGIN. Study the tensions in the back of your 
hand and in your left lower arm, Notice what those tensions feel like. (narrator silent count for 5 
seconds) and now release the muscles. Notice t he difference in your muscles between the tension 
and the relaxation. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release. BEGIN (narrator 
silent count for 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. And feel how the relaxed muscles feel 
different than  when you were keepi[INVESTIGATOR_57480].  
Now this time I want you to tense BOTH FOREARMS AND BOTH HANDS at the same time 
and hold the tension steady until I tell you to release it. BEGIN Study the tensions in the back of 
your hands and in your lower arms, Notice  what the tensions feel like (narrator silent count 5 
seconds) and now release the muscles. Notice the difference between the tension and the 
relaxation. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 
for 5 seconds),  and now release your muscles … paying close attention to what the relaxation 
feels like.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your RIGHT UPPER ARM by [CONTACT_57539]  I tell you to 
release. BEGIN Study the tensions in the muscles of your arm study those tensions (narrator 
silent count 5 seconds) and then release the muscles. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell 
you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count for 5 se conds), and now release your muscles.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in your LEFT UPPER ARM by [CONTACT_57540] I tell you to release. BEGIN Study 
the tensions in the muscles o f your arm, study those tensions (narrator silent count 5 seconds) 
and now release the muscles. Now I want you to repeat that until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release your muscles.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 127 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
This time I want you to tense the muscles in BOTH UPPER ARMS at the same time BEGIN 
Study the tensions in in your upper arms, study those tensions (narrator silent count 5 seconds) 
and then release the muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release 
BEGIN (narrat or silent count 5 seconds), and now release your muscles. Notice the difference 
between the tension and the relaxation.  
Now, feel your muscles as they become loose and relaxed.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your RIGHT LOWER LEG, particularly in your calf and 
hold it until I tell you to release, BEGIN study the tensions in your right lower leg (narrator silent 
count 5 seconds), now release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you 
to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now release your muscles.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your LEFT LOWER LEG, particularly in your calf and 
hold it until I tell you to release, BEGIN study the tensions in your left lower leg (narrator silent 
count 5 seconds), now re lease your muscles. Remember, When tensing your muscles, and then 
relaxing them, study the difference in feeling between the tension and the relaxation. Repeat this 
one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 second s), now  
release your muscles.  
By [CONTACT_57547], the various muscles that you have been working on should be feeling more loose and 
relaxed than before, and you can let them stay that way … comfortably soft and loose.  
This time I want you to tense BOTH LOWER LEGS a t the same time and hold it until I tell you 
release, BEGIN study the tensions in your lower legs (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now 
release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds), and now release.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your THIGHS by [CONTACT_57541] I tell you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 seconds), now 
release your muscles. Repeat this one mo re time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN 
(narrator silent count 5 seconds). release your muscles.  
Now I want you to tense all of the muscles in your body and hold the tension steady until I tell 
you to release BEGIN (narrator silent count 5 se conds), now relax all the muscles in your body 
together. Just let them release all the tension and become soft and relaxed. Notice how your body 
feels different now that it lets go of all the tension, and all the muscles become soft and loose. I 
am going t o help you achieve a deeper state of muscle relaxation now by [CONTACT_57551] 1 to 5. 
As I count you can let muscles all over your body becoming even more soft and loose.  
1…………………your muscles are feeling more soft and relaxed, 
…………………..2………………..your muscles  are releasing any remaining tension 
…………………………………………………… 3……………….4……………… 
……………………5.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 128 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
When you are ready you can get yourself back into a normal state. Remember, only through 
practice can your brain become more aware of your muscles, how they respond to te nsion and 
how you can relax them. Training your muscles to respond differently is like any training. 
Practicing consistently is the key.   
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 129 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
APPENDIX E.  MUSCLE RELAXATION DAILY PRACTICE SESSION SCRIPT  
Now let’s begin. Close your eyes and we will begin the exercise.”  
First, I want you to tense BOTH ARMS AND BOTH HANDS together,. Keep the tension and 
now bend your arms at the elbow. BEGIN Study the tensions in the back of your hands and in 
your lower arms ………………study those tensions (Narrator count 5 seconds) now RELAX 
your arms and hands. Notice the difference between the tension and the relaxation. Repeat this 
one more time and hold it until I tell you to release BEGIN (Narrator count 5 seconds), now 
relea se your muscles.  
Next I want you to tense BOTH LOWER LEGS at the same time and hold it until I tell you to 
release, BEGIN, remember to study the tensions in your lower legs (Narrator count 5 seconds), 
now release your muscles. Repeat this one more time and  hold it until I tell you to release 
BEGIN (Narrator count 5 seconds), now release your muscles.  
Next I want you to tense the muscles in your SHOULDERS and UPPER BACK by [CONTACT_57568]. BEGIN Study those tensions across your u pper 
back………………….study those tensions (Narrator count 5 seconds) now relax the muscles. 
Study the difference between the tension and the relaxation. Repeat this one more time and hold 
it until I tell you to release BEGIN (Narrator count 5 seconds), now rel ease your muscles.  
This time I want you to tense the muscles in the region around your EYES by [CONTACT_57569]. BEGIN Just close your eyes tightly and study the tension around your eyes and 
upper face (Narrator count 5 seconds) then RELAX the muscles. Notice t he difference between 
the tension and the relaxation. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to release 
BEGIN (Narrator count 5 seconds), now release your muscles.  
Now I want you to tense all of the muscles in your body and hold it until I tell you to release 
BEGIN (Narrator count 5 seconds), now relax all the muscles in your body together. Just let 
them become more and more relaxed. Repeat this one more time and hold it until I tell you to 
release BEGIN (Narrator count 5 seconds), now relea se your muscles.  
I am going to help you achieve a deeper state of muscle relaxation now by [CONTACT_57551] 1 to 5. 
As I count you will feel the muscles all over your body becoming soft and loose.  
1…………………your muscles are feeling soft, …………………..2………………..your  
muscles are deeply relaxed…………………………………………………… 
3……………….4……………… ……………………5.  
When you are ready you can get yourself back into a normal state.  
 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 130 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
APPENDIX F GDH  INTRO SCRIPT  
Implementation notes:  
1. The intro video will be played before the first treatment (no option to opt out).  
2. Starting with Session 2, intro video will be accessible from a button/link near the large 
video play button (opt -in to watch).  
3. The intro video will also be accessible from the help section of the app.  
Intro Script (sentences in italics indicate GDH -specific text):  
Welcome and thank you for participating in this important clinical study. Your treatment session 
will begin after this two -minute introductory video. Your treatmen t program will consist of seven 
30-minute sessions, with two weeks between each session. You will be sent an email reminder 24 
hours and 1 hour before each of your sessions, and a text message reminder 5 minutes before each 
of your sessions. It is importan t to do your treatment session on the day that it is scheduled. If you 
do miss a session, you will be notified by [CONTACT_6968]. If you know in advance that you can’t make your 
scheduled session time, you may re -schedule it in your app. All treatment sessions must  be 
completed within 3 days of the originally scheduled date.  
On days you don’t have a treatment session, a “practice” session will be available to you. A 
minimum of three practice sessions per week is recommended, but you may complete a practice 
session e very day you don’t have a treatment session. You can always access your treatment or 
practice sessions by [CONTACT_57570]. To play your treatment or practice session, press the 
large arrow -button on your app. The button is designed to always play the  correct treatment or 
practice session.  
If you are interrupted for any reason during your session, it’s best to start over from the 
beginning. To do this, you may press the “begin again” button at any time. You may restart each 
of your sessions up to thre e times. When you successfully complete a session, press the 
“complete session” button.  
Relaxation can improve gut symptoms. That’s why during your sessions, it is important to be in a 
quiet place where you can sit comfortably and will not be disturbed . Be sure to place your phone 
in “Do Not Disturb” mode. Choose a place you can adjust the lights so that they are not too bright, 
and a place with a good wifi or cellular network connection. If possible, loosen any restrictive 
clothing. We recommend using headphones, earbuds, or quality speakers. Never view or listen to 
your sessions in a car, even if it is not moving.   
If after completing your session you still fe el like you are not fully alert, it is ok to sit for another 
few minutes before getting up. Thank you again for participating in this study.  
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 131 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
APPENDIX G MUSCLE RELAXATION INTRO SCRIPT  
Implementation notes:  
1. The intro video will be played before the first treatment (no option to opt out).  
2. Starting with Session 2, intro video will be accessible from a button/link near the large 
video play button (opt -in to watch).  
3. The intro video will also be accessible from the help section of the app.  
Welcome and thank you for participating in this important clinical trial. Your treatment session 
will begin after this [ADDRESS_62640] of seven 30 -minute sessions, with 2 weeks between each 
session. An email reminder will be sent to you 24 hours and 1 hour before each of your sessions. 
And a text message reminder will be sent to you 5 minutes before eac h of your sessions.  
It’s important to do your treatment session on the day that it’s scheduled. If you miss a session, 
you’ll be notified by [CONTACT_6968]. If you know in advance that you cannot make a scheduled session, 
you may re -schedule it in this app. But al l treatment sessions must be completed within 3 days of 
the originally scheduled date.  
On days when you don’t  have a treatment session, a “practice” session will be available. A 
minimum of 3 practice sessions between treatment sessions is recommended. You may complete 
a practice session on any day that you don’t have a treatment session.  
You can always access your treatment or practice sessions by [CONTACT_57570]. To play your 
treatment or practice session, press the large arrow button in the app. It  will always play the 
correct treatment or practice session.  
If you’re interrupted during a session, it’s best to start over from the beginning. To do this, press 
the “Begin Again” button at any time. You may restart each session up to 3 times.  
When you s uccessfully complete a session, press the “complete session” button.   
Relaxation can improve gut symptoms. That’s why it is important to find a comfortable position 
for your sessions, preferably lying in a recliner or on a bed. Be sure you’re in a quiet pl ace where 
you won’t be disturbed. And put your phone in “Do Not Disturb” mode. If possible, loosen any 
tight or restrictive clothing.  Choose a place where you can adjust the lights so they’re not too 
bright, and someplace with a good Wi -Fi or cellular netw ork connection. Place your smartphone 
 
EASITx Clinical Research Protocol V 6.0  
Page 132 of 132  
 
Confidential  
 
or mobile device close enough so you can hear it. Or better yet, use headphones, earbuds, or 
quality speakers. Never listen to your sessions in a car, even if it’s not moving.  
If you ever have any muscle discomfort dur ing your session, immediately release and relax the 
muscle.  If you have discomfort with a muscle group, you may choose not to try that muscle 
group again and wait until the session takes you to the next muscle group. Thank you again for 
participating in th is trial.   