 Initiation	of	Continuous	Glucose	Monitoring	at	Diagnosis	of	Type	1	Diabetes	Version	1.3	(Version	that	Received	FDA	Approval)	December	22,	2015															
 
1  CHAPTER	1:	INTRODUCTION		1.1.		Purpose			The	primary	objective	of	this	pi[INVESTIGATOR_775453]	(CGM)	on	families	with	newly	diagnosed	children	with	type	1	diabetes	(T1D).	This	randomized	clinical	trial	compares	newly	diagnosed	T1D	youth	who	are	started	on	CGM	(the	intervention	group)	versus	those	who	are	not	(the	control	group).	We	will	examine	group	differences	over	a	6-month	period	(Phase	1)	on	two	sets	of	outcomes.	The	first	set	of	outcomes	includes	psychosocial	variables	such	as	parents’	diabetes-related	distress,	hypoglycemic	concerns,	broad	markers	of	parent	stress,	anxiety	and	sleep	quality,	and	health-related	quality	of	life.	In	this	set	of	psychosocial	outcomes,	health-related	quality	of	life	is	the	identified	primary	endpoint.	The	second	set	of	outcomes	includes	glycemic	variables	such	as	time	spent	in	range,	hemoglobin	A1c,	and	C-peptide.	In	this	set	of	glycemic	outcomes,	time	spent	in	target	range	is	the	identified	primary	endpoint.	After	the	initial	comparison	of	intervention	to	control	across	the	first	six	months	after	diagnosis,	we	will	conduct	a	longitudinal	follow-up	(Phase	2)	of	glycemic	and	psychosocial	variables	for	an	additional	[ADDRESS_1065155]	and	Barbara	Davis	Center	both	initiate	treatment	with	multiple	daily	injections	of	rapid	acting	insulin	analogs	and	1-2	injections	per	day	of	long	acting	insulin	(glargine	or	detemir).	At	both	sites,	basal-bolus	regimens	are	the	first	line	of	insulin	treatment	and	frequent	monitoring	(over	the	phone	or	email)	and	face-to-face	visits	with	the	clinical	care	team	will	help	to	fine-tune	dosages.	Parents	and	youth	(typi[INVESTIGATOR_775454]	10)	are	taught	procedures	for	injecting	insulin	as	well	as	time	periods	to	check	blood	sugar	to	understand	insulin	action.	They	are	discouraged	from	administering	rapid	acting	insulin	unless	three	hours	have	passed	(i.e.,	avoid	insulin	stacking).	In	addition	to	nutrition	therapy	via	carbohydrate	counting,	families	are	recommended	to	do	6-10	fingersticks	per	day	to	monitor	blood	sugars.	Substantial	education	is	provided	through	additional	materials	including	Understanding	Diabetes	(known	to	many	as	the	Pi[INVESTIGATOR_775455])	written	by	[CONTACT_6283].	Peter	Chase	and	David	Maahs	at	the	Barbara	Davis	Center.	The	13th	edition	of	this	book	is	given	to	new	onset	families	and	also	accessible	online	at	the	Barbara	Davis	Center	website	(www.barbaradaviscenter.org)	under	online	books.	Both	sites	give	this	book	to	new	onset	families.	In	addition,	supplemental	education	handouts	are	typi[INVESTIGATOR_775456].	As	an	example,	the	supplemental	education	materials	from	the	Stanford	site	are	included	in	the	Appendix.			With	CGM	and	insulin	pump	use	becoming	more	common,	more	families	are	interested	in	adding	these	technologies	to	the	treatment	regimen	sooner.	Many	providers	do	not	start	using	CGM	or	insulin	pumps	until	at	least	3-[ADDRESS_1065156]	12	months	from	diagnosis	to	move	to	the	insulin	pump.	Even	if	a	family	with	experience	in	treating	type	1	diabetes	(such	as	a	parent	or	sibling	with	

 
3  T1D),	insurance	may	reject	coverage	for	insulin	pumps	and	CGM	prior	to	[ADDRESS_1065157]	that	youth	with	T1D	using	CGM	can	achieve	lower	hemoglobin	A1c	values	and	experience	fewer	hypoglycemic	events	than	non-CGM-using	youth	3,4.	Even	with	relatively	older	and	less	reliable	CGM	systems,	parents	of	youth	with	T1D	often	reported	relatively	high	levels	of	satisfaction.	However,	little	else	is	known	about	parents’	responses	to	CGM.	We	do	know	that	parents	of	youth	with	T1D	are	often	highly	distressed	at	diagnosis	and	over	the	course	of	many	years,	partly	due	to	their	sense	of	powerlessness	in	the	face	of	often	wild	swings	in	their	child’s	mood	and	glucose	levels	as	well	as	their	fears	and	worries	concerning	the	ever	present	danger	of	hypoglycemia	5-7.	A	goal	of	this	project	is	to	better	understand	whether	the	introduction	of	CGM	in	youth	with	T1D	at	diagnosis	might	allay	parents’	fears,	more	broadly	ease	their	sense	of	diabetes-related	distress	and	foreboding,	and	impact	glycemic	variables	measured	during	the	first	year	of	T1D.		1.3.		Preliminary	studies		We	have	extensive	experience	using	sensors,	pumps,	and	new	technology.	Both	the	Stanford	and	University	of	Colorado	groups	participated	in	the	NIH	sponsored	metabolic	control	at	the	onset	of	diabetes	study	where	newly-diagnosed	children	received	three	days	of	closed-loop	therapy	within	a	week	of	diagnosis	and	then	were	maintained	on	sensor	augmented	pump	therapy	for	one	year	8.	Stanford	and	University	of	Colorado	were	two	of	the	three	centers	conducting	the	predictive	low	glucose	suspend	(PLGS)	in-home	studies	[ADDRESS_1065158]	worked	well	together	since	the	onset	of	the		NIH-funded	Diabetes	Research	in	Children	Network	(DirecNet).		Since	2001	DirecNet	has	conducted	numerous	protocols	involving	CGM	in	which	both	centers	participated	in	equally.		Both	centers	also	were	leaders	in	the	JDRF-funded	CGM	Randomized	Clinical	Trial	(RCT)	comparing	CGM	to	standard	care	10.	[CONTACT_775494]	was	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_775457]-[ADDRESS_1065159]	gained	extensive	experience	using	the	Medtronic	Paradigm	REAL-Time	Insulin	Pump	and	CGM	System.			 The	Metabolic	Control	study	(IDE	G080204)	was	an	NIH-sponsored	study	to	determine	if	tight	glucose	control	beginning	within	the	first	week	of	diagnosis	of	diabetes	will	be	of	benefit	in	maintaining	endogenous	insulin	production.	We	have	over	[ADDRESS_1065160],	and	two	of	the	centers	doing	this	study	(Stanford	and	University	of	Colorado)	have	amassed	over	1,[ADDRESS_1065161],	Barbara	Davis	Center,	and	Indiana	University	(PIs	Buckingham	&	Hood)	called	Using	Behavioral	Supports	for	Diabetes	Devices	in	Young	Children	with	Type	1	Diabetes,	17	families	with	a	child	under	the	age	of	6	with	type	1	diabetes	were	enrolled.	All	participants	were	on	CGM	and	as	part	of	assessment	procedures,	parents	completed	food,	insulin,	and	meter	blood	glucose	logs	([ADDRESS_1065162]-intervention).	On	those	logs,	8	noted	they	were	using	non-adjunctive	CGM	data	to	make	diabetes	treatment	decisions.	Logging	of	this	information	was	not	required	as	part	of	the	study	and	it	is	not	known	if	the	9	participants	who	did	not	indicate	so	had	used	non-adjunctive	CGM	data	to	make	treatment	decisions.	The	age	range	of	the	8	participants	who	had	indicated	non-adjunctive	CGM	use	at	the	time	of	enrollment	was	2	to	5	years.	Duration	of	diabetes	was	between	1.08	and	4.67	years	(mean	2.25,	SD	1.13	years).	Frequency	of	CGM	use	prior	to	study	enrollment	ranged	from	7	to	30	days	per	month	(mean	26	days,	SD	8.39	days).	Over	90%	were	using	the	Dexcom	G4	system,	some	with	active	Share	remote	monitoring.	
 
[ADDRESS_1065163].			
 
5  	CHAPTER	2:	STUDY	PROTOCOL		2.1.		Synopsis	of	study	protocol		This	pi[INVESTIGATOR_775458]	T1D	youth	who	are	started	on	CGM	(the	intervention	group)	versus	those	who	are	not	(the	control	group).	We	will	examine	group	differences	over	a	6-month	period	(Phase	1)	on	two	sets	of	outcomes:	psychosocial	variables	and	glycemic	variables.	After	the	initial	comparison	of	intervention	to	control	across	the	first	six	months	after	diagnosis,	we	will	conduct	a	longitudinal	follow-up	(Phase	2)	of	glycemic	and	psychosocial	variables	for	an	additional	18	months.	The	CGM	system	used	in	this	study	is	the	Dexcom	G5	System	with	the	Share	function	(FDA	Approved).	An	IDE	will	be	obtained	to	use	this	system	in	a	non-adjunctive	manner.	Participants	will	complete	Phase	[ADDRESS_1065164]-diagnosis.		2.2.		Study	Procedures		Participants	will	be	recruited	at	two	centers:	Stanford	University	and	the	Barbara	Davis	Center	for	Diabetes,	University	of	Colorado.	Participants	will	be	enrolled	while	inpatient	or	within	[ADDRESS_1065165]	10	in	the	eligible	age	range.	Once	identified,	study	staff	will	approach	potential	participants	to	explain	the	study,	determine	eligibility,	and	obtain	informed	consent.	Once	enrolled	in	the	study,	participants	will	be	randomized.	We	will	randomize	at	a	2:1	ratio,	intervention	to	control.	We	will	also	stratify	by	[CONTACT_775472].	The	age	groups	(in	years)	are	2-6,	7-11,	and	12-17.	To	ensure	safety	in	the	youngest	group,	recruitment	of	participants	in	the	age	2-[ADDRESS_1065166]	age	group.		2.3.		Study	Groups		There	are	two	groups	in	this	pi[INVESTIGATOR_107734]:	intervention	and	control.	After	randomization,	participants	in	the	intervention	group	(CGM)	will	receive	standardized	education	about	CGM	and	its	use.	This	session	can	take	up	to	120	minutes	and	will	focus	largely	on	adjunctive	use	and	other	foundational	aspects	of	education	about	CGM	use.	After	a	two-week	period	of	adjunctive	use,	families	will	receive	another	training	(up	to	120	minutes)	that	will	reinforce	some	of	the	content	on	CGM	use	and	introduce	and	train	on	non-adjunctive	use	of	the	Dexcom	G5	system.	The	procedures	for	non-adjunctive	use	are	detailed	below	in	section	2.5.	and	families	will	be	informed	that	they	have	the	freedom	to	check	and	rely	on	blood	glucose	via	fingerstick	any	time	the	child	or	parent	notices	a	potential	discrepancy	between	CGM	and	fingerstick	values.	Families	will	be	given	handouts	that	contain	information	in	sections	2.5.	Families	will	also	be	provided	with	accuracy	tables	3-D,	11-B,	and	12-B	from	the	Dexcom	manual	and	will	be	instructed	on	the	accuracy	of	sensor	values	at	different	readings.	This	information,	along	with	all	that	is	given	as	handouts	to	study	participants,	will	also	be	given	to	the	healthcare	team.	A	person	trained	in	delivering	education	about	CGM	will	deliver	the	education	about	CGM	use	and	will	insert	the	first	sensor	at	the	first	training.	This	individual	will	be	available	to	assist	with	questions	from	participating	families.	In	addition,	Dexcom	representatives	are	available	to	the	family	for	technical	questions	or	issues	with	the	system,	just	like	the	access	any	Dexcom	user	has.	Families	randomized	to	the	intervention	group	will	be	required	to	actively	use	CGM	for	[ADDRESS_1065167]	this	in	–	individuals	who	do	not	have	working	knowledge	of	adjunctive	use	or	blood	glucose	meter	treatment	decisions.		2.5.		Procedures	for	non-adjunctive	Use	of	CGM		Participants	in	this	study	will	be	taught	to	use	CGM	in	a	non-adjunctive	manner	that	is	consistent	with	the	language	included	in	Dexcom’s	CE	mark.	Participants	–	youth	with	T1D	and	their	caregivers	–	will	be	taught	the	following	in	their	initial	education	session	with	CDE	and	will	be	provided	with	this	information	in	a	handout.	Of	note,	participating	families	are	able	to	seek	out	other	devices	(e.g.,	insulin	pump)	and	start	them	during	the	course	of	the	study.	We	will	track	this	information,	but	neither	encourage	or	discourage	use.	The	study-specific	CGM	education	and	informational	handout	will	be	provided	by	[CONTACT_97757].	The	study	team	(CDE	in	particular)	will	review	the	following	guidelines	and	note	that	alert	and	alarm	settings	on	the	CGM	system	should	be	set	in	consultation	with	the	diabetes	care	team.		Instructions	for	non-adjunctive	CGM	use	with	Dexcom	G5	Share		1. If	your	glucose	alerts	and	readings	from	your	Dexcom	G5	do	not	match	your	symptoms	or	expectations,	use	a	fingerstick	blood	glucose	value	from	your	blood	glucose	meter	to	make	diabetes	treatment	decisions.		2. Discuss	with	a		healthcare	provider	on	your	study	team		how	you	should	use	the	information	displayed	on	the	Dexcom	G5	to	help	manage	your	diabetes.		3. Taking	medications	with	acetaminophen	while	wearing	the	Dexcom	G5	may	lead	to	inaccurate	glucose	readings	generated	by	[CONTACT_775473]	G5.	The	level	of	inaccuracy	depends	on	the	amount	of	acetaminophen	active	in	your	body	and	is	different	for	each	person.		Do	not	rely	on	CGM	data	produced	by	[CONTACT_775473]	G5	if	you	have	recently	taken	acetaminophen.	Keep	in	mind	that	some	cold	medicines	contain	acetaminophen.	If	you	are	not	sure	if	your	medication	contains	acetaminophen,	contact	[CONTACT_775474].		4. If	your	Dexcom	G5	does	not	display	a	sensor	glucose	reading	or	if	you	are	getting	inconsistent	readings,	use	a	fingerstick	blood	glucose	value	from	your	blood	glucose	meter	to	make	diabetes	treatment	decisions.		5. Do	not	ignore	symptoms	of	low	or	high	glucose.	If	your	glucose	alerts	and	readings	do	not	match	your	symptoms	or	expectations,	you	should	obtain	a	fingerstick	blood	glucose	value	from	your	blood	glucose	
 
[ADDRESS_1065168]	followed	the	prompts	from	the	device	and	calibrated	every	12	hours	after	the	initial	calibration.			7. Make	diabetes	treatment	decisions	based	on	the	combination	of	the	sensor	glucose	reading,	trend	arrow,	trend	graph,	and/or	actionable	alerts	generated	by	[CONTACT_775473]	G5.	If	you	plan	to	administer	insulin	for	a	sensor	glucose	reading	over	300	mg/dl,	you	should	be	conservative	with	dosing	and	possibly	double-check	sensor	value	with	fingerstick	blood	glucose	before	administering	a	correction	dose.		8. If	your	sensor	glucose	is	below	40	mg/dl,	you	get	a	“LOW”	on	your	display	device.	You	may	have	very	low	blood	sugar	requiring	immediate	treatment	based	on	your	health	care	professional’s	guidance.		To	be	safe,	treat	first.	After	treating,	make	sure	your	glucose	is	very	low	by	[CONTACT_7087]	a	fingerstick	for	a	BG	measurement.		9. If	your	sensor	glucose	is	above	400	mg/dl,	you	get	a	“HIGH”	on	your	display	device.	You	may	have	very	high	blood	sugar	requiring	immediate	treatment	based	on	your	health	care	professional’s	guidance.	To	be	safe,	first	make	sure	your	glucose	is	very	high	and	do	a	fingerstick	for	a	BG	measurement.	Treat	based	on	your	BG	measurement.		There	are	three	keys	when	making	decisions	based	on	your	Dexcom	G5.	Without	all	three,	you	won’t	have	all	the	needed	information	to	make	a	correct	treatment	decision.		To	help	you	remember	the	three	key	pi[INVESTIGATOR_6928],	think	of	TAG:		T-Trend:	Trend	Dots		Make	sure	trend	graph	has	three	back-to-back	readings	within	the	last	15	minutes		A-Arrow:	Trend	Arrow		Your	trend	arrow	telling	you	the	speed	and	direction	of	your	glucose		G-Glucose:	Sensor	Glucose	Readings		If	you	do	not	have	TAG	do	not	make	any	treatment	decisions	using	your	Dexcom	G5		Possible	Scenarios	to	use	TAG:		Scenario	1:		You	have	consistent	trend	dots	for	the	past	hour	(T),	the	arrow	is	to	the	right		(A),	and	the	glucose	reading	is	243	mg/dl.	In	this	situation,	you	first	consider	whether	you	need	to	administer	a	correction	insulin	dose	because	you	have	consistent	information	and	a	flat	arrow	to	the	right	showing	steady	sensor	values.	In	this	situation,	you	would	check	to	see	if	any	rapid	acting	insulin	has	been	administered	in	the	past	[ADDRESS_1065169]	rapid	acting	insulin	injection	(or	bolus),	you	will	plug	the	sensor	value	in	to	the	equation	you	came	up	with	your	clinical	care	team	and	decide	on	the	appropriate	insulin	dose.		

 
8  Scenario	2:		You	do	not	have	all	three	pi[INVESTIGATOR_775459].	In	this	case,	you	will	resort	back	to	blood	glucose	readings	and	make	treatment	decision	based	on	rules	provided	by	[CONTACT_775475].		Scenario	3:		You	have	consistent	trend	dots	for	at	least	the	past	15	minutes	(T)	and	your	glucose	reading	is	174	mg/dl	(G).	Your	trend	arrow	is	straight	down			(A).	Before	administering	insulin	or	taking	fast-acting	carbohydrates,	you	should	“watch	and	wait”	for	[ADDRESS_1065170]-acting	carbohydrates	if	sensor	value	approaches	your	low	threshold	or	the	arrow	is	still	going	straight	down.				

 
9  Table	1.	Possible	actions	based	on	sensor	glucose	reading	and	trend	arrows		Screen	Possible	actions	based	on	sensor	glucose	reading’s	trend	arrows	Arrows	Low	Glucose	High	Glucose	Target	Glucose		No	arrows/no	sensor	glucose	readings.			Use	BG	meter,	not	Dexcom	G5,	to	make	treatment	decision.	No	arrows/no	sensor	glucose	readings.			Use	BG	meter,	not	Dexcom	G5,	to	make	treatment	decision.	No	arrows/no	sensor	glucose	readings.	Use	BG	meter,	not	Dexcom	G5,	to	make	treatment	decision.	
	May	need	to	eat	a	snack	or	a	fast	acting	carbohydrate.	May	adjust	insulin	to	correct	a	high	sensor	glucose	reading	to	reach	target	range.			Do	not	take	multiple	insulin	doses	too	close	together	in	time.			Think	about	your	trend	graph	and	recent	Alarm/Alerts.	Based	on	last	meal	or	insulin	dose,	may	need	to	take	insulin	or	eat	a	snack	to	stay	within	target.			Do	not	take	multiple	insulin	doses	too	close	together	in	time.	
	Watch	and	wait.	May	adjust	insulin	to	correct	a	high	sensor	glucose	reading	to	reach	target	range.			Do	not	take	multiple	insulin	doses	too	close	together	in	time.			Think	about	your	trend	graph	and	recent	Alarm/Alerts.	Based	on	last	meal	or	insulin	dose,	may	need	to	take	insulin	to	stay	within	target.			Do	not	take	multiple	insulin	doses	too	close	together	in	time.	
	Watch	and	wait.	Make	sure	you	did	not	over	treat	for	a	low.	May	adjust	insulin	to	correct	a	high	sensor	glucose	reading	to	reach	target	range.			Do	not	take	multiple	insulin	doses	too	close	together	in	time.			Think	about	your	trend	graph	and	recent	Alarm/Alerts.	If	not	with	a	recent	meal	or	snack,	may	take	insulin	to	stay	within	target	range.	
	Watch	and	wait.	Make	sure	you	did	not	over	treat	for	a	low.	May	adjust	insulin	to	correct	a	high	sensor	glucose	reading	to	reach	target	range.			Do	not	take	multiple	insulin	doses	too	close	May	need	to	take	insulin	to	stay	within	target.			Do	not	take	multiple	insulin	doses	too	close	together	in	time.	

 
10  together	in	time.			Think	about	your	trend	graph	and	recent	Alarm/Alerts.	
	May	need	to	eat	a	snack	or	fast	acting	carbohydrate.			Was	last	insulin	dose	too	high	or	activity	too	strenuous?	Based	on	last	insulin	dose	or	activity,	may	need	to	watch	and	wait	to	reach	your	target	range.			Think	about	your	trend	graph	and	recent	Alarm/Alerts.	May	need	to	eat	a	snack	or	fast	acting	carbohydrate.	
	May	need	to	eat	a	snack	or	fast	acting	carbohydrate.			Was	last	insulin	dose	too	high	or	activity	too	strenuous?	Based	on	last	insulin	dose	or	activity,	may	need	to	watch	and	wait	to	reach	your	target	range.			Think	about	your	trend	graph	and	recent	Alarm/Alerts.	May	need	to	eat	a	snack	or	fast	acting	carbohydrate.	
		May	need	to	eat	a	snack	or	fast	acting	carbohydrate.			Was	last	insulin	dose	too	high	or	activity	too	strenuous?	Based	on	last	insulin	dose	or	activity,	may	need	to	watch	and	wait	to	reach	your	target	range.			Think	about	your	trend	graph	and	recent	Alarm/Alerts.	May	need	to	eat	a	snack	or	fast	acting	carbohydrate.				2.6.	Coordination	of	Study	Procedures	with	Clinical	Care		All	study	participants	will	receive	clinical	care	by	[CONTACT_775476].	Staff	at	both	sites	include	pediatric	endocrinologists,	nurses,	nurse	practitioners,	certified	diabetes	educators,	social	workers,	psychologists,	and	dietitians.	As	noted	and	depi[INVESTIGATOR_775460]	1.2.2.,	care	for	newly	diagnosed	youth	with	type	[ADDRESS_1065171],	extensive	education,	and	materials	and	guides	provided	to	all	families.	Clinical	care	teams	will	teach	families	who	enroll	in	this	study	about	insulin	administration,	nutrition	therapy	(e.g.,	carbohydrate	counting),	and	blood	glucose	monitoring.	If	families	start	on	an	insulin	pump	during	the	course	of	the	study,	that	will	be	coordinated	by	[CONTACT_775477].	In	sum,	care	for	new	onset	type	1	diabetes	will	be	delivered	by	[CONTACT_775478].		The	study	staff	has	the	primary	role	of	initiating	CGM	(at	the	start	of	the	study	with	intervention	participants	and	after	six	months	with	control	participants)	and	training	participants	on	non-adjunctive	use.	Clinical	care	staff	will	be	informed	about	which	of	their	clinic	patients	are	study	participants	and	which	are	actively	engaged	in	non-adjunctive	use	of	CGM.	The	clinical	care	team	will	also	be	provided	with	the	educational	materials	given	to	study	participants.	The	clinical	care	team	will	be	informed	about	use	of	Dexcom	software	so	that	they	may	review	study	

 
11  participant	CGM	data.	Further,	the	following	scenarios	may	be	encountered	and	if	they	occur,	they	will	be	reported	to	the	clinical	care	team:	• Upon	review	of	CGM,	more	than	5%	of	values	fall	below	the	threshold	for	hypoglycemia	(<60	mg/dl).	• Upon	review	of	blood	glucose	meter	downloads	(all	participants),	more	than	10%	of	values	fall	below	the	threshold	for	hypoglycemia	(<60	mg/dl).	• Any	evidence	of	insulin	stacking	reported	by	[CONTACT_775479]	a	download	(if	download	includes	any	insulin	administration	details).	2.7.	Study	Visits	and	Measurements				Study	visits	for	both	groups	will	occur	at	baseline,	[ADDRESS_1065172]	month	since	diagnosis	of	T1D.	These	visits	should	be	within	±[ADDRESS_1065173]-diagnosis	(Phase	2).	We	will	conduct	these	assessments	to	examine	changes	over	time	in	glycemic	and	psychosocial	variables.			Assessment	components	are	included	in	Table	[ADDRESS_1065174]	Measured	/	Relevant	Points	Number	of	Items	/	Time	to	Complete	Psychosocial	Outcomes	Parents’	Diabetes	Distress	The	Problem	Areas	in	Diabetes,	Pediatric	version	(PAID-P).		The	PAID-P	is	a	validated	tool	used	to	assess	parental	burden	related	to	diabetes	management.	The	Parent	Diabetes	Distress	Scale	(PDDS).		This	is	a	validated	tool	to	assess	how	diabetes	care	impacts	on	parents’	quality	of	life.			20	items.	5-10	minutes	to	complete.		6	items,	2	–	3	minutes	to	complete.	Parents’	Psychological	Distress	The	PHQ-[ADDRESS_1065175]	of	psychological	distress.	9	items	on	PHQ-9	(5	minutes)	and	40	items	on	STAI	(10	minutes)	Parents’	Sleep	Quality	An	abbreviated	version	of	the	Pi[INVESTIGATOR_775461],	a	validated	tool	for	assessing	self-reported	sleep	quantity	and	quality,	will	be	developed	for	this	project.			7	items,	2	–	3	minutes	to	complete.			Parents’	Hypoglycemic	Fear	The	Hypoglycemic	Fear	Survey-Parents	(HFS-P)	is	a	validated	tool	to	assess	parents’	anxiety	and	behavior	concerning	possible	hypoglycemia.			25	items,	5	–	10	minutes	to	complete	Parents’	Hypoglycemic	Confidence	A	new	version	of	the	Hypoglycemic	Confidence	Questionnaire,	modified	for	use	by	[CONTACT_3654],	will	be	developed	for	this	project.			7	items,	2	–	3	minutes	to	complete	Health-related	quality	of	life	Parents	will	complete	the	generic	version	of	the	Pediatric	Quality	of	Life	Inventory	(PedsQL)	to	provide	a	report	of	their	perception	of	the	child’s	quality	of	life.	This	cuts	across	social,	emotional,	academic,	and	health	domains.	25	items.	5-10	minutes	to	complete.	Satisfaction	with	Diabetes	Technology	We	will	use	our	CGM	Satisfaction	Scale	from	JDRF	and	DirecNet	studies	(developed	by	[CONTACT_775480],	PhD).				The	Glucose	Monitoring	System	Satisfaction	Survey	(GMSS-T1D)	is	a	validated	tool	used	to	assess	treatment	satisfaction	with	glucose	monitoring	devices	and	its	impact	on	quality	of	life	and	other	patient-reported	outcomes.	43	items.	5-10	minutes	to	complete.				15	items.	5-10	minutes	to	complete.	
 
13  Use	and	Comfort	with	Technology	Objective	questions	documenting	the	frequency	of	use	and	types	of	technologies	used.	Both	general	(e.g.,	smartphone)	and	diabetes-specific	(e.g.,	trend	program).	20	items.	5	minutes	to	complete.	Demographic	and	Family	Data	Parents	will	complete	a	questionnaire	on	the	family’s	structure,	racial	and	ethnic	background,	indicators	of	socioeconomic	status,	insurance	status	(public	vs.	private),	and	other	essential	characteristics.	5	minutes		Behavioral	Outcomes	Diabetes	management	behaviors	Blood	glucose	monitoring	frequency	(by	[CONTACT_775481]);	adherence	to	injections/pump	boluses;		Download	(no	time	burden	for	participants)	Health	care	utilization	Number	of	visits	and	calls	to	the	diabetes	care	team	Tracking	by	[CONTACT_30230]	(10	minutes	to	complete)	Placement	of	sensor	Parents	will	log	placement	of	sensor	based	on	Dexcom	manual	table	on	page	75.	A	quadrants	on	the	front	abdomen	and	B	locations	on	back	of	body	will	be	noted.				Table	3.	Assessment	Battery	for	Youth		Measure	Construct	Measured	/	Relevant	Points	Number	of	Items	/	Time	to	Complete	Psychosocial	Outcomes	Diabetes	Distress	The	Problem	Areas	in	Diabetes	(PAID)	–	Teen,	Diabetes	Burden	is	a	measure	of	diabetes-specific	burden.	Items	focus	on	degree	to	which	diabetes	impacts	areas	of	everyday	functioning.	Strong	correlations	with	clinical	outcomes.		The	Diabetes	Distress	Scale	(DDS)	is	a	gold	standard	measure	for	understanding	distress	symptoms	related	to	diabetes.		26	items.	7	minutes	to	complete.						17	items.	5	minutes	to	complete.		Psychological	Distress	The	Center	for	Epi[INVESTIGATOR_775462]	–	Depression	(CES-D)	is	a	widely	used	measure	to	assess	psychological	distress	20	items.	5	minutes	to	complete.	
 
14  and	depression.	Health-Related	Quality	of	Life	The	Child	Health	Utility-9D	(CHU-9D)	is	a	pediatric	generic	preference	based	measure	of	health-related	quality	of	life.		The	Pediatric	Quality	of	Life	Inventory	(PedsQL)	Diabetes	module	measures	diabetes-specific	health-realted	quality	of	life.	[ADDRESS_1065176]	is	a	widely	used	measure	of	diabetes	numeracy.	This	diabetes-specific	measure	has	been	shown	to	be	linked	with	health	outcomes	and	health	literacy.		15	items.	5	minutes	to	complete.		Cognition	(Attention,	Executive	Functioning,	Processing	Speed)	The	NIH	Toolbox	offers	standardized,	validated	assessments.	Three	modules	are	self-administered:			The	Flanker	Inhibitory	Control	and	Attention	Test	measures	both	a	participant’s	attention	and	inhibitory	control.			The	Dimensional	Change	Card	Sort	Test	is	a	measure	of	cognitive	flexibility.		The	Pattern	Comparison	Processing	Speed	Test	measures	speed	of	processing.						3	minutes	to	complete.			4	minutes	to	complete.		3	minutes	to	complete.	Satisfaction	with	Diabetes	Technology	We	will	use	our	CGM	Satisfaction	Scale	from	JDRF	and	DirecNet	studies	(developed	by	[CONTACT_775480],	PhD).			The	Glucose	Monitoring	System	Satisfaction	Survey	(GMSS-T1D)	is	a	validated	tool	used	to	assess	treatment	satisfaction	with	glucose	monitoring	devices	and	its	impact	on	quality	of	life	and	other	patient-reported	outcomes.		43	items.	5-10	minutes	to	complete.			15	items.	5-10	minutes	to	complete.		
 
15  	Use	of	and	Comfort	with	Technology	Objective	questions	documenting	the	frequency	of	use	and	types	of	technologies	used.	Both	general	(e.g.,	smartphone)	and	diabetes-specific	(e.g.,	trend	program).		20	items.	5	minutes	to	complete.		Behavioral	Outcomes	Diabetes	Management	Behaviors	The	Diabetes	Self	Management	Profile	(DSMP)	–	Self	Report	is	a	validated	tool	used	to	assess	daily	diabetes	management	tasks	including	frequency	of	blood	glucose	monitoring,	carbohydrate	counting,	and	insulin	administration.	24	items.	7	minutes	to	complete.	Health	Outcomes	HbA1c	measurement		Participants	will	provide	a	small	fingerstick	sample	of	blood	(capi[INVESTIGATOR_1396])	during	their	routine	clinic	visit.	This	will	be	done	using	the	DCA	in	clinic	or	local	CTRU.	Gold	standard	measure	of	glycemic	control	Glycemic	excursion	measures	Time	in	range	(70	to	150	mg/dL);	percent	below	70	and	60	mg/dL	as	indicators	of	hypoglycemia,	and	above	150	and	250	mg/dL	as	indicators	of	hyperglycemia;	additional	indices	of	variability	including	standard	deviation	will	also	be	calculated		C-peptide	Fasting	C-peptide	collected	at	0,	13,	52,	and	104	weeks	4	blood	draws	over	24	months		In	addition,	parents	will	be	asked	to	complete	a	brief	online	survey	(<	10	minutes)	at	the	following	intervals	since	randomization	–	4,	8,	18,	and	[ADDRESS_1065177]	of	the	Diabetes	Distress	Scale	(3	items),	PHQ-9	(9	items),	and	the	short	form	of	the	STAI	(10	items).	Additional	questionnaires	will	be	administered	at	study	conclusion	to	ascertain	CGM	satisfaction	(both	perceived	benefits	and	barriers),	overall	usability	issues,	and	amount	of	time	the	device	was	used.	All	surveys	can	be	completed	online	via	RedCap.	Families	will	receive	a	$[ADDRESS_1065178]	for	each	assessment	they	complete.	Participants	11-17	years	of	age	will	be	asked	to	complete	child/teen	versions	of	several	surveys.	These	include	psychological	distress,	fear	of	hypoglycemia,	and	quality	of	life.	They	will	not	complete	the	phone	call	assessments.	We	will	provide	a	$[ADDRESS_1065179]	to	teens	at	each	assessment.		The	following	table	highlights	the	planned	timeline	for	study	visits.	Visit	Number:	1	2	3	4	5	6	7	8	9	10	Study	Time:	0	4w	8w	13w	18w	22w	26w	52w	78w	104w	History	(medical	and	demographic)	X										Training	on	use	of	CGM	(intervention	only)	X										Adverse	Events	such	as	severe	hypoglycemia		X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	X	
 
16  CGM	downloads				X			X	X	X	X	Meter	and	CSII	downloads	(if	applicable)				X			X	X	X	X	Training	on	use	of	CGM	(control	only)							X				Local	HbA1c	X			X			X	X	X	X	Fasting	C-peptide	X			X				X		X	Full	Psychosocial	Questionnaires	X			X			X	X	X	X	Brief	Online	Psychosocial	Survey		X	X		X	X						In	addition,	participating	families	will	be	contact[CONTACT_775482],	and	once	every	four	weeks	after	to	remind	to	upload	Dexcom	receiver	via	Dexcom	Clarity	website	and	software.	The	study	team	will	provide	technical	assistance	if	required	to	upload	the	Dexcom	receiver	data.		2.8	Study	population		The	patient	population	is	children	with	type	1	diabetes	and	their	parents.	Parents	(18	years	and	older)	will	provide	informed	consent	for	their	own	participation	and	parental	permission	for	their	child	to	participate.	Youth	[ADDRESS_1065180]	60	subjects	complete	the	protocol,	we	will	enroll		up	to	75	youth	with	newly	diagnosed	T1D	and	randomize	them	to	either	the	intervention	(CGM,	n=50)	or	control	group	(no	CGM,	n=25).		2.8.1.		Eligibility	criteria		To	be	eligible	for	the	study,	a	child	must	meet	the	following	criteria:		1. Diagnosis	of	type	1	diabetes	according	to	ADA	diagnostic	criteria	2. Time	since	diagnosis	of	no	longer	than	one	month		3. Age	between	2	and	17	years			4. Parental	consent	(and	assent	from	the	child	where	applicable)	to	participate	in	the	study		5. No	severe	medical	conditions,	which	in	the	opi[INVESTIGATOR_775463].		To	be	eligible	for	the	study,	a	parent	must	meet	the	following	criteria:		1. Parent	or	legal	guardian	of	a	child	with	type	1	diabetes	meeting	the	“child”	criteria	outlined	above	2. Age	of	18.0	years	or	older	3. Parent	comprehends	written	English	4. Parent	understands	the	study	protocol	and	signs	the	informed	consent	document			2.8.2.		Exclusion	criteria		The	presence	of	any	of	the	following	is	an	exclusion	for	the	study:		1. Child	has	a	medical	disorder	that	in	the	judgment	of	the	investigator	will	interfere	with	completion	of	any	aspect	of	the	protocol	(e.g.,	pregnancy,	kidney	disease,	adrenal	insufficiency,	skin	condition	that	may	hinder	sensor	application).	
 
[ADDRESS_1065181],	we	will	document	uptake	of	the	study	with	a	review	of	descriptive	statistics	for	all	relevant	metrics	(e.g.,	recruitment	rate,	proportion	enrolled	relative	to	patient	population)	as	well	as	indicators	of	the	acceptance	of	randomization	and	overall	intervention	components	(i.e.,	is	there	variability	in	retention	and	satisfaction	between	treatment	arms?).	When	needed,	data	will	be	displayed	graphically	using	spaghetti	plots	for	individual	as	well	as	grouped	data.		Second,	in	order	to	determine	the	preliminary	efficacy	of	the	intervention	condition	(CGM)	compared	to	the	control	condition	(standard	care),	linear	mixed	effects	models	will	be	used.	A	model	will	be	run	for	each	of	the	main	endpoints,	psychosocial	distress	and	glycemic	indices.	The	testable	covariate	in	both	cases	will	be	treatment	status	(intervention	or	control).	Linear	mixed	effects	models	were	deemed	most	appropriate	for	these	analyses	due	to	the	continuous	nature	of	the	variables,	the	longitudinal	nature	of	the	design,	and	our	interest	in	testing	within-individual	change	over	time.	PROC	MIXED	in	SAS	will	be	used	for	the	linear	modeling.		In	general,	if	missing	data	are	realized,	these	linear	models	allow	for	data	that	are	missing	at	random	to	be	handled	appropriately	by	[CONTACT_775483].	We	will	also	assess	the	degree	of	non-ignorable	missingness	present	through	investigating	and	reporting	the	impact	of	sensitivity	analyses	(e.g.,	pattern	mixture	models8)	that	allow	for	plausible	non-ignorable	missing	data	patterns	on	the	model	results.	A	total	of	[ADDRESS_1065182]	size	of	1σ	on	psychological	distress	and	glycemic	indices,	up	to	10%	attrition	at	follow-up,	and	80%	power.	Recognizing	that	estimates	from	small	samples	are	imprecise,	we	will	cautiously	use	summary	measures	from	the	pi[INVESTIGATOR_775464]	a	larger	trial,	including	effect	sizes	and	the	standard	deviations	of	continuous	outcome	measures.			2.10.		Expected	duration	of	study	participation		Duration	of	study	participation	is	expected	to	be	2	years.			
 
18  CHAPTER	3:	ADVERSE	EVENT	REPORTING	AND	SAFETY	MONITORING		3.1.		Overview	of	Safety	Monitoring		Study	procedures	are	in	place	to	monitor	safety	of	participants	and	reduce	risk	for	adverse	events.	These	procedures	come	in	two	forms:	those	conducted	by	[CONTACT_775484],	and	those	conducted	by	[CONTACT_775485].	All	participants	will	have	glucose	data	reviewed	at	planned	intervals	and	based	on	pre-determined	cut	points	to	determine	safety.		All	participants,	intervention	and	control,	will	have	their	glucose	data	reviewed	weekly	by	[CONTACT_775486].	All	participants	in	the	intervention	group	will	have	their	CGM	data	reviewed	daily	in	their	first	week	of	non-adjunctive	CGM	use	(week	3	of	the	study).	Those	on	CGM	will	be	monitored	via	Dexcom	Clarity	download	and	those	using	only	meters	(control	group)	will	be	done	via	meter	download	(or	review	of	faxed	or	emailed	logbooks	if	family	is	not	able	to	download	meter	at	home).	After	the	first	month,	this	occurs	once	monthly,	starting	on	week	6	of	the	study,for	the	remaining	5	months.	The	control	group	also	wears	a	blinded	CGM	for	one	week	each	month	and	this	data	will	be	reviewed	as	well.	We	are	examining	these	reports	for	adverse	events	and	the	potential	of	adverse	events	(e.g.,	hypoglycemia).	When	the	control	group	starts	use	of	CGM	non-adjunctively	(month	7),	they	will	follow	the	same	pattern	of	data	review	that	the	intervention	group	did.		3.2.	Definition	of	Adverse	Event		Reportable	adverse	events	in	this	study	include	any	untoward	medical	occurrence	that	meets	criteria	for	a	serious	adverse	event	or	any	medical	occurrence	(expected	or	unexpected)	in	a	study	participant	that	is	study	or	device-related.			Hypoglycemic	events	are	recorded	as	adverse	events	if	the	event	required	assistance	of	another	person	due	to	altered	consciousness	and	required	another	person	to	actively	administer	carbohydrate,	glucagon,	or	other	resuscitative	actions.	This	means	that	the	subject	was	impaired	cognitively	to	the	point	that	he/she	was	unable	to	treat	his	or	herself,	was	unable	to	verbalize	his	or	her	needs,	was	incoherent,	disoriented,	and/or	combative,	or	experienced	seizure	or	coma.	These	epi[INVESTIGATOR_775465].		If	plasma	glucose	measurements	are	not	available	during	such	an	event,	neurological	recovery	attributable	to	the	restoration	of	plasma	glucose	to	normal	is	considered	sufficient	evidence	that	the	event	was	induced	by	a	low	plasma	glucose	concentration.				On	each	daily	download	(week	1	of	non-adjunctive	CGM	use)	and	weekly	download	and	review	(within	the	first	month),	we	will	also	document	the	percent	time	spent	at	or	below	60	mg/dL.	If	this	value	is	greater	than	or	equal	to	5%	(>1.2	hours	per	day),	we	will	notify	the	participant’s	caregiver	and	diabetes	care	provider	in	order	to	prevent	future	hypoglycemia.	These	criteria	will	also	apply	to	the	CGM	data	obtained	from	monthly	blinded	CGM	use	in	the	control	group.		Hyperglycemic	events	are	recorded	as	adverse	events	if	the	event	involved	diabetic	ketoacidosis	(DKA),	as	defined	by	[CONTACT_775487],	and	had	all	of	the	following:			⋅ Symptoms	such	as	polyuria,	polydipsia,	nausea,	or	vomiting;		⋅ Serum	ketones	>	1.0	mmol/L	or	large/moderate	urine	ketones;		⋅ Either	arterial	blood	pH	<7.30	or	venous	pH	<7.24	or	serum	bicarbonate	<15;	and		⋅ Treatment	provided	in	a	health	care	facility							Skin	irritation	from	sensor	wear	will	be	recorded	in	specific	sections	of	the	case	report	forms.		An	adverse	event	form	is	only	completed	if	skin	irritation	is	severe.				
 
[ADDRESS_1065183]	been	caused	by	[CONTACT_775488].					The	intensity	of	adverse	events	will	be	rated	on	a	three-point	scale:	(1)	mild,	(2)	moderate,	or	(3)	severe.		It	is	emphasized	that	the	term	severe	is	a	measure	of	intensity:	thus	a	severe	adverse	event	is	not	necessarily	serious.	For	example,	itching	for	several	days	may	be	rated	as	severe,	but	may	not	be	clinically	serious.				Adverse	events	that	continue	after	the	participant’s	discontinuation	or	completion	of	the	study	will	be	followed	until	their	medical	outcome	is	determined	or	until	no	further	change	in	the	condition	is	expected.				3.3.		Reporting	serious	or	unexpected	device-related	adverse	events		A	serious	adverse	event	is	any	untoward	occurrence	that:	⋅ Results	in	death	⋅ Is	life-threatening;	(a	non	life-threatening	event	which,	had	it	been	more	severe,	might	have	become	life-threatening,	is	not	necessarily	considered	a	serious	adverse	event)	⋅ Requires	inpatient	hospi[INVESTIGATOR_201578]	⋅ Results	in	significant	disability/incapacity		⋅ Is	a	congenital	anomaly/birth	defect		3.4.		Unanticipated	adverse	device	event			An	unanticipated	adverse	device	event	is	defined	as	an	adverse	event	caused	by,	or	associated	with,	a	device,	if	that	effect	or	problem	was	not	previously	identified	in	nature,	severity,	or	degree	of	incidence.		Serious	or	unexpected	adverse	events	must	be	reported	to	the	coordinating	center	immediately	via	completion	of	the	online	serious	adverse	event	form.		The	principal	investigator	[INVESTIGATOR_775466].		Notification	will	be	made	within	10	days	after	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_775467].		Such	events	will	be	reported	to	the	FDA	according	to	regulatory	requirements.		Each	principal	investigator	[INVESTIGATOR_775468]/her	IRB	of	serious	study-related	adverse	events	and	abiding	by	[CONTACT_775489].		
 
[ADDRESS_1065184]	4	times	daily.	This	should	not	be	a	significant	contributor	to	risks	in	this	study	as	finger	lancing	is	part	of	the	usual	care	for	people	with	diabetes.			3.6.2.		Sensor	site	risks		Whenever	the	skin	is	broken	there	is	the	possibility	of	an	infection.	CGM	sensors	are	inserted	under	the	skin.	There	may	be	bleeding	where	the	sensor	is	inserted,	which	can	cause	bruising.	CGM	site	infections	occur	very	infrequently,	but,	if	an	infection	was	to	occur,	oral	and/or	topi[INVESTIGATOR_775469].	The	risk	of	skin	problems	could	be	greater	if	a	sensor	is	left	in	longer	than	recommended.	Participants	will	be	carefully	instructed	about	proper	use	of	sensors.			3.7.		Risk	of	hypoglycemia		There	is	always	a	risk	of	hypoglycemia	for	patients	with	insulin-dependent	diabetes.	The	frequency	of	hypoglycemia	during	this	study	is	not	expected	to	be	greater	than	the	risk	incurred	during	daily	living.	If	severe	hypoglycemia	occurs,	it	is	readily	treated	with	either	oral	glucose	or	glucagon	injection.	To	minimize	the	risk	of	hypoglycemia	due	to	“stacking”	insulin	doses,	study	participants	will	be	instructed	in	their	initial	education	(face-to-face	and	in	educational	materials)	not	to	take	rapid	acting	insulin	injections	to	correct	hyperglycemia	more	than	once	every	3	hours.	Further,	the	low	glucose	alert	on	the	Dexcom	G5	system	will	be	set	at	70	mg/dl	for	all	participants	on	CGM.				3.8.		Risk	of	hyperglycemia		Hyperglycemia	and	ketonemia	can	occur	if	insulin	delivery	is	attenuated	or	suspended	for	an	extended	period.	This	is	a	risk	of	type	1	diabetes	that	is	not	expected	to	be	greater	during	the	study	period	than	it	is	during	daily	living.	If	severe	hyperglycemia	occurs,	participants	will	be	advised	to	treat	with	insulin	therapy	or	to	seek	medical	attention	from	the	child’s	diabetes	care	team.					3.9.		Other	risks		
 
21  Subjects	may	develop	skin	irritation	or	allergic	reactions	to	the	adhesives	used	to	secure	the	CGM.	If	these	reactions	occur,	different	adhesives	(such	as	with	IV	3000,	Tegaderm,	etc.)	will	be	tried,	sites	will	be	rotated	frequently,	and	a	mild	topi[INVESTIGATOR_775470].		Data	downloaded	from	the	CGM	and	the	home	glucose	meter	will	be	collected	for	the	study	as	measures	of	diabetes	self-management	behaviors.		Some	people	may	be	uncomfortable	with	the	researchers'	having	such	detailed	information	about	their	daily	diabetes	habits.		Psychological	and	human	factors	testing	and	focus	groups	may	make	study	participants	uncomfortable.	Subjects	are	free	to	withdraw	from	the	study	at	any	time.	A	psychologist	or	a	health	care	professional	will	be	available	to	help	them	with	their	stress	or	anxieties.				3.10.		Adequacy	of	protection	against	risks		3.10.1.		Recruitment	and	informed	consent		All	minorities	will	be	encouraged	to	participate.		Economically	and	educationally	disadvantaged	people,	parents	who	are	employed	at	the	clinical	center	(Stanford	or	the	University	of	Colorado)	will	be	eligible	to	enroll	their	child	in	this	study	if	they	meet	all	the	study	criteria.	Subjects	will	be	recruited	from	our	clinics,	chart	review,	and	IRB	approved	patient	recruitment	lists.	We	will	also	use	IRB	approved	recruitment	materials	to	post	the	study	on	clinicaltrials.gov	and	the	local	universities’	research	and	department	websites.	Participants	may	self-select	to	join	the	research	by	[CONTACT_775490].	These	posts	will	provide	contact	[CONTACT_775491].	We	will	not	interact	with	potential	participants	or	enrolled	participants	through	these	media.	We	will	actively	work	to	prevent	harm	to	all	subjects	enrolled	in	the	study.	We	will	work	to	avoid	coercion	by	[CONTACT_775492],	as	well	as	non-university	affiliated	subjects.	We	will	ensure	that	all	families	are	informed	that	their	participation	is	voluntary,	that	they	will	receive	no	ill	treatment	should	they	decide	to	not	participate,	and	that	they	will	receive	no	special	advantages,	aside	from	those	mentioned	in	the	"benefits"	section	of	the	consent,	for	participating	in	the	study.			Participation	will	be	voluntary	and	all	participants	must	provide	consent	prior	to	inclusion	in	this	research	study.		The	primary	investigator	at	each	of	the	participating	clinical	sites,	or	one	of	their	designees,	will	explain	the	nature,	purpose,	expected	duration,	and	risks	of	study	participation	to	each	eligible	family.		The	primary	investigator	at	each	site,	or	one	of	their	designees,	will	also	obtain	consent	and	authorization	for	the	release	of	personal	information.			For	children	<	[ADDRESS_1065185]	benefit	to	individual	subjects,	but	likely	to	yield	generalizable	knowledge	about	the	subjects’	disorder	or	condition.	In	accordance	with	federal	guideline	[ADDRESS_1065186]	and	their	parent	and/or	legal	guardian,	questions	will	be	answered	about	the	study,	and	the	participant	and/or	parent	and/or	legal	guardian	will	be	asked	to	explain	what	they	understand	about	the	study	in	order	to	assess	the	autonomy	of	the	subject	and	caregiver	and	their	comprehension	of	the	explanations	provided.		A	copy	of	the	consent	form	will	be	provided	to	the	adult	subjects	or	parent	or	guardian	of	subjects	<	[ADDRESS_1065187]’s	medical	file	at	the	participating	institution.				3.10.2.		Protections	against	risk		All	protocols	and	consent	documents	will	be	approved	by	[CONTACT_775493].			All	of	the	participating	clinical	centers	have	an	endocrinologist	on	call	24/[ADDRESS_1065188]	on	call.		Participants	in	the	intervention	group	will	receive	standardized	education	about	CGM	and	its	use	after	randomization.	Participants	in	the	control	group	who	wish	to	start	CGM	at	six	months	will	receive	standardized	education	about	CGM	and	its	use.	Both	groups	will	be	instructed	on	inserting	and	calibrating	the	sensor.	Participants	are	free	to	check	blood	glucose	via	fingerstick	at	any	time	and	encouraged	to	do	so	if/when	the	child	or	parent	notices	a	potential	discrepancy	between	CGM	and	fingerstick	values.	A	person	trained	in	delivering	education	about	CGM	will	deliver	the	education	about	CGM	use	and	will	assist	with	inserting	the	first	sensor.	This	individual	will	be	available	to	assist	with	questions	from	participating	families.	In	addition,	Dexcom	representatives	are	available	to	the	family	for	technical	questions	or	issues	with	the	system,	just	like	the	access	any	Dexcom	user	has.				3.11.		Study	stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_775471]:		pregnancy,	study-related	adverse	events	(i.e.	severe	hypoglycemia,	loss	of	consciousness,	hypoglycemia	related	seizure,	DKA	related	to	non-adjunctive	CGM	use	or	study-related	event	requiring	hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]),	severe	skin	infection	requiring	systemic	antibiotics,	severe	reaction	to	sensor	tape,	or	other	reasons	that	develop	during	the	study	that	in	the	judgment	of	the	investigator	make	it	unadvisable	for	the	subject	to	continue	with	the	study.
 
23  CHAPTER	4:	MISCELLANEOUS	CONSIDERATIONS		4.1.		Benefits		It	is	expected	that	this	protocol	will	yield	knowledge	about	the	impact	of	continuous	glucose	monitoring	on	families	with	newly	diagnosed	children	with	type	1	diabetes.	The	introduction	of	CGM	in	youth	with	T1D	at	diagnosis	might	allay	parents’	fears,	ease	their	sense	of	diabetes-related	distress	and	foreboding,	and	impact	glycemic	variables	measured	during	the	first	year	of	T1D,	however	there	is	no	guarantee	of	any	benefit	from	participating	in	this	research	study.		4.2.		Subject	compensation		There	will	be	no	cost	to	the	subjects	to	participate	in	this	research	study.	Parents	will	receive	$40	for	the	completion	of	each	of	three	assessments.	Youth	11-17	years	of	age	will	receive	$25	for	the	completion	of	each	of	three	assessments.	In	total,	a	family	can	receive	$[ADDRESS_1065189]	benefit	to	individual	subjects,	but	likely	to	yield	generalizable	knowledge	about	the	subjects'	disorder	or	condition.				
 
24  							
 
25  	
