PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 1 of 38  
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE : 
Randomized Trial of a Positive Psychology Intervention for Patients with Hematologic Malignancies 
Undergoing Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
[INVESTIGATOR_102884] L. Amonoo , MD, MPP  
Department : Psychosocial Oncology and Palliative Care  
NCT: 05147311  
 
 
VERSION NUMBER:  1.3 
 
DATE: 11/12/2021 
Date of IRB Submission: 11/12/2021  
Date of IRB Approval: 11/17/2021  
  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 2 of 38  
Section 1: Protocol Schema  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Screening: 
Patients ≥ [ADDRESS_113894] 
Patient Enrollment 
(Approximately [ADDRESS_113895]) 
Complete registration and baseline data collection 
Patient Randomization 
9-week post-assessment 
18-week post-assessment 
PATH Intervention 
9 weekly phone sessions 
Usual Care Control 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 3 of 38  
 
Table of Contents  
1.0 Objectives*  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  4 
2.0 Background*  ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  5 
2.3 Relevant Preliminary Studies.  ................................ ................................ ..................  6 
3.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria*  ................................ ................................ ............  7 
4.0 Study -Wide Number of Subjects*  ................................ ................................ ...........  8 
5.0 Study -Wide Recruitment Methods*  ................................ ................................ ........  8 
6.0 Multi -Site Research*  ................................ ................................ ...............................  9 
7.0 Study Timelines*  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 9 
8.0 Study Endpoints*  ................................ ................................ ................................ ... 10 
9.0 Procedures Involved* ................................ ................................ .............................  10 
10.0  Data and Specimen Banking*  ................................ ................................ ................  18 
11.0  Data Management* and Confidentiality  ................................ ................................  21 
12.0  Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects*  ........................  17 
13.0  Withdrawal of Subjects*  ................................ ................................ ........................  25 
14.0  Risks to Subjects*  ................................ ................................ ................................ .. 26 
15.0  Potential Benefits to Subjects*  ................................ ................................ ..............  27 
16.0  Vulnerable Populations*  ................................ ................................ ........................  21 
17.0  Community -Based Participatory Research*  ................................ ..........................  21 
18.0  Sharing of Results with Subjects*  ................................ ................................ .........  [ADDRESS_113896] the Privacy Interests of Subjects  ................................ ..........  30 
25.0  Compensation for Research -Related Injury  ................................ ...........................  31 
26.0  Economic Burden to Subjects  ................................ ................................ ................  31 
27.0  Consent Process  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... 31 
28.0  Process to Document Consent in Writing  ................................ ..............................  32 
29.0  Drugs or Devices ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 30 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 4 of 38  
1.0 Objectives * 
1.1 Overview  
Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation  (HSCT)  is an intensive treatment that offers a potential cure 
for some hemat ologic malignancies . The prolonged hospi[INVESTIGATOR_102885].[ADDRESS_113897] substantial psychological distress2 and experience diminished 
positive psychological well -being (PPWB; e.g., optimism, positive affect, or gratitude).3 PPWB is prospectively 
associated with improved quality of life (QOL), physical functioning, and survival in allogeneic recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840],  
independent of medical or socio -demographic variables, and above and beyond the adverse effects of 
depression.4,5,6 This suggests  that there may be substantial benefit from cultivating PPWB in this population. 
Positive psychology interventions (PPIs) are interventions that encourage patients to perform simple, enjoyable 
activities (e.g., writing a gratitude letter,7 performing  acts of kindnes s8) that consistently and durably improve 
PPWB in a wide variety of populations.9,10,[ADDRESS_113898] never been tested in 
allogeneic transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840].  Informed by [CONTACT_102923],16 an 
efficacious PPI [INVESTIGATOR_102886],17 and findings from our prior (17-154) work  that 
explored PPWB in 25 allogeneic recipi[INVESTIGATOR_102887] -structured interviews in which patients reported that 
positive emotional experiences resulted in increased motivation to engage in treatment and participate in health 
behaviors ,18 we develop ed the Positive psychology for Allogeneic Transplantation of Hematopoietic stem cell 
intervention (PATH) , to fill this gap . PATH is a novel [ADDRESS_113899] completed a one -arm proof -of-concept study  (18-225) 
to assess the feasibility and acceptability of the PATH intervention.[ADDRESS_113900], symptoms of depression and anxiety, quality of life,  (QOL)  and fatigue.[ADDRESS_113901].  
 
1.2 Specific Aims /Objectives  
#1 (Feasibility; Primary Aim): To determine the feasibility  and acceptability  of the PATH intervention 
in patients with hematologic malignancy undergoing HSCT . 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 5 of 38  
Hypothesis : The PATH intervention will be deemed feasible  with >75% of participants  randomized to 
the intervention arm  completing ≥ 6/9 positive psychology exercises.  The PATH intervention will be 
deemed acceptable with mean ease and utility  scores  of each exercise being ≥ 7/10. 
#2 (Effects  on Patient -Reported Outcomes ): To assess the preliminary efficacy of the PATH 
intervention on psychological (e.g., depression, anxiety, optimism, positive affect), QOL , and functional 
outcomes compared to the usual care condition . 
Hypothesis: Patients randomized to the PATH intervention will have improved PPWB (e.g., optimism, 
positive affect, gratitude), mood (e.g., depression and anxiety), and QOL compared to those in the usual 
care condition . 
#3 (Effects  on Health Behaviors ): To examine the impact of the PATH intervention on behavioral 
outcomes (e.g., medication adherence, physical activity) compared to those in the usual care condition . 
Hypothesis: Patients randomized to the PATH intervention will have improved behavioral outcomes 
(e.g., medication adherence, physical activity)  compared to those in the usual care condition . 
 
2.0 Background * 
 
Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation offers a potential cure for some hematologic malignancies.  
Fifteen thousand allogeneic stem cell transplantations are performed in the [LOCATION_002] annually, and this 
number is projected to increase five -fold by 2030.[ADDRESS_113902] -transplant complications .21,22-27 For example, 50-70% of patients undergoing 
HSCT experience  moderate to severe nausea, diarrhea, pain, insomnia, and fatigue.24, [ADDRESS_113903] .26-28 
 
Psychological distress is common in hematopoietic stem cell  transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840].29,30,31 The prolonged 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], social isolation, quarantine status, painful side effects, infections, and frequent outpatient follow -
up visits can cause significant psychological distress even in the absence of formal psychiatric diagnoses.32,33,34 
For example,  40% of patients report clinically significant depression and anxiety symptoms during H SCT.23, 24, [ADDRESS_113904] consistently shown that symptoms of psychological distress (e.g., depressi on, 
anxiety) is prospectively associated with worse health outcomes, including decreased QOL, higher risk of graft 
vs. host disease (GVHD), and increased mortality.2, [ADDRESS_113905] significant physical and psychological needs, and interventions that reduce distress and 
its associated negative outcomes are needed for allogeneic transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840].  
 
Low levels of positive psychological well -being (PPWB) are also common in hematopoietic stem cell  
transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_102888].  Low levels of 
PPWB (e.g., optimism, positive affect) in allogeneic transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_102889],38 poorer immune response,39 and increased mortality.40 These poor health outcomes are likely 
mediated through deficits in health behaviors (e.g., medication adherence, physical activity),41 and indeed low 
PPWB has been prospectively associated with poorer adherence to diet, medication , and physical activity in other 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_113906]  recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840], low PPWB and its associated effects on health behaviors are not only 
important in the short -term (e.g., for adherence to immunosuppressants), but also in the long term, as poor 
adherence to health behaviors can lead to secondary health problem s (e.g., cardiovascular disease), low QOL, and 
increased mortality in cancer survivors.44,[ADDRESS_113907]  recipi[INVESTIGATOR_102890],46 reduced fatigue and pain,47 faster day to neutrophil engraftment,39 and lower mortality.40 
 
Positive psychological interventions (PPIs) could be used to promote PPWB in the allogeneic transplant 
population. PPIs are interventions that encourage patients to systematically perform simple, enjoyable structured 
tasks and activities (e.g., writing a letter of gratitude, leveraging previous successes) that increase the intensity of 
positive thoughts and emotions.17, 48 A meta -analysis of 51 PPIs in >4000 participants found that PPIs enhance 
well-being and improve depressive symptoms, with effects persisting for up to 6 months.7, 49 Randomized trials 
of PPIs in medical populations (e.g., patients with coronary artery disease,11 hypertension,10 or an acute coronary 
syndrome9) have found PPIs to be associated with greater PPWB, improved depression, improved QOL, greater 
medication adherence, and more physical activity.42, [ADDRESS_113908]: Despi[INVESTIGATOR_102891],9, [ADDRESS_113909] never been tested in 
allogeneic recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]. Accordingly,  informed by [CONTACT_102923],16 our team’s 
efficacious PPI [INVESTIGATOR_102892],[ADDRESS_113910] develop ed the Positive psychology for Allogenic Transplantation of Hematopoietic stem cell intervention 
(PATH), a novel [ADDRESS_113911] also completed a one -arm proof -of-concept study  
(18-225) to assess the feasibility and acceptability of the PATH intervention.[ADDRESS_113912]. Our findings from the proof -of concept trial  (18-225) suggest that the next step in this 
intervention development line of research is to conduct a randomized feasibility and preliminary efficacy trial to 
demonstrate feasibility and preliminary efficacy of the intervention in improving clinical outcomes. Find ings from 
this single center randomized trial will lay the important groundwork for larger , multi-site randomized trails to 
establish efficacy.  
 
Conceptual Model : Our conceptual model in Figure 2 , adapted from the Broaden and Build Theory of 
Positive Emotions , proposes that PPWB increases patients’ emotional and cognitive resources for 
problem -solving strategies and copi[INVESTIGATOR_007].[ADDRESS_113913] outcomes (e.g., survival and GVHD 
severity)3 via decreased depression  and anxiety ,55 and improved copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], QOL,42, 48 physical function ,9, 56 
and health behavior adherence.48 (Figure 2) 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 7 of 38  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.0 Inclusion  and Exclusion Criteria*  
We propose a single center randomized controlled trial of the PATH intervention versus usual care in 70 patients 
(age ≥18) with hematologic malignancies who have undergone HSCT. Participants will be  recruited from the 
Dana Farber Cancer Institute (DFCI) HSCT Program. Participants will be randomized equally to the two arms 
using randomized permuted blocks of sizes two and four, with randomization stratified by [CONTACT_102924]/absence of 
graft versus host disease (GVHD) . As a llogeneic transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_102893], QOL, and function post -transplant , we will stratify by [CONTACT_102925].  
 
 3.1    Screening Procedures:  
Eligible study participants will be identified  using the DFCI HSCT clinic database . The clinical research 
coordinator (CRC) will review the database to screen for eligible patients. We have utilized this study procedure 
in our proof -of-concept trial ( 18-225) and enrolled 56% of potentially eligible participants.  
 
Patients who have been approved for the study  by [CONTACT_102926] a routine clinic visit  by a member of the study team  after inclusion/exclusion criteria is assessed . 
Eligible patients  will be screened and provided (in -person at clinic, mailed or e -mailed) an information sheet 
(Appendix  A) of the study to review prior to their completing consent procedures .  
PATH  
Intervention  
PPWB  
(e.g., optimism, positive affect)  
Health -Related Outcomes  
QoL 
Mood (depression, anxiety)  
Copi[INVESTIGATOR_102894]-care 
Medication adherence  
 
HSCT Outcomes  
Mortality  
Readmissions  
Infection Rates  
GVHD Severity  
 
Figure 2. Conceptual Model  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 8 of 38  
The DFCI will register eligible participants in the Clinical Trials Management System (CTMS) OnCore as 
required by [CONTACT_102927]/HCC SOP REGIST -101. When required by [CONTACT_102928] -101, registration must occur prior to the 
initiation of protocol -specific procedures or assess ments.  
 
 3.2    Eligibility Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Adult patients  (≥ 18 years)  with hematologic malignancies  who have received  allogeneic HSCT 
at the DFCI who are approaching [ADDRESS_113914]-transplant milestone . 
2. Ability to speak, read and write English .  
3. Access to a telephone . 
Exclusion Criteria  
1. Cognitive deficits impeding a study participant’s ability to provide informed consent or 
participate adequately in the study procedures assessed via a  commonly used  6-item cognitive 
assessment  with the Brief Interview for Mental Status (BIMS) .57 (Appendix B) 
2. Medical conditions precluding interviews.  
3. Patients undergoing H SCT for benign hematologic conditions . 
4. Patients undergoing outpatient H SCT. 
5. Patients with psychiatric or cognitive conditions which the treating clinicians believes prohibits 
compliance with study procedures.  
6. Patients who are unable to consent or are not yet adults (including infants, children, teenagers), 
pregnant women , or prisoners . 
 
4.0 Study -Wide Number of Subjects*  
We propose to recruit [ADDRESS_113915] from one 
site – DFCI . This is not a multi -site study . 
 
5.0 Study -Wide Recruitment Methods  
5.1 Recruitment and Enrollment Procedures:  
Prior to study start, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_102895], recruitment, and enrollment procedures. The CRC will screen the 
DFCI HSCT clinic database to recruit, screen, and identify potentially eligble pa tients. The CRC will then email 
the transplant oncology clinician to notify them that the patient is potentially eligible for study participation and 
to inquire about any concerns regarding their study partic ipation  (Appendix C) . If the treating transplant 
clinician has any concerns regarding a patient’s study participation , then the CRC will document the reason and 
not approach th at individual. If there is no concern regarding study participation, the CRC will approach 
patients  for study participation  as they approach their 70-80-day post transplant recovery milestone  over the 
phone or in clinic and ask if they are interested in participating (Appendix D). Patients will only be contact[CONTACT_102929] a call back number to either opt -in or opt -out of the study. 
Interested participants will be screened with the BIMS and provided (in -person at clinic, mailed or e -mailed) an 
information sheet of the study to review prior to their completing consent procedures.  Patients will have the 
option of enrolling in the study in -person at the patient’ s scheduled clinic visit or over the telephone with a 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 9 of 38  
verbal consent (Appendix E) seven days after receiving the study information sheet . Consented participants will 
then receive an Actigraph GT3X+  and MEMS Cap for baseline (Day [ADDRESS_113916]) physical activity and 
medication adherence assessment , respectively . Additionally, consented participants will complete baseline 
assessments around Day [ADDRESS_113917] consented, provided 
baseline Actigraph GT3X+  data, and completed baseli ne assessments. If participants provide  consent but do not 
complete baseline Actigraph data collection and assessments, they will not count towards accrual numbers. 
Participants who withdraw from the study or die during the study period will not be replaced and they will 
count towards accrual numbers.  
 
DF/HCC institutions will register eligible participants in the Clinical Trials Management System (CTMS) 
Oncore as required by [CONTACT_102927]/HCC SOP REGIST -101. Registration must occur after the initiation of protocol -
specific procedures or assessments.  
 
For registration of pa rticipants  from the DF/HCC institutions, study  staff will complete the DF/HCC protocol -
specific eligibility checklist. Study staff will confirm that the participant meets all inclusion criteria as described 
in this protocol. Study staff will then register study participants through OnCore. Study staff will follow 
DF/HCC Standard Operating Procedure for Human Subject Research Titled Subject Protocol Registration (SOP 
#: REGIST -101) and register the participant on the protocol.  
 
Once the patient has been registered, a member from the MGH Cardiac Psychiatry  Research Program ( CPRP ) 
team or the Cancer Outcomes Research and Education Program (CoRE) (independent from the study staff) will 
perform randomization procedures using a computer -generated randomization schema, stratified by [CONTACT_102930] . 
 
6.0 Multi -Site Research  
Not Applicable . This research is located at one site – the DFCI main campus  
 
7.0 Study Timelines* : Table 1 depi[INVESTIGATOR_102896] . 
Time Point  Table 1 : Study Procedure  
Months [ADDRESS_113918] for approval  
Months 3 -4 
 Staff Training  
❖ Hire CRC  and train them  in study procedures, recruitment, and data collection . 
Months 5-29 
 Randomized Controlled Trial:  
❖ Enroll and randomly assign 70 patients ( 35 per study group) to receive either the PATH intervention  vs. usual 
care control . 
Months 30-35 Data Collection:  
❖ Complete longitudinal dat a collection with a minimum of 1 year  follow -up on all study participants.  
Months 36-40 Data Analysis:  
❖ Complete data analysis and submit primary manuscripts . 
❖ Prepare and submit grant proposal for large scale multi -site randomized controlled efficacy  study.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_113919] patient -reported outcomes. We 
estimate that we will complete the primary manuscripts in months 57 -60 from the study start period . 
 
8.0 Study Endpoints * 
 
Primary Endpoint:  
➢ Establish  feasibility and acceptability of the PATH intervention  in the intervention group .  
Secondary Endpoint s:  
➢ Compare patients’ QOL (FACT -BMT) scores longitudinally between the study groups  
➢ Compare patients’ positive psychological wellbeing factors [ e.g., optimism (LOT -R) and 
positive affect (PANAS)] between the study groups  
➢ Compare patients’ symptoms of anxiety and depression (HADS) between the study 
groups  
➢ Compare patients’ post -traumatic stress symptoms (PCL -C) between the study groups  
➢ Compare patients’ fatigue ( PROMIS -fatigue) scores between the study groups  
➢ Compare patients’ physical activity ( Actigraph GT3X+  data)  and physical functioning 
(PROMIS -PF-20) between the study groups  
➢ Compare patients’ medication adherence (MEMS Cap data , SSEQ, MARS -5) between 
the study groups  
➢ There are currently no anticipated primary or secondary safety endpoints.  
Exploratory  Endpoints:  
➢ Compare patients’ copi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (Brief Cope) between the study groups  
➢ Assess whether group differences in patient reported QOL are mediated by [CONTACT_102931] (mediator: HADS) or copi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (mediator: Brief Cope)  
 
9.0 Procedures Involved * 
9.1 Study Design  
We propose a single center randomized trial of a positive psychology intervention (PATH)  
versus usual care in [ADDRESS_113920].   Participants 
will be randomized equally to the two arms using randomized permuted blocks of sizes two and 
four, with randomization stratified by [CONTACT_102924]/absence of GVHD . As allogeneic transplant 
recipi[INVESTIGATOR_102897], QOL, and function post -
transplant, we will stratify by [CONTACT_102932] e adequate and balanced representation 
between the two study groups.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_113921] -transplant visit for eligibility determination . Interested patients will be screened 
based on the inclusion/exclusion criteria and provided a study information sheet via mail, e -mail 
or in-person at a routine clinic visit.  Consent  procedures would be completed  in-person at a 
routine clinic visit or verbally over the phone approximately seven days after study information 
is provided .  
Upon consent to participate in the study, participants will be given  an electronic pi[INVESTIGATOR_73586] 
(MEMS Cap)  [to be used from the time of baseline assessment completion through the entire 
duration of the intervention] , and an accelerometer to be worn for [ADDRESS_113922] week of the intervention, all participants  (regardless of whether 
they are in the intervention group or usual care  group)  will be mailed  (or given in person at a routine 
follow -up clinic visit)  an accelerometer to be worn for 7 days prior to the follow -up survey. After the 
Week 9 intervention phone session , all participants (regardless of whether they are in the intervention 
group or usual care  group) will repeat self -assessment questionnaires completed at baseline either over 
the phone , in-person at a routine clinic visit  or via a REDCap survey link emailed to participants . 
Additionally, participants  randomized to the intervention group  will be asked to complete a recorded 
exit interview  (Appendix F)  over the phone. At study completion , we will inquire about participants’  
potential interest in being contact[CONTACT_102933].  We will adhere to any and all participant 
requests regarding contact.  Participants will also return the accelerometer and MEMS Caps at the end of 
the study via mail  or in person during a routine follow -up clinic visit . All participants will receive a $50 
check after the 9 -week follow -up assessments . Participan ts who complete the 18 -week follow -up 
assessments will receive an additional $50 check.  
  
9.2 The PATH Intervention  
Participants  randomized to the PATH intervention will meet (via phone) with the interventionist 
around approximately day [ADDRESS_113923] will then meet weekly with patients via phone to 
review each positive psychology exercise.  
 
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 12 of 38  
As shown in Table 2 above, the PATH intervention will focus on three main modules: 1) 
gratitude/positive affect -based exercises; 2)  strengths -based exercises; and 3) optimism and 
meaning -based exercises.  
• Training:  The PP exercises for this trial have been identified via published literature, or directly 
from researchers, and modified appropriately for this population based on results from our prior 
work (17 -154 and 18 -225). Additional text outlining the rationale and instructions for each 
exercise are in the written packets for each exercise that are provided to participants. [CONTACT_102971], study interventionists  ([CONTACT_102972] will be the primary study interventionist and will 
be covered by [CONTACT_102934]  (Drs. F eig and Milstein)  who have extensive  training and expertise 
in delivering positive psychology interventions) , and CRCs  will engage in several training 
exercises prior to study initiation. [CONTACT_102972]  and [CONTACT_102973] (research mentor) have had 
substantial experience in delivering PP exercises from prior work  which will inform training of  
other study team members. Together with [CONTACT_102974], [CONTACT_102972] will also review the 
treatment manual and the team’s prior training manuals related to these exercises.  
• Ensuring Fidelity of the PATH  Intervention : We will take several measures to ensure the 
fidelity of our study design and intervention delivery. (Table 3) For the study design, we will use 
a  well -established intervention guide utilized in prior studies by [CONTACT_102935][INVESTIGATOR_2268] -tested in 
this populat ion (18 -225), and monitor the number of participants in our control group. Also, we 
will use rigorous training procedures for our CRCs . To ensure fidelity of the intervention 
delivery, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_102898]. Huffman, her primary research mentor for the study 
and a world leader in PPI [INVESTIGATOR_102899]. [CONTACT_102974]  will 
provide ongoing training on effective and consistent delivery of positive psychological exercises 
to pa rticipants  and will help to problem -solve issues as they come up during the intervention 
delivery. We will audio -record all sessions and use a fidelity structure developed from prior 
work17, 54 to measure the extent to which domains of each session are addressed. On a monthly 
basis, Drs. Huffman and El -Jawahri  (research mentor)  will independently review (and rate for Table 2. PP intervention component: modules and exercises. Intervention content will be customized to HSCT context . 
 
Module 1: Gratitude/positive affect -based exercises  
Week [ADDRESS_113924] a useful activity from the prior two weeks, consider how to adapt the 
activity to daily life, and develop a plan to utilize this skill regularly.  
Module 2: Strengths -based exercises  
Week [ADDRESS_113925] 
to use one of their ‘signature [CONTACT_75916]’ in the next [ADDRESS_113926] a useful activity from the prior two weeks, consider how to adapt the 
activity to daily life, and develop a plan to utilize this skill regularly.  
Module 3: Optimism and meaning -based exercises  
Week 7  Enjoyable and 
meaningful 
activities59 Participants complete three activities: an enjoyable activity alone, an enjoyable activity with 
another person, and a meaningful activity completed alone or with others.  
[ADDRESS_113927] possible (realistic) future one year from 
now and consider small short -term steps to take toward such a future.  
9 Skills application + 
future planning  Participants select an activity from this module and develop a plan to utilize this skill —and 
additional skills from the program —this week and beyond  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 13 of 38  
fidelity, using an adapted scale) a random sample of 10% of the audio -recorded sessions to 
ensure intervention fidelity.  
Table 3: Fidelity  Steps Taken to Ensure Fidelity  Fidelity Assessment  
 
Study Design  - Intervention based on  extensive literature review, 
prior work in several medical populations and pi[INVESTIGATOR_102900]   
- Standard intervention dose with clear feasibility data 
based on prior work  - Utilize  evidence -based positive psychology  
intervention guide based on prior trial s 
- Measure number of intervention visits  
Intervention 
Delivery  
 - Utilization of prior tested positive psychology  
intervention guide with standardized content areas  
- Audio -record all intervention calls and sessions  
 - Study PI [INVESTIGATOR_102901]. Huffman weekly for 
ongoing training of consistent intervention delivery  
- [CONTACT_102974] will help problem -solve issues as 
they come up during the intervention delivery  
- On a monthly basis, Drs. Huffman and El -Jawahri 
will independently review (and rate for fidelity, 
using an adapted scale) a random sample of 10% 
of the audio -recorded sessions to ensure 
intervention fidelity  
 
9.[ADDRESS_113928] recovery. 
Routinely, allogeneic transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_102902] a social worker prior to their 
transplant and the social worker is available to meet regularly during their recovery; typi[INVESTIGATOR_897], 
social workers see patients once  every 2 -3 months, and their work does not focus on PPWB skill 
building or cognitive strategies. Pa rticipants  in both conditions can see the social worker and 
receive any other treatments for mental or physical health, as desired. We will track social work 
visits and other supportive care measures (including any visits with mental health clinicians) in 
both group s. Data collected on social work consultations will be considered as covariates in our 
analyses.  
9.[ADDRESS_113929] selected self -assessment measures based on our prior work and the conceptual 
framework of our intervention which seeks to improve psychological outcomes, QOL, fatigue, 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262], and health behaviors in patients recovering from an allogenei c stem cell 
transplant.  
1.1.1.  Demographics:  Patients will complete a demographic questionnaire at baseline 
detailing their age, sex, race, ethnicity, religion, relationship status, educational level, 
annual household income, and living situation . (Appendix G)  
 
1.1.2.  QOL:  We will use the 47-item Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy -Bone 
Marrow Transplant (FACT -BMT) to assess QOL, which has been validated for use in 
patients undergoing HCT.[ADDRESS_113930] -BMT consists of f ive subscales assessing well -
being across four domains (physical, functional, emotional,  social , and bone marrow 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 14 of 38  
transplant symptoms ). These  self-reported measures possess strong psychometric 
properties and have been validated for patients undergoing HSCT . (Appendix H) 
 
1.1.3.  Fatigue : We will use the Patient Reported Outcome Measurement Information 
System -Fatigue -8a (PROMIS -Fatigue -8a) questionnaire to assess fatigue. The PROMIS -
Fatigue -8a is a [ADDRESS_113931]. Higher 
scores indicate greater fatigue.62 (Appendix  I) 
 
1.1.4.  Overall Function : We will use the  20-item Patient -Reported Outcomes 
Measurement Information System -Physical Function -20 (PROMIS -PF-20); higher scores 
indicate better physical function.63 (Appendix J) 
1.1.5.  Mood : We will use the Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5620] (HADS) to 
assess symptoms of depression and anxiety in all study participants. The HADS is 
a 14-item questionnaire that contains two [ADDRESS_113932] week (Appendix  K).64 Used extensively in 
samples of patients with cancer, the questionnaire consists of a four -point item 
response form that quantifies the degree to which participants experience mood 
symptoms. Scores on each subscale range from 0 to 21, with a cutoff of 8 or  
greater denoting clinically significant anxiety or depression.  
1.1.6.  PTSD symptoms: We will use the Post -Traumatic Stress Disorder 
Checklist (PCL) to assess symptoms of post -traumatic stress in patients. The PCL 
is a [ADDRESS_113933] -traumatic 
stress disorder according to the criteria of the Di agnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders -IV.65(Appendix L) 
1.1.7.  Optimism : We will use the 10-item Life Orientation Test -Revised (LOT -
R) to measure dispositional (trait) optimism . Higher scores indicate greater 
optimism.66 (Appendix M) 
1.1.8.  Positive Affect:  We will use  the [ADDRESS_113934] 
Schedule (PANAS)  to measure positive affect ; higher scores indicate greater 
positive and negative affect.67 (Appendix N) 
1.1.9.   Social Support : We will assess social support using the 26 -item Social 
Support Effectiveness Questionnaire (SSEQ), a validated instrument used in 
oncological population to assess patients’ perception of social support.68, 69 
(Appendix O) 
1.1.10.  Copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262]: We will use the Brief Cope, a 28 -item questionnaire 
that assess 14 methods of copi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (e.g., self -distraction, humor, denial) using a 4 -
point Likert scale.70 (Appendix P) 
1.1.11.  Satisfaction:  We will use the 5 -item Satisfaction with Life Scale (SWLS) 
to measure satisfaction with life; higher scores indicate greater satisfaction with 
life.71 [Appendix Q] 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 15 of 38  
1.1.12.  Gratitude:  We will use the 6 -item Gratitude Questionnaire to   measure 
dispositional gratitude; higher scores indicate greater proneness to experience 
gratitude in daily life.72 [Appendix R] 
1.1.13.  Purpose and Flourishing:  We will use the 8 -item Flourishing Scale to 
assesses a person’s self -perceived success in critical areas such as engagement, 
relationships, self -esteem, meaning & purpose, and optimism; higher scores 
indicate many psychological resources and strengths.73 [Appendix S] 
1.1.14.  Health Behaviors : Physical activity and medication adherence will be the 
target behavioral outcome measures. We will use t he well -validated Actigraph 
GT3X+ accelerometer,74 at baseline, Week 9, and Week 18, for 7 days of wear; 
minimum acceptable use is 4+ days with 10+ hours of recorded data as in prior 
guidelines75-77 to measure minutes/day of light activity (100 -1951 counts/min78) 
as our primary activity measure, along with sedentary leisure time (SL T),74, 79 
given their links to health outcomes.  Medication  (specifically 
immunosuppressant, tacrolimus or sirolimus)  adherence will be measured via the 
widely used electronic pi[INVESTIGATOR_102903], MEMS Caps ,80 to electronically 
monitor immunosuppressant adherence over the duration of the study. From the 
EHR and confirmed by [CONTACT_1962], we will determine immunosuppressant 
medication and dosing, and we will calculate changes in adherence over time (% 
of medication correctly taken, by [CONTACT_102936]), based on MEMS data. 
Additionally, we will assess self -reported adherence to Tacrolimus (an 
immunosuppressant medication which all allogeneic HSCT patients must take) 
with the Medication Adherence Scale -5 (MARS -5).81, 82 (Appendix  T)  
9.[ADDRESS_113935]:  
Study staff will collect clinical, disease, and transplant characteristics at baseline including: 
ECOG Performance Status at the time of H SCT, clinical comorbidities as measured by [CONTACT_102937] -
Comorbidity Index,[ADDRESS_113936] and enter all patient -reported data electronically using Research Electronic Data Capture 
(REDCap). The REDCap Survey is a tool for building and managing online surveys. Vanderbilt 
University, in collaboration with a consortium of instituti onal partners, has developed this software and 
workflow methodology for electronic collection and management of research and clinical trial data. Our 
research team has extensive experience using REDCap and will create and design the surveys in a web 
browse r, with institutional information technology support. The REDCap Survey system offers secure, 
HIPAA compliant, web -based applications that provide an intuitive interface for participants to enter 
data, with real -time validation rules at the time of entry.  
 
Participants will  be e-mailed (Appendix U) a remote access to the REDCap system containing 
questionnaires for them to complete or they can  complete questionnaires during in-person clinic  visits . If 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_113937] pa rticipants  (in person  or via 
telephone ) daily for two days to remind them to complete and return the surveys. If study participants 
fail to complete the surveys within seven  days of the expected time point, we will report the data as 
missing and document the reason for incompletion. Table 4 details the schedule for administering the 
self-report measures. At enrollment all participants will be mailed  the Actigraph GT3X+  (together with 
instructions (Appendix  V) on how to use the Actigraph ) for 7 days of wear; minimum acceptable use is 
4+ days with 10+ hours of recorded data around day [ADDRESS_113938] -transplant. After baseline physical activity data collection, participants 
will mail back the Actigraph  in prepaid envelopes we will provide. In addition to the Actigraph , 
participants will also be mailed the MEMS Cap  (together with the instructions (Appendix W) on how to 
use the MEMS Cap)  for medication  (immunosuppressant)  adherence assessment over the entire duration 
of the intervention starting at the time of baseline surveys around day [ADDRESS_113939] -transplant . All 
participants will then complete follow -up assessments at Week-9 (with a 1 week window) and at Week-
18 (+/ - 1 week window) of intervention initiation.  
 
  
Table 4 : Administration of Self -Report Measures  
Participant  Baseline  Week -9 (+ 1 week 
window)  Week -18 (+/ - 1 week 
window)  
Patient Measures:       
Demographics  X   
FACT -BMT  X X X 
PROMIS -Fatigue 8a  X X X 
PROMIS -PF-20 X X X 
HADS  X X X 
PCL (PTSD)  X X X 
LOT -R X X X 
PANAS  X X X 
GQ-6 X X X 
SWLS  X X X 
Flourishing Scale  X X X 
Brief Cope  X X X 
MARS -5 X X X 
SSEQ  X X X 
Accelerometer  X X  
MEMS -Cap Longitudinal from baseline through week 9   
 
 
9.7 Overview of Research Procedures  
Initial/Enrollment phone call:  During this initial approach at a routine outpatient follow -up clinic 
or phone call, the study procedures will be explained to potential participants. Those who are 
interested will be screened for eligibility and , mailed or e -mailed a copy of the study information 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 17 of 38  
sheet. We will then call patients upon receipt of the information sheet approximately seven days 
from receipt of the information sheet for enrollment and written  consent procedures  during a 
routine clinic visit  or verbal consent procedures over the phone . Consented participants  will then 
be randomized to usual care or the intervention group.  All participants will be  mailed (or given 
in person at a routine follow -up visit) the electronic pi[INVESTIGATOR_73586] (MEMS Caps), and the 
accelerometer (Actigraph GT3X+, small half-dollar sized device that clip on to a belt with no 
visible readout thus preventing independent subject access to data)  to wear for 7 days  prior to the 
intervention initiation in the control group . Participants in the intervention group will also be 
mailed t he study intervention manual  together with their accelerometer and electronic pi[INVESTIGATOR_73586] . 
At the time of  the baseline survey and prior to the start of the intervention, adequate 
accelerometer wear (at least 4 days with 10+ hours per day worn) will b e confirmed.  Participants 
in the intervention group will also be mailed t he study intervention manual . Those who have not 
completed sufficient wear of the device will be asked to re -wear the device until there is 
sufficient baseline data available.  
Baseline  Assessments : Around the time of each participant’s r outine 85-95-day post-transplant 
routine clinic  visit, participants will be asked to complete baseline assessment questionnaires 
either in person during a routine follow -up visit in clinic, over phone , or via a REDCap survey 
link that will be e -mailed to participants.  
After completion of the baseline survey and a returned accelerometer with adequate data , the 
interventionist will review the mailed  treatment manual with weekly PP exercises  to those in the 
intervention group . Participants in the intervention group will be assigned the first exercise (gratitude for 
positive events) in preparation for their first phone session .  
  
Weekly phone sessions for positive psychology intervention : Participants in the intervention group will 
be asked to complete the [ADDRESS_113940] approximately 15-20 minutes. Prior to completing each phone session , 
participant s will be asked to rate their current level of happi[INVESTIGATOR_102904], using a 10 -point Likert 
scale. Immediately after completing the exercise  and phone session , participant s will rate the ease of 
exercise /session  completion, overall utility of the exercise /phone session , and their current levels of 
happi[INVESTIGATOR_102904], all using 10 -point Likert scales. These calls will be recorded using the SONY 
IC Recorder ICD -PX370 so that a percentage (10%) of these recordings can be reviewed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. 
Huffman , to ensure that the PP inte rvention is being delivered as described in the protocol.  Given the 
results of our prior PP studies in medical populations yielding a 64 -85% completion rate of the 
exercises,  our recent proof -of-concept trial (18 -225) yielding 100% completion rate in this population , 
and given that this is a feasibility study (i.e., we want to assess participants’ willingness to complete the 
phone sessions), we will expect participants to complete at least [ADDRESS_113941] 6 sessions, missed sessions will not be considered a deviation from the 
protocol.  
 
All participants will receive a $50 check after completion of the intervention. Participants in the usual 
care group will also receive a $50 at the same timepoint. All p articipants  (in either the usual care group 
or intervention group ) who complete 18 -week follow -up assessments will receive an additional $50 
check.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 18 of 38  
Follow -up assessments:  During Week 8 of the intervention, all participants (those in the intervention 
group and the usual care group will be mailed (or given in -person during a routine follow -up clinic visit) 
an accelerometer to wear for 7 days in order to assess physical activity at follow -up. Then, at Week 9, 
participants will return the accelerometer and MEMS Cap, and will repeat self -assessment 
questionnaires obtained at the beginning of the study either in -person during a routine follow -up clinic 
visit, over the phone , or via a REDCap survey link e -mailed to them, depending on participant’s 
preference. Furthermore, participants in the intervention group will be asked to provide feedback about 
the program via a recorded exit interview over the phone.  
 
Positive Psychology Program Content : All phone sessions will include (a) a review of the ease and 
utility of the week’s PP exercise , (b) a discussion of the rationale of the next week’s PP exercise through 
a guided review of the PP manual, and (c) assignment of the next week’s PP exercise. During the calls, 
the interventionist  and participant  will also review the next section of the treatment manual and prepare 
for the upcoming week’s exercise.  
 
9.[ADDRESS_113942] -protected file on a Partners /Mass General Br igham/DFCI  server. 
Recordings wil l contain minimal  personally identifiable information  as the recordings will include the 
participant’s voice but their names or other identifying information on the recordings  will not be used  
and will be erased following review.  
 
All data regarding the objective adherence devices will be encoded only with the study participant 
number that is linked to personal identifying information in the study database. The devices will not be 
marked with any personal identifiable information, a nd the database that will be used to monitor 
medication adherence and accelerometer data will only contain participant numbers. Data that is 
uploaded from each participant’s accelerometer will be coded without identifying information and will 
be accessed f rom a locked computer in a research team office.  
 
10.0 Data and Specimen Banking : Not Applicable  
10.1. Data analysis  
Specific Aim 1 (Feasibility; Primary Aim):  To demonstrate  the feasibility of the PATH 
intervention in patients with hematologic malignancy undergoing HSCT : Based on prior work, we 
define feasibility as > 75% of enrolled participants who start the intervention completing at least 6 of the 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_113943] 95% binomial confidence interval around the proportion . We will 
assess acceptability using weekly ratings of ease and utility of each exercise (0=very difficult/not 
helpful; 10=very easy/very helpful) . The mean ease and utility of each exercise and overall will be 
calculated, and  and will use a threshold of a mean combined score of 7.0/10 for acceptability that was 
used in prior studies.19,57 
 
Specific Aim 2 (Effects on Patient -Reported Outcomes):  To assess the preliminary efficacy of the 
PATH intervention on psychological (e.g., depression, anxiety, optimism, positive affect), QOL , 
and functional outcomes compared to the usual care condition : Analyses will begin with descriptive 
and graphical summaries of the endpoints and evaluation of whether a normality assumption is 
reasonable for the endpoint or whether transformation is necessary.  We will use a Bonferroni correction 
to address multiple mea sures and testing.  All statistical tests will be two -sided with a  liberal alpha level 
of 0.[ADDRESS_113944] of the intervention on patient - reported outcomes . We will 
summarize p articipants’ baseline characteristics using descriptive statistics (e.g., mean) for continuous 
variables and proportions for categorical variables.  
 
To examine the immediate impact of the intervention on happi[INVESTIGATOR_102904], we will use  
generalized estimating equations (GEE) to determine the immediate impact of a PP session on optimism 
and happi[INVESTIGATOR_008] . The GEE model will allow us to account for the repeated observations on subjects from 
the different exercises.  
 
We will compare between -group differences in change over time in all patient -reported outcome 
measures (i.e., psychological, functional, and QOL outcomes) at the [ADDRESS_113945] of time (baseline, week 9 and week 
18), a group effect and a time by [CONTACT_102938]. The time by [CONTACT_102939], and these regression coefficients will be the 
focus of the analysis . 
 
Given that this pi[INVESTIGATOR_102905], we will examine 
difference  in the change with time  and sample variance components on the secondary outcomes . Effect 
sizes (Cohen’s d) will be calculated for changes in outcomes from baseline to [ADDRESS_113946] a full -scale efficacy trial with power >80%. 
We will also verify the needed sample size based on ability to detect a clinically meaningful difference 
and referen ces to existing literature.89  
 
Finally, we will explore  (1) possible mediators of the intervention (e .g., copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262] ) by [CONTACT_102940] (2) possible moderators (e .g., social 
support) of intervention effects by [CONTACT_102941] (p<0.15) when predicting patient -reported outcomes.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 20 of 38  
Specific Aim 3 (Effects on Health Behaviors):  To examine the impact of the PATH intervention on 
behavioral outcomes (e.g., medication adherence, physical activity) compared to those in the usual 
care condition : We will initially compare physical activity (# of steps/day) at [ADDRESS_113947], given that the distribution of the 
number of steps will likely be skewed. We will also use random effects regression models with a 
random intercept for each pa rticipant  to compare  between -group differences in change over time in 
physical activity  and medication adherence . All statistical tests will be two tailed, with p<0.05 
considered significant.  
 
Missing Data: We will also use the intention -to-treat principle with all randomized participant s and 
conducting sensitivity analyses to explore various assumptions about missing data . If source of the 
missing data appear to be missing at random, the linear mixed effects models described above provide 
an unbiased estimate of the regression coefficients . However, if we find that participants do not 
complete the study because of disease worsening, suggesting missing data are not random, we will 
employ pattern mixture modeling or joint modeling approaches90 to handle incomplete data, and perform 
sensitivity analysis91 to assess the impact of missing data. In addition to the intention -to-treat analysis, 
we will also estimate the group differences in the completers to estimate the per protocol group 
difference.  
 
10.2. Sample Size Calculation & Power Analysis:  
Based on prior trials in this population,92 we anticipate 15% of enrolled participants will be unable to 
complete the intervention due to medical complications and mortality. Hence, we will enroll 70 
participants (35 in the [PATH] PP arm) to target having at least 30 PP participants who complete th e 
intervention. For our primary aim (feasibility), in prior trials, approximately 80% of participants have 
completed [ADDRESS_113948] 95% 
power (two -sided =.05, binomial proportion test) to demonstrate that the proportion who complete >6 
of 9 PP sessions is larger than 50% (i.e., a majority). For acceptability, using this sample size, we will 
have 95% power to detect a true mean score of >7.0 based on prior work (in which mean utility scores 
were 7.8 +/ - 1.8).[ADDRESS_113949] significant (p<.05) group 
differences in psychological, QOL, or behavioral outcomes (and we would need between -group effect 
size differences of d=.74 to be powered at 80% to detect significant differences). However, this sample 
of [ADDRESS_113950] been obtained and data 
analysis has been completed as discussed previously.  
 
Participants’ responses to survey questions will remain confidential unless there is active suicidal 
ideation confirmed by [CONTACT_5051]. Under these circumstances, as clearly stated in the pa rticipant  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 21 of 38  
consent form, the study CRC  will inform the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_102906], 
psychiatry and/or take further action as deemed necessary.  
We will ensure that contact [CONTACT_102942] -related messages for participants unless expressly allowed b y participants. Upon 
enrollment, we ask all participants if it is acceptable to leave voice messages on their phones, as 
well as the appropriate t imes to call them. We will adhere to all pa rticipant  requests regarding 
contact.  
In addition, as stated previously, all study staff will undergo an extensive training on study 
procedures as well as data management to ensure data security and maintaining of 
confidentiality.  
10.4. Quality control for collected data:  
Our study staff will utilize double -data entry for approximately 10% of the data entered through 
REDCap to ensure high data quality. A research coordinator, blinded to the study intervention, 
will double enter 10% of the data through REDCap to check on dat a fidelity. If an error is found, 
the research coordinator will double enter an additional 5% of the data through REDCap. This 
process will continue until no errors are found. Also, the research coordinator will perform ‘test 
downloads’ of the data to ensu re that it can be captured in the statistical package to be used in 
this study.  
 
11.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects * 
 
Purpos e of Data and Safety Monitoring Plan:  
The purpose of the data and safety monitoring plan is to establish standards that will ensure that this 
protocol complies with Federal Regulations, Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) requirements and applicable Dana Farber Harvard Cancer Center (DF/HCC) Standard 
Operating Procedures.  
General Roles and Responsibilities:  
The PI ([CONTACT_102972]) will work closely with Drs. Huffman  (mentor) and El -Jawahri (mentor), who have 
extensive expertise conducting randomized supportive care trials to ensure the successful 
implementation of the proposed project. [CONTACT_102972] will be responsible for all aspects of conducting 
the protocol, which in cludes:  
• Overseeing the development, submission, and approval of the protocol as well as subsequent 
amendments.  
• Ensuring that the research team members are qualified and appropriately resourced to conduct 
the protocol.  
• Following the procedures as outlined in this Data and Safety Monitoring Plan.  Detail plan is also 
in (Appendix  X). 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 22 of 38  
• Training the clinical research coordinators prior to enrolling participants and throughout the 
trial’s conduct as needed.  
• Monitoring the progress and overall conduct of the study.  
• Reviewing data collection and entry and maintaining timely submission of data for study 
analysis.  
• Ensuring compliance with all requirements as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations, Dana 
Farber Harvard Cancer Center requirements, HIPAA requirements, and the approved protocol.  
• Committing to provisions that the protocol will not be rewritten or modified by [CONTACT_102943].  
• Monitoring accrual and address concerns if accrual goals are not met.  
The Dana -Farber Cancer Center is expected to comply with all applicable federal regulations and 
requirements, the protocol and HIPAA requirements. Specifically, it will be responsible for:  
• Reviewing registration materials for eligibility and registering participants with the DF/HCC 
Quality Assurance for Clinical Trials (QACT).  
• Overseeing the data collection process.  
• Maintaining documentation of Serious Adverse Events (SAE) reports and deviations/violations.  
• Maintaining regulatory documents which include but not limited to the following: IRB 
approvals/notifications, confirmation of Federal wise Assurances (FWAs), all SAE submissions, 
screening logs, IRB approved consents.  
• Conducting regular communications with overall PI [INVESTIGATOR_102907].  
• Documenting the delegation of research specific activities to study personnel.  
• Maintaining regulatory files.  
• Having office space, office equipment, and internet access that meet HIPAA standards.  
• Participating in quality assurance activities and meet with monitors or auditors at the conclusion 
of a visit to review findings.  
• Providing follow -up and/or corrective action plans for any monitoring queries or audit findings.  
Intervention Training and Supervision:  
• Study Staff Training:  We will conduct a full day training for the clinical research coordinator 
(CRC) to ensure consistent recruitment and enrollment procedures. We will train the CRC to: 1) 
identify potentially eligible patients via the transplant clinic schedule and/or databa se; 2) track 
potentially eligible patients; 3) communicate with the treating clinicians about patient eligibility; 
4) obtain informed consent from patients; and 5) monitor pa rticipants  longitudinally and 
administer study questionnaires. In addition, [CONTACT_102975] onoo will meet with the CRC weekly to 
address any study issues or concerns. Drs. Huffman and El -Jawahri will join these weekly 
meetings as needed.  
• Assessment of Intervention Fidelity:  To ensure the appropriate delivery of the intervention, 10% 
of all intervention calls will be recorded and reviewed with the research mentorship team (Drs. 
Huffman and El -Jawahri). The research mentorship team will review recorded intervention 
sessions for  consistency with explanation and delivery of positive psychology exercises. These 
measures will also provide accurate data on intervention feasibility. The research mentorship 
team will also discuss any issues or conce rns regarding the intervention fidelity.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 23 of 38  
Informed Consent Requirements:  
The Dana Farber Harvard Cancer Center approved informed consent document will serve as a template 
for the informed consent.  
 
Protocol Confidentiality:  All documents, investigative reports, or information relating to study 
participants will be kept strictly confidential. We will ensure confidentiality is maintained by [CONTACT_102944], visit number , and date of visit. By 
[CONTACT_102945], all information will be considered 'de -identified,' and therefore 
compliant with the Standards for Privacy of Individually Identifiable Health Information ("Privacy 
Rule") of the Health Insurance Portability Act of 1996. We will keep participant data in a computer file 
that is password protected. Only [CONTACT_102972] and research team will have access to the data. We will 
maintain a link between the participant name [CONTACT_102970] a separate password protected file.  
 
Data Management Organizational Structure:  [CONTACT_102972] and the CRC will develop the study specific 
database to ensure all data is entered appropriately. The CRC will routinely evaluate the data and discuss 
any problems and questions with [CONTACT_102972] at a weekly meeting. Data management formal report s on 
record status across the three following domains will be employed: entered, verified, and edited. These 
reports of data records will be evaluated once a month during the final team meeting of the month. To 
help ensure data protection, backup copi[INVESTIGATOR_014], automatically generated by [CONTACT_46768], will be 
available.  
 
Attrition Safeguards/Protection of Loss of Data:  
A notable methodological consideration pertaining to the proposed research is protection against attrition. Our 
research group has conducted numerous clinical intervention studies. In our previous work, we have learned 
that individuals are best retained in  studies when there is 1) a familiarity with study personnel (e.g., ability to 
effectively establish rapport), 2) team -based persistence in conducting follow -up assessments, and 3) 
intervention sessions happening in tandem with ongoing medical appointments  or inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]. 
Yet, it is worth noting here a number of key issues that we have thoughtfully considered in the construction of 
the present proposal related to attrition. Attrition in clinical research studies overall occurs from three majo r 
sources: (a) disease worsening/mortality, (b) refusal to participate, and (c) loss of contact.  
 
• Disease Worsening/Mortality:  Given the burden of t reatment  for patients with hematologic malignancies 
undergoing H SCT, we do anticipate that a minority of participants will be unable to complete the study 
protocol due to deteriorating health or death. Our research team has given considerable thought to this 
concern and adequately powered the study to account for missin g data. Based on prior work, we anticipate a 
15% attrition rate . The study CRCs  will maintain detailed records for patient attrition due to disease -related 
factors.  
• Refusal to Participate:  Participants who are successfully recruited into the study but later refuse to 
participate in subsequent intervention sessions pose a threat to the proposed study. In our previous trial, our 
refusal to participate rate after study enrollment was quite low  and all participants who started the 
intervention actually completed the all the intervention sessions . Again, the CRCs  will maintain detailed 
records for patient refusals.  
• Loss of Contact:  [CONTACT_102946] -up assessments. Like attrition due to subject refusal, 
attrition due to loss of contact [CONTACT_102947] a threat to the  proposed study. We do not anticipate this to be a major 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_113951]. 
• Participant Adherence : To minimize attrition, we plan to use multiple strategies to reduce drop -out. 
Potential participants will be invited to participate in the baseline assessment during which time participants 
will receive a thorough explanation of the study treatments, req uirements, and follow -up procedures. Study 
staff will emphasize the patient’s responsibility as a research participant, reiterate confidentiality, and work 
to develop good rapport. We will make a concerted and systematic effort to faci litate adherence to the 
completion of follow -up assessments. This task will be accomplished by: (1) obtaining longitudinal 
participant -reported measures during regular follow -up appointments; (2) providing participants with remote 
access to complete the lo ngitudinal study measures; and (3) making reminder phone calls and administering 
the study measures over the phone if necessary for participants who do not have appointments in the 
window for assessment completion.  
 
Data Safety and Monitoring Plan  
The following procedures will be followed, in compliance with NIH requirements, to ensure the safety 
of study participants and the validity and integrity of data.  
• Range of Safety Reporting:  [CONTACT_102972] will review all data pertaining to safety during the weekly 
research team meeting. These include adverse events (AEs) and serious adverse events (SAEs), but 
also other data that may reflect differences in safety such as treatment retention rate s and reasons for 
dropout.  
• Data Repository:  [CONTACT_102972] will oversee all aspects of data collection for the study and the CRCs 
will have the operational responsibility of data management. Specifically, the research team will 
develop a study specific data management protocol and standard operating pr ocedures for the 
creation and testing of all study forms, data collection, quality control, and data extraction. These 
forms will be standardized. We will provide ongoing oversight of data management throughout the 
study, and will be respon sible for generating reports and datasets for quality control and data 
analysis. All data management activities will utilize REDCap, a software toolset and workflow 
methodology for electronic collection and management of research and clinical trial data. R EDCap 
data collection projects rely on a thorough study -specific data dictionary defined in an iterative self -
documenting process by [CONTACT_102948], Enterprise Research Infrastructure & Services (ERIS) group. 
REDCap provides secure, HIPAA compliant, web -based applications with an intuitive interface for 
users to enter data and have real time validation rules (with automated data type and range checks) at 
the time of entry .  
• Serious Adverse Events:  Expedited review will occur for all events meeting the FDA definition of a 
SAE (i.e., any fatal event, immediately life -threatening event, permanently or substantially disabling 
event, event requiring or prolonging inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or any congen ital anomaly). This also 
includes any event that a study investigator judges to impose a significant hazard, contraindication, 
side effect, or precaution. Given that this is a supportive care study in a population at risk for disease  
relapse and death due to transplant complications (unrelated to the study procedures), only SAEs that 
may potentially be related to the study will be reported to the IRB. All relevant information will be 
reported to the IRB for each SAE including informat ion about the event and its outcome, study 
condition, concomitant medications, the subject’s medical history and current conditions, and all 
relevant laboratory data. Notification by [CONTACT_102949] e -mail of all related study forms shall be made to the 
IRB within 24 hours of the occurrence of any SAE that might be relevant to the study. Information 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 25 of 38  
will be reviewed and a determination made of whether there was any possible relevance to the study 
interventions. Additional reporting to the NIH will be made according to their respective regulations 
governing SAE reporting.  
• Non-Serious Adverse Events : The research team will review monthly summary reports of the 
numbers and rates of adverse events by [CONTACT_1570]. These reports will include types of events, 
severity, and treatment phase.  
• Other Safety -Related Reports : The research team will review weekly summary reports of treatment 
retention and reasons for dropout, by [CONTACT_1570].  
 
Monitoring of Data Quality by [CONTACT_5051]:  
The research team will review the following items on weekly basis to ensure data quality and 
completeness:  
• Total enrollment compared with anticipated enrollment  
• Number of ineligible patients registered  
• Proportion of missing participant -reported outcomes  
• Proportion of other missing data  
• Number of participants lost to follow -up 
• Number of participants completing the study  
 
Additionally, the research team will receive a report on safety and outcome data for the trial:  
• Number of deaths, listed by [CONTACT_102950]  
• Number and types of SAEs  
• Number and types of reportable AEs  
• Number of participants with primary outcomes  
• Number of participants with secondary outcomes  
 
ClinicalTrials.gov Requirements  
As per Public Law [ADDRESS_113952]. Amonoo’s (PI) ove rsight. She will work closely with the Partners 
Human Research Affairs QI Program to register the trial prior to enrolling the first subject. Once a 
record is established, she will confirm accuracy of record content; resolve problems; and maintain 
records including content update and modification. She will also be responsible for aggregate results 
reporting and AE reporting at the conclusion of the project. We will ensure that summary results will be 
reported to clinicaltrials.gov no later than one year aft er the primary completion date.  
 
12.0 Withdrawal of Subjects*  
We do not anticipate any circumstances under which the subjects will be withdrawn from the research without 
their consent.  We do not anticipate any termination of pa rticipants . When informed consent is being obtained 
from patients, we will emphasize to patients that they can withdraw from the study at any time for any 
discomforts. Participant s who withdraw from the study will still have their data potentially analyzed depending 
on when in the study they withdraw , and pa rticipants  will be informed of this as  well.  We will ensure that 
contact [CONTACT_102951] -related messages for participants unless expressly 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_113953], but 
withdraw from all other study procedures.  
 
13.0 Risks to Subjects*  
The risks to participating  in this study should be relatively limited  and is no more than minimal risk . Given this 
is a supportive oncology study, we do not anticipate any study -related events meeting the FDA definition of a 
SAE (i.e., any fatal event, immediately life -threatening event, permanently or substantially disabling event, 
event requiring or prolonging inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or any congenital anomaly). This study population is 
comprised of individuals undergoing H SCT who frequently experience disease worsening, high ra te of 
symptoms, and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_102908]/or side effects of treatment. Therefore, regular 
fluctuations in cancer -related symptoms, disease worsening, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], emergency department visits, and 
deaths are to be expected t hroughout the study, and we will not consider or report such events as SAEs in this 
trial. 
 
We anticipate no physical risks to participating in this study. Study participants may experience discomfort 
from discussing psychological experiences and could experience the evaluation as intrusive. Study participants 
who do not find any benefit from participation  may find this upsetting. Activities to obtain data t hrough the 
baseline and follow -up assessment  battery  may provide some inconvenience to study participants.  
 
Non-Serious Adverse Events:  The IRB will be provided with unblinded summaries of study related non -serious 
adverse events by [CONTACT_102952]. These reports will include types of events, 
severity, and treatment phase. To date, we have had very few non -seriou s events in our supportive care studies.  
 
As this is a behavioral study, there are no ingested medications, and no biomedical procedures. It is unlikely 
that participants will be at any risk for physical harm as a result of study participation.   
 
Reaction Management:  Informed consent  will be provided  by [CONTACT_102953] . The consent will include all study procedures, information about potential risks and benefits of 
participation, and information regarding whom the participant can contact [CONTACT_102954]. It also will state 
that participation is voluntary, that participa nts can refuse to answer any question, that they can withdraw from 
the study at any time, and that study participation is in no way related to their medical care. All study staff will 
complete the required human subjects training before working on any huma n subject aspects of the study.  
 
Should a participant exhibit or express distress, they will be reassured by [CONTACT_102955]. They will also be reminded that study participation is voluntary. If 
participants remain distressed, bo th the study PI [INVESTIGATOR_102909]. Should several 
participants express distress over an individual item, the research team will review the questionnaire and contact 
[CONTACT_102956].  
 
If a participant reports severe distress or suicidal ideation during the study conduct, the CRC  will inform the PI. 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_102910]. The research 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 27 of 38  
team will review sensitive items regarding suicidal ideation within 120 hours (5 business days) of receipt of 
completed surveys and will report any suicidal ideation to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_102911]. We will take all measures to ensure  
that participan ts are comfort able and we will postpone or end intervention sessions  at study participants’ 
requests. We will also ensure that the PI [INVESTIGATOR_102912] (due 
to pa rticipant  discomfort or to answer specific questions about the study), during intervention sessions, baseline 
and follow -up assessments. We have  been thoughtful to use the briefest methods necessary to assess emotional 
states and other outcomes to reduce pa rticipant  discomfort.  
 
With regard to the device s to be used in this study, the medication adherence device, MEMSCap , carries 
minimal risk ; it has no sharp edges, no shock risk, and no other known risks.  The accelerometer (ActiGraph  
GT3X+) used to measure activity is small, light, and without sharp edges  – it should pose minimal to no risk . 
Immersing the device in water for a prolonged period may render it unusable but does not pose a shock risk. 
Participant s will mail the device back after 7 days in a pre -paid envelope provided by [CONTACT_3476].  We will 
provide explicit instructions  (in person, via zoom video session , or via mailed documents)  regarding the use of 
the MEMS Cap and accelerometer to ensure safety and proper use, and to  reduce inconvenience/distress 
associated with uncertainty about their safety or use. We will reduce technological failure by [CONTACT_102957] . Study staff 
will liaise with participants regarding any battery problems or technical advice for the MEMS Cap and/or  
Actigraph accelerometer . The participant will be instructed to contact [CONTACT_102958] a problem 
develop with the MEMS Cap and/or accelerom eter during the course of the study. If there is an irresolvable 
problem, the participant will send the device back to the CRC , and be provided a new one. Study staff will work 
directly with MEMS Cap and Actigraph technical support to resolve any device issues. A log of all technical 
difficulties will be maintained.  
 
As with any study, there is the risk of a breach of confidentiality of data collected. To minimize the potential 
loss of confidentiality, we will employ multiple safeguards and measures.  Study procedures will be executed by 
[CONTACT_3665]. Interv ention sessions  will be administered by [CONTACT_102959] . Study participants will 
be assigned a unique study identification number which will be stored separately from personal identification 
information. All data, including telephone recordings and tran scripts will be securely stored in locked file 
drawers. All project file cabinets and computer databases will be secured in locked offices. Devices will not be 
marked with any personally indentifiable information , and the database that will be used to monitor medication 
adherence and accelerometer data will only contain participant  numbers. We will ensure to not provide any data 
to third particies. Data will be aggregated and summary reports will be generated without any personal 
identification information.  
 
14.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects*  
Positive psychology interventions are not a standard of care for patients with any form of malignancy. To our 
knowledge, this trial is the first of its kind testing a positive psychology intervention in patients with 
hematologic malignancies undergoing HSCT. Therefore, a potential benefit of the proposed research to human 
subjects is that participants may e xperience benefits from receiving the intervention as they reflect and share 
positive experiences in their lives. As part of the intervention , participants  will be given the opportunity to 
identif y positive emotions and consider ways to enhance their own positive emotions. Description of the PP 
exercises may enlighten them as to potential means of improving their own emotional states  and well -being . 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_113954] on 
their illness experience. Some may also value the possibility that their contribution to the study may benefit 
other patients with hematologic malignancies.  It is also possible that some participants may not derive these 
benefits. However, the risk from participation in the study is small (and w ill be minimized by [CONTACT_102960]), and overall risk to benefit ratio is favorable.  
 
15.0 Vulnerable Populations  
Not Applicable. This trial does not involve vulnerable populations including pregnant women, prisoners, 
adults who cannot consent, children or patients with cognitive difficulties.  
 
16.0 Community -Based Participatory Research  
Not Applicable. This trial does not involve community -based participatory research . 
 
17.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects * 
Given the nature of the population included in the study, it is not appropriate to proactively 
contact [CONTACT_102961]. We anticipate that a proportion of our 
participants will die during or within months of completing the stud y. We do not wish to cause 
unnecessary distress to participants’ family members by [CONTACT_102962]. Therefore, we provide the research team contact [CONTACT_102963]. We hope to publish the results from the study in peer review journal articles 
but data will be de -identified  – patients will be made aware of the fact that the results will be 
published.  
18.0 Setting  
18.1 Location  
As stated previously in the recruitment and enrollment procedures (section 5.1), patients who are 
adult (age ≥18) English speaking patients with hematologic malignancies recruited from the 
Brigham and Women’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (BWH) and Dana Farber Cancer Institute (DFCI) HSCT 
Program will be eligible for the study . Eligible study participants will be identified using the 
DFCI HSCT database. Patients will be contact[CONTACT_102964] 70-
80-day post -transplant visit for eligibility determi nation and to obtain  either  written  consent  
during a routine clinic visit  or verbal consent over the phone . Upon agreement to participate in 
the study, participants will be mailed (or given in person via a routine follow -up clinic visit) 
study information sheet, an electronic pi[INVESTIGATOR_73586] (MEMS Cap), and an accelerometer to wear for 
7 days. Additionally, participants randomized to the intervention group will be mailed a 
treatment manual  (or given in person via a routine follow -up clinic visit) . Around the ti me 
participants’ 85-90-day oncology visit they will be emailed a REDCap link with self -assessment 
questionnaires. Participants will also be provided the option to complete baseline self -assessment 
questionnaires in person during a routine clinic visit, over the phone , or mailed paper copi[INVESTIGATOR_102913]. The intervention will be delivered via phone and pa rticipants  in the intervention 
group will be called on a private phone they designate. Follow -up assessments will be completed 
over phone,  via a REDCa p survey link that study staff e -mails,  during a routine clinic visit, or via 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_113955] ([CONTACT_102972] ) is responsible for full oversight of the project . She will be meeting 
with the research coordinator on weekly basis (and more often as urgent issues arise) to ensure the study 
process is being followed accurately and to address potential challenges or issues as they may arise. [CONTACT_102971]  is a member of the MGH Cancer Outcomes Research Program (CORe). CORe has extensive 
experience conducting randomized clinical trials of supportive care interventions in oncology and has 
the necessary expertise to ensure the success of the proposed project.  [CONTACT_102972] is a lso a member of 
the MGH Cardiac Psychiatry Research Program (CPRP) which has extensive expertise in conducting 
positive psychology based intervention studies in patients with serious illnesses – resources from the 
CPRP will help to ensure the success of th e project.  
19.[ADDRESS_113956] program performs approximately 550 transplantations per year. We anticipate that  
10% of patients would be ineligible for study participation. Therefore, we will have approximately [ADDRESS_113957] successfully enrolled >50% of potentially 
eligible patients in our prior studies . We therefore  conservatively estimate enrolling at least 50% of 
eligible patients to meet our recruitment goal of approximately 70 subjects  – enrolling [ADDRESS_113958]. Amonoo currently has 75% of her time protected to conduct research activities. She will 
dedicate at least 50% of her time specifically for this project.  
If participants exhibit distress due to study procedures, both the PI [INVESTIGATOR_102914].  If participants  report acute medical symptoms, they will be directed to 
emergency medical care, and their primary medical and transplant oncologists may be contact[CONTACT_102965]. If the patient is at imminent risk to self -harm, the study PI, psychiatrist , will take all 
needed steps to ensure emergent psychiatric evaluation, which may include ensuring evaluation 
in the nearest emergency ro om. Participants will be informed of these measures to ensure 
confidentiality —and the limits of confidentiality, such as arranging for emergent medical or 
psychiatric care if safety is at imminent risk —as part of the informed consent process. However, 
given that this is a medical rather than a psychiatric population we anticipate the rate of 
suicidality in this population will be low.   
 
20.0 Prior Approvals  
This research does not involve any prior approvals for subjects.  
 
21.0 Recruitment Methods  
As previously  outlined  in section 5.1, we will use the same successful recruitment and 
enrollment procedures from our prior work . Prior to the study start, the principal investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_102915]:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_113959] objections to their patients’  participating in the study, the 
CRC  will document the reason and not approach those individuals. If the transplant clinicians 
have no objections, the CRC  will approach p atients for study participation . 
Eligible study participants will be identified  using the DFCI HSCT database . Patients who are 
approaching their routine 70-80-day post -transplant visit will be contact[CONTACT_102966]. Upon agreement to participate in the study, 
participants will be mailed study information sheet, an electronic pi[INVESTIGATOR_73586], MEMS Cap, and an  
accelerometer to wear for 7 da ys. Additionally, participants randomized to the intervention group 
will be mailed an intervention manual . Around the time of participants’  85-90-day oncology 
visit, a REDCap survey link with  baseline self-assessment questionnaires will be sent to 
participants . Participants  will also be given the option to complete self -assessment questionnaires 
via phone or mail or in-person during their routine follow -up visit in clinic . Patients who refuse 
study participation will be asked the reason for deferring.  
Patients who complete informed  consent and complete baseline questionnaires are then 
registered with the Clinical Trials Management System. If patients provide  consent, but do not 
complete baseline questionnaire, they will not count towards accrual numbers.  
DF/HCC institutions will register eligible participants in the Clinical Trials Management System 
(CTMS) Oncore as required by [CONTACT_102927]/HCC SOP REGIST -101. Registration must occur prior to the 
initiation of protocol -specific procedures or assessments.  
For registration of patients from DF/HCC institutions, study staff will complete the DF/HCC 
protocol -specific eligibility checklist using the eligibility assessment documented in the 
participant’s medical record and/or research chart. Study staff will conf irm that the participant 
meets all inclusion criteria as described in this protocol and the criteria on the eligibility 
checklist.  
Once a patient has been registered, a member from of the CPRP  research team (independent 
from the study staff) will perform randomization procedures using a computer -generated 
randomization schema, stratified by [CONTACT_102967] . 
Patients will receive a $50 check for completing baseline  and week 9  assessments. Participants 
will receive an additional $[ADDRESS_113960] been obtained and data analysis has been 
completed as discussed previously.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 31 of 38  
Participants’ responses to survey questions will remain confidential unless there is active suicidal 
ideation confirmed by [CONTACT_5051]. Under these circumstances, the study CRC  will inform 
the PI. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_102916], psychiatry and/or take further 
action as deemed necessary.  
During  the informed consent process, it will be emphasized to the patient that at any time  during 
the research, they are free to say they will not participate in the study. Their decision to 
participate in any part of the study will not in any way  interfere with their care at the DFCI.  We 
will also emphasize that only study staff will have access to the data . 
It will be emphas ized throughout the study that participants should not feel obligated to  answer 
any questions that is asked of them that causes uneasiness.  
24.[ADDRESS_113961] or quality of care received. The CRC  will also clarify 
the potential minimal risks associated with the study: breach of confidentiality and feelings of distress 
from answering questions of a personal or sensitive nature , as well as possibly feeling 
inconvenienced/distressed when using the accelerometer . To ensure ongoing consent, the CRC will 
explain the participant’s right to withdraw at any time and will explain the appropriate means of 
contact[CONTACT_102968].  
Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process (consent will not be obtained, required information will not 
be disclosed, or the research involves deception) : Verbal consent will be obtained, and participants’ 
willingness to partake in the study  will be indicative of consent. Although we have written consent 
procedures to offer participants, w e advocate for a waiver of written informed consent because this study 
is no more than minimal risk and the goal is to prioritize patient safety and reduce their exposure to 
study staff in the setting of the ongoing  COVID pandemic. For the nature of this study, remote 
consenting is not feasible  for our cohort as it requires a level of technical knowledge and maybe 
burdensome for some patients. Electronic consenting may also result in a selection bias in participation 
procedures. Lastly, in the setting of th e pandemic, patients  (especially those who are 
immunocompromised like our cohort)  are increasingly conducting virtual visits with their oncology 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_113962] in -person consent procedures.  As part of the verbal 
consent process, a study information sheet will mailed to all study participants in the study.  
Participants  who complete verbal consents  will be asked to sign HIPAA Authorization to review their 
medical records for the purposes of research. HIPAA authorization maybe provided at a clinic visit or 
remotely over e -mail or via mail in the setting of the COVID -19 stipulations.  
 
27.0 Process to Document Consent in Writing  
As stated earlier , written informed consent will be obtained  . Instead, verbal consent will be obtained, 
and participants’ willingness to partake in the study will be indicative of consent. We will advocate for a 
waiver of written informed consent because this study is no more than minimal risk and the goal is to 
prioritize patient safety and reduce their exposure to study staff in the setting of the ongoing COVID 
pandemic. For the nature of this stu dy, remote consenting is not feasible for our cohort as it  requires a 
level of technical knowledge and maybe burdensome for some patients. Electronic consenting may also 
result in a selection bias in participation procedures. Lastly, in the setting of the pandemic, patients 
(especially those who are immunocomprom ised like our cohort) are increasingly conducting virtual 
visits with their oncology clinicians, limiting our ability to effectively conduct in -person consent 
procedures. As part of the verbal consent process, a study information sheet will mailed to all s tudy 
participants in the study.  
 
28.0 Drugs or Devices  
 
The ActiGraph GT3X+ accelerometer  will be used to measure physical activity . It is small, light, and 
without sharp edges. Immersing the device in water for a prolonged period may render it unusable but 
does not pose a shock risk.  
 
The MEMSCap  will be  used to measure  medication adherenc e. It carries minimal risk ; it has no sharp 
edges, no shock risk, and no other known risks.  
 
29.0 References  
 
1. Kroemeke A, Sobczyk -Kruszelnicka M, Kwissa -Gajewska Z. Everyday life following hematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation: Decline in physical symptoms within the first month and change -related predictors. 
Qual Life Res . 2018;27(1):125 -135. doi:10.1007/s11136 -017-[ADDRESS_113963] posttraumatic stress 
disorder after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Cancer . 2016;122(5):806 -812. doi:10.1002/cncr.[ADDRESS_113964], Lee SJ, Huffman JC. Positive Psychological 
Constructs and Health Outcomes in Hematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation Patients: A Systematic Review. 
Biol Blood Marrow Transplant . Jan 2019;25(1):e5 -e16. doi:10.1016/j.bbmt.2018.09.030  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 33 of 38  
4. Chida Y, Steptoe A. Positive psychological well -being and mortality: A quantitative review of 
prospective observational studies. Psychosom Med . Sep 2008;70(7):741 -756.  
5. Jim HS, Syrjala KL, Rizzo D. Supportive care of hematopoietic cell transplant patients. Biol Blood 
Marrow Transplant . Jan 2012;18([ADDRESS_113965]):S12 -S16. doi:10.1016/j.bbmt.2011.10.029  
6. Ehrlich KB, Miller GE, Scheide T, et al. Pre -transplant emotional support is associated with longer 
survival after allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant . Jul 18 
2016;doi:10.1038/bmt.2016.191  
7. Seligman ME, Steen TA, Park N, Peterson C. Positive psychology progress: Empi[INVESTIGATOR_49479]. Am Psychol . 2005;60(5):410 -421. doi:10.1037/0003 -066X.60.5.410  
8. Lyubomirsky S, Sheldon KM, Schkade D. Pursuing happi[INVESTIGATOR_008]: The architecture of sustainable change. 
2005.  
9. Huffman JC, Feig EH, Millstein RA, et al. Usefulness of a Positive Psychology -Motivational 
Interviewing Intervention to Promote Positive Affect and Physical Activity After an Acute Coronary Syndrome. 
Am J Cardiol . Jun 15 2019;123(12):1906 -1914. doi:10.1016/j.amjcard.2019.03.[ADDRESS_113966] 
intervention and medication adherence in hypertensive African Americans. Archives of internal medicine . Feb 
27 2012;172(4):322 -326. doi:10.1001/archinternmed.2011.[ADDRESS_113967] induction 
to promote physical activity after percutaneous coronary intervention. Archives of internal medicine . 
2012;172(4):329 -336. doi:10.1001/archinternmed.2011.1311  
12. Huffman JC, Millstein RA, Mastromauro CA, et al. A positive psychology intervention for patients with 
an acute coronary syndrome: Treatment development and proof -of-concept trial. J Happi[INVESTIGATOR_102917] . 
2016;17(5):1985 -2006.  
13. Robertson SM, Stanley MA, Cully JA, Naik AD. Positive emotional health and diabetes care: Concepts, 
measurement, and clinical implications. Psychosomatics . 2012;53(1):1 -12. doi:10.1016/j.psym.2011.09.008  
14. Celano CM, Gianangelo TA, Millstein RA, et al. A positive psychology -motivational interviewing 
intervention for patients with type 2 diabetes: Proof -of-concept trial. Int J Psychiatry Med . Aug 16 
2018:91217418791448.  
15. Moskowitz JT, Hult JR, Duncan LG, et al. A positive affect intervention for people experiencing health -
related stress: development and non -randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_21087]. Journal of health psychology . Jul 2012;17(5):676 -
692. doi:10.1177/1359105311425275  
16. Fredrickson BL. The broaden -and-build theory of positive emotions. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol 
Sci. 2004;359(1449):1367 -1378. doi:10.1098/rstb.2004.1512  
17. Huffman JC, Mastromauro CA, Boehm JK, et al. Development of a positive psychology intervention for 
patients with acute cardiovascular disease. Heart Int . 2011;6(2):e14. doi:10.4081/hi.2011.e14  
18. Amonoo HL, Brown LA, Scheu CF, et al. Positive psychological experiences in allogeneic 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Psychooncology . 2019;28(8):1633 -1639. doi:10.1002/pon.5128  
19. Amonoo HL, El -Jawahri A, Celano CM, et al. A positive psychology intervention to promote health 
outcomes in hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: the PATH proof -of-concept trial. Bone Marrow 
Transplant . Apr 20 2021;doi:10.1038/s41409 -021-[ADDRESS_113968] of hematopoietic stem -cell transplantation in the United 
States. Am Health Drug Benefits . 2017;10(7):366 -374.  
21. Wong FL, Francisco L, Togawa K, et al. Long -term recovery after hematopoietic cell transplantation: 
Predictors of quality -of-life concerns. Blood . 2010;115(12):2508 -2519. doi:10.1182/blood -2009 -06-225631  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 34 of 38  
22. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_43221] J, Anasetti C, Jim H. Health -related quality of life following haematopoietic cell transplantation: 
patient education, evaluation and intervention. British journal of haematology . Feb 2010;148(3):373 -85. 
doi:BJH7992 [pii]  
10.1111/j.1365 -2141.2009.[ZIP_CODE].x  
23. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_43221] J, Anasetti C, Jim H. Quality of life after allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation. Blood . Jul 
2 2009;114(1):7 -19. doi:blood -2008 -10-182592 [pii]  
10.1182/blood -2008 -10-182592  
24. McQuellon RP, Russell GB, Rambo TD, et al. Quality of life and psychological distress of bone marrow 
transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]: the 'time trajectory' to recovery over the first year. Bone marrow transplantation . Mar 
1998;21(5):477 -86. doi:10.1038/sj.bmt.1701115  
25. Bevans MF, Marden S, Leidy NK, et al. Health -related quality of life in patients receiving reduced -
intensity conditioning allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Bone marrow transplantation . Jul 
2006;38(2):101 -9. doi:1705406 [pii]  
10.1038/sj.bmt.[ADDRESS_113969], Kuzmuk K, et al. Quality of life and mood of patients and family 
caregivers during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_102918]. Cancer . Mar 15 2015;121(6):951 -
9. doi:10.1002/cncr.[ADDRESS_113970] LP, Broun ER. Longitudinal study of adaptation 
to the stress of bone marrow transplantation. Journal of clinical oncology : official journal of the American 
Society of Clinical Oncology . Apr 2000;18(7):1539 -49.  
28. Prieto JM, Atala J, Blanch J, et al. Patient -rated emotional and physical functioning among hematologic 
cancer patients during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_102919] -cell transplantation. Bone marrow transplantation . Feb 
2005;35(3):307 -14. doi:1704788 [pii]  
10.1038/sj.bmt.1704788  
29. Loberiza FR, Jr., Rizzo JD, Bredeson CN, et al. Association of depressive syndrome and early deaths 
among patients after stem -cell transplantation for malignant diseases. J Clin Oncol . Apr 15 2002;20(8):2118 -
2126. doi:10.1200/JCO.2002.08.757  
30. Prieto JM, Atala J, Blanch J, et al. Patient -rated emotional and physical functioning among hematologic 
cancer patients during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_102919] -cell transplantation. Bone Marrow Transplant . 2005;35(3):307 -
314. doi:10.1038/sj.bmt.1704788  
31. Bubalo J. Managing the mental distress of the hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) patient: A 
focus on delirium. Curr Hematol Malig Rep . Apr 2018;13(2):109 -113. doi:10.1007/s11899 -018-0441 -2 
32. Cooke L, Gemmill R, Kravits K, Grant M. Psychological issues of stem cell transplant. Semin Oncol 
Nurs . 2009;25(2):139 -150. doi:10.1016/j.soncn.2009.03.[ADDRESS_113971] 100 days following allogeneic 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT). Support Care Cancer . 2008;16(11):1243 -1254. 
doi:10.1007/s00520 -008-0420 -6 
34. Gomez -Bernal F, Madva EN, Puckett J, Amonoo HL, Millstein RA, Huffman JC. Relationships between 
life stressors, health behaviors, and chronic medical conditions in mid -life adults: A narrative review. 
Psychosomatics . 2019;60(2):153 -163. doi:10.1016/j.psym.2018.12.007  
35. Mosher CE, Redd WH, Rini CM, Burkhalter JE, DuHamel KN. Physical, psychological, and social 
sequelae following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation: A review of the literature. Psychooncology . 
2009;18(2):113 -127. doi:10.1002/pon.1399  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 35 of 38  
36. Kuba K, Esser P, Mehnert A, et al. Depression and anxiety following hematopoietic stem cell 
transplantation: A prospective population -based study in [LOCATION_013]. Bone Marrow Transplant . 
2017;52(12):1651 -1657. doi:10.1038/bmt.2017.190  
37. Costanzo ES, Juckett MB, Coe CL. Biobehavioral influences on recovery following hematopoietic stem 
cell transplantation. Brain Behav Immun . Mar 2013;[ADDRESS_113972]:S68 -S74. doi:10.1016/j.bbi.2012.07.[ADDRESS_113973] J. Relationships among symptoms, psychosocial 
factors, and health -related quality of life in hematopoietic stem cell transplant survivors. Support Care Cancer . 
Mar 2015;23(3):797 -807. doi:10.1007/s00520 -014-2420 -z 
39. Knight JM, Moynihan JA, Lyness JM, et al. Peri -transplant psychosocial factors and neutrophil recovery 
following hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. PLoS One . 2014;9(6):e99778. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0099778  
40. Lee SJ, Loberiza FR, Rizzo JD, Soiffer RJ, Antin JH, Weeks JC. Optimistic expectations and survival 
after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant . 2003;9(6):389 -396.  
41. Bhatia S. Long -term health impacts of hematopoietic stem cell transplantation inform recommendations 
for follow -up. Expert Rev Hematol . 2011;4(4):437 -452. doi:10.1586/ehm.11.39  
42. Huffman JC, Albanese AM, Campbell KA, et al. The Positive Emotions after Acute Coronary Events 
behavioral health intervention: Design, rationale, and preliminary feasibility of a factorial design study. Clin 
Trials . Apr 2017;14(2):128 -139. doi:10.1177/1740774516673365  
43. Huffman JC, Beale EE, Celano CM, et al. Effects of optimism and gratitude on physical activity, 
biomarkers, and readmissions after an acute coronary syndrome: The Gratitude Research in Acute Coronary 
Events study. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes . Jan 2016;9(1):55 -63. 
doi:10.1161/CIRCOUTCOMES.115.[ADDRESS_113974] CM, Courneya KS, Stein K, American Cancer Society's SCS, II. Cancer survivors' adherence 
to lifestyle behavior recommendations and associations with health -related quality of life: Results from the 
American Cancer Society's SCS -II. J Clin Oncol . 2008;26(13):2198 -2204. doi:10.1200/JCO.2007.14.[ADDRESS_113975] mortality after adult stem cell transplant? Bone Marrow Transplant . 2006;38(4):255 -264. 
doi:10.1038/sj.bmt.1705419  
46. Fromm K, Andrykowski MA, Hunt J. Positive and negative psychosocial sequelae of bone marrow 
transplantation: implications for quality of life assessment. J Behav Med . 1996;19(3):221 -240.  
47. Leeson LA, Nelson AM, Rathouz PJ, et al. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_102920]. Health Psychol . 2015;34(9):920 -928. doi:10.1037/hea0000196  
48. Bolier L, Haverman M, Westerhof GJ, Riper H, Smit F, Bohlmeijer E. Positive psychology 
interventions: a meta -analysis of randomized controlled studies. BMC Public Health . Feb 8 2013;13:119. 
doi:10.1186/1471 -2458 -13-119 
49. Sin NL, Lyubomirsky S. Enhancing well -being and alleviating depressive symptoms with positive 
psychology interventions: A practice -friendly meta -analysis. J Clin Psychol . 2009;65(5):467 -487. 
doi:10.1002/jclp.[ZIP_CODE]  
50. Celano CM, Albanese AM, Millstein RA, et al. Optimizing a positive psychology intervention to 
promote health behaviors after an acute coronary syndrome: The Positive Emotions After Acute Coronary 
Events III (PEACE -III) randomized factorial trial. Psychosom Med . 2018;80(6):526 -534xxx. 
doi:10.1097/PSY.0000000000000584  
51. Celano CM, Gianangelo TA, Millstein RA, et al. A positive psychology -motivational interviewing 
intervention for patients with type 2 diabetes: Proof -of-concept trial. Int J Psychiatry Med . 2019;54(2):97 -
114nnn. doi:10.1177/0091217418791448  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_113976], Kubzansky LD, Boehm JK, Lloyd -Jones DM, Berry JD, Seligman ME. Positive 
cardiovascular health: A timely convergence. J Am Coll Cardiol . Aug 23 2016;68(8):860 -867. 
doi:10.1016/j.jacc.2016.03.608  
53. Van Cappellen P, Rice EL, Catalino LI, Fredrickson BL. Positive affective processes underlie positive 
health behaviour change. Psychol Health . Jan 2018;33(1):77 -97. doi:10.1080/08870446.2017.1320798  
54. Huffman JC, DuBois CM, Millstein RA, Celano CM, Wexler D. Positive Psychological Interventions 
for Patients with Type 2 Diabetes: Rationale, Theoretical Model, and Intervention Development. J Diabetes 
Res. 2015;2015:428349. doi:10.1155/2015/[ADDRESS_113977] of positive psychology 
interventions on well -being and distress in clinical samples with psychiatric or somatic disorders: a systematic 
review and meta -analysis. BMC Psychiatry . Jun 27 2018;18(1):211. doi:10.1186/s12888 -018-1739 -2 
56. Park N, Peterson C, Szvarca D, Vander Molen RJ, Kim ES, Collon K. Positive psychology and physical 
health: Research and applications. Am J Lifestyle Med . May -Jun 2016;10(3):200 -206. 
doi:10.1177/1559827614550277  
57. Callahan CM, Unverzagt FW, Hui SL, Perkins AJ, Hendrie HC. Six -item screener to identify cognitive 
impairment among potential subjects for clinical research. Med Care . Sep 2002;40(9):771 -81. 
doi:10.1097/00005650 -200209000 -[ZIP_CODE]  
58. Selimbegovic L, Régner I, Sanitioso RB, Huguet P. Influence of general and specific autobiographical 
recall on subsequent behavior: The case of cognitive performance. J Exp Soc Psychol . 2011;47(1):72 -78. 
doi:10.1016/j.jesp.2010.08.011  
59. Peterson C, Park N, Seligman MEP. Orientations to happi[INVESTIGATOR_102921]: The full life versus 
the empty life. journal article. J Happi[INVESTIGATOR_102917] . 2005;6(1):25 -41. doi:10.1007/s10902 -004-1278 -z 
60. Sheldon KM, Lyubomirsky S. How to increase and sustain positive emotion: The effects of expressing 
gratitude and visualizing best possible selves. J Posit Psychol . 2006/04/01 2006;1(2):73 -82. 
doi:10.1080/17439760500510676  
61. McQuellon RP, Russell GB, Cella DF, et al. Quality of life measurement in bone marrow 
transplantation: development of the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy -Bone Marrow Transplant 
(FACT -BMT) scale. Bone Marrow Transplant . Feb 1997;19(4):357 -68. doi:10.1038/sj.bmt.1700672  
62. Cella D, Lai JS, Jensen SE, et al. PROMIS Fatigue Item Bank had Clinical Validity across Diverse 
Chronic Conditions. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] . May 2016;73:128 -34. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2015.08.037  
63. Cella D, Riley W, Stone A, et al. The Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System 
(PROMIS) developed and tested its first wave of adult self -reported health outcome item banks: 2005 -2008. J 
Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] . Nov 2010;63(11):1179 -94. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2010.04.011  
64. Zigmond AS, Snaith RP. The hospi[INVESTIGATOR_56105]. Acta psychiatrica Scandinavica . Jun 
1983;67(6):[ADDRESS_113978] -Civilian 
Version in survivors of bone marrow transplantation. Research Support, Non -U.S. Gov't. Journal of traumatic 
stress . Jul 1999;12(3):485 -99. doi:10.1023/A:1024719104351  
66. Scheier MF, Carver CS, Bridges MW. Distinguishing optimism from neuroticism (and trait anxiety, 
self-mastery, and self -esteem): A reevaluation of the Life Orientation Test. J Pers Soc Psychol . 
1994;67(6):1063 -1078. doi:10.1037/[ADDRESS_113979]: The PANAS scales. J Pers Soc Psychol . 1988;54(6):1063 -1070.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 37 of 38  
68. Rini C, Redd WH, Austin J, et al. Effectiveness of partner social support predicts enduring 
psychological distress after hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. J Consult Clin Psychol . Feb 2011;79(1):64 -
74. doi:10.1037/a0022199  
69. Stapleton LR, Schetter CD, Westling E, et al. Perceived partner support in pregnancy predicts lower 
maternal and infant distress. J Fam Psychol . Jun 2012;26(3):453 -63. doi:10.1037/a0028332  
70. Carver CS. You want to measure copi[INVESTIGATOR_9418]'s too long: consider the brief COPE. Int J 
Behav Med . 1997;4(1):92 -100. doi:10.1207/s15327558ijbm0401_6  
71. Diener E, Emmons RA, Larsen RJ, Griffin S. The Satisfaction With Life Scale. J Pers Assess . Feb 
1985;49(1):71 -5. doi:10.1207/s15327752jpa4901_13  
72. McCullough ME, Emmons RA, Tsang JA. The grateful disposition: a conceptual and empi[INVESTIGATOR_102922]. J Pers Soc Psychol . Jan 2002;82(1):112 -27. doi:10.1037//0022 -3514.82.1.112  
73. Diener E, Wirtz D, Tov W, et al. New Well -being Measures: Short Scales to Assess Flourishing and 
Positive and Negative Feelings. Social Indicators Research . 2010;97:[ADDRESS_113980] . Jan 2009;17(1):[ADDRESS_113981] cancer survivors: A prospective 
observational study. Support Care Cancer . Nov 2017;25(11):3305 -3312. doi:10.1007/s00520 -017-3745 -1 
76. Helgadottir B, Forsell Y, Ekblom O. Physical activity patterns of people affected by [CONTACT_102969]: A cross -sectional study. PLoS One . 2015;10(1):e0115894. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0115894  
77. Garriguet D, Colley RC. A comparison of self -reported leisure -time physical activity and measured 
moderate -to-vigorous physical activity in adolescents and adults. Health Rep . Jul 2014;25(7):3 -11.  
78. KL C, CM G. Accelerometer Data Collection and Scoring Manual for Adult & Senior Studies. Accessed 
June 16, 2019. 
http://sallis.ucsd.edu/Documents/Measures_documents/Accelerometer_Data_Collection_and_Scoring_Manual_
Updated_June2012.pdf  
79. Choi L, Ward SC, Schnelle JF, Buchowski MS. Assessment of wear/nonwear time classification 
algorithms for triaxial accelerometer. Med Sci Sports Exerc . Oct 2012;44(10):2009 -2016. 
doi:10.1249/MSS.0b013e318258cb36  
80. Partridge AH, Archer L, Kornblith AB, et al. Adherence and persistence with oral adjuvant 
chemotherapy in older women with early -stage breast cancer in CALGB [ZIP_CODE]: Adherence companion study 
[ZIP_CODE]. J Clin Oncol . May 10 2010;28(14):2418 -2422. doi:10.1200/JCO.2009.26.4671  
81. Leino AD, King EC, Jiang W, et al. Assessment of tacrolimus intrapatient variability in stable adherent 
transplant recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]: Establishing baseline values. Am J Transplant . May 2019;19(5):1410 -1420. 
doi:10.1111/ajt.[ZIP_CODE]  
82. Chan AHY, Horne R, Hankins M, Chisari C. The Medication Adherence Report Scale: A measurement 
tool for eliciting patients' reports of nonadherence. Br J Clin Pharmacol . Jul 2020;86(7):1281 -1288. 
doi:10.1111/bcp.[ZIP_CODE]  
83. Sorror ML, Maris MB, Storb R, et al. Hematopoietic cell transplantation (HCT) -specific comorbidity 
index: a new tool for risk assessment before allogeneic HCT. Research Support, N.I.H., Extramural  
Research Support, U.S. Gov't, P.H.S. Blood . Oct 15 2005;106(8):2912 -9. doi:10.1182/blood -2005 -05-2004  
84. Armand P, Kim HT, Logan BR, et al. Validation and refinement of the Disease Risk Index for 
allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Blood . Jun 5 2014;123(23):3664 -71. doi:10.1182/blood -2014 -01-552984  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Randomized Trial of a P ositive Psychology Intervention for P atients with 
Hematologic Malignancies Undergoing H ematopoietic Stem Cell Transplantation  
 
 Page 38 of 38  
85. Siddiqi AE, Sikorskii A, Given CW, Given B. Early participant attrition from clinical trials: Role of trial 
design and logistics. Clin Trials . 2008;5(4):328 -335. doi:10.1177/1740774508094406  
86. Steinhauser KE, Clipp EC, Hays JC, et al. Identifying, recruiting, and retaining seriously -ill patients and 
their caregivers in longitudinal research. Palliat Med . 2006;20(8):745 -754. doi:10.1177/0269216306073112  
87. Bowen DJ, Kreuter M, Spring B, et al. How we design feasibility studies. Am J Prev Med . 
2009;36(5):452 -457. doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2009.02.002  
88. Cohen J. A power primer. Psychol Bull . Jul 1992;112(1):155 -9. doi:10.1037//0033 -2909.112.1.155  
89. Kraemer HC, Mintz J, Noda A, Tinklenberg J, Yesavage JA. Caution regarding the use of pi[INVESTIGATOR_90374]. Arch Gen Psychiatry . May 2006;63(5):484 -9. 
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.63.5.[ADDRESS_113982] NM. Model -based approaches to analysing incomplete longitudinal and failure time 
data. Stat Med . Jan 15 -Feb 15 1997;16(1 -3):259 -72.  
91. Daniels MJ, Hogan JW. Missing Data in Longitudinal Studies Strategies for Bayesian Modeling and 
Sensitivity Analysis . Taylor and Francis,; 2008:1 online resource (324 p.). 
http://gallaudet.eblib.com/patron/FullRecord.aspx?p=[ADDRESS_113983] of Inpatient Palliative Care During Hematopoietic Stem -
Cell Transplant on Psychological Distress 6 Months After Transplant: Results of a Randomized Clinical Trial. J 
Clin Oncol . Nov 10 2017;35(32):3714 -3721. doi:10.1200/JCO.2017.73.2800  
 