COVER PAGE  
Official title : Virtual Family -Centered Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_242450]: A 
Cluster Randomized Controlled Trial  
NCT number : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document date : 12/07/2022   
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Virtual Family -Centered Rounds in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: 
A Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
Page 1 of 11  HRP -503-PTOTOCOL TEMPLATE -General  
  Template Revision: January 17, 202 0 1) Protocol Title  
Title:  Virtual Family -Centered Rounds in the Neonatal Intensive Care 
Unit: A Randomized Clinical Trial  
Protocol Version Date: 12/5/2022 
2) Objectives  
 
The overall objective of this study is to test the efficacy  of virtual family -
centered rounds (FCR) compared to standard rounds for NICU patients 
and to conduct an intervention evaluation of the virtual FCR  intervention.  
Aim 1: Evaluate the impact of virtual FCR on parental activation and 
wellbeing. The primary outcome will be FCR parent attendance proportion 
(number of round encounters with a parent present – either virtually or in person 
– divided by [CONTACT_242461]). Increased parent FCR 
attendance would increase the delivery of best practice. We will also compare 
parent experience (Child HCAHPS)28 and parent activation (P -PAM)29,30 at 
discharge and parent distress andquality of life at 0, 30, 60, and 90 days from 
discharge between assigned trial arms. Parent wellbeing promotes neonatal 
wellbeing.  
- Hypothesis 1a: The virtual FCR (intervention) group will have a higher parent 
FCR attendance proportion compared to the standard FCR (control) group.  
- Hypotheses 1b: Parents of virtual FCR neonates will report (a) better 
experience, (b) higher activation, (c) less distress, and (d) better quality of life 
compared to parents of standard -of-care neonates .  
Aim 2: Evaluate the impact of virtual FCR on neonatal outcomes. We will 
compare breast milk feeding at discharge and 90 days from discharge, growth 
failure,33 medical errors, and NICU length of stay  between assigned trial arms.   
- Hypotheses 2: Virtual FCR neonates will have (a) greater breast milk feeding, 
(b) reduced growth failure, (c) fewer errors, and (d) shortened length of stay 
compared to standard -of-care neonates.  
Aim 3: Conduct a mixed methods evaluation of the virtual FCR intervention. 
We will measure all five RE -AIM dimensions using quantitative (chart review, 
surveys) and qualitative (observations, interviews) methods. Observations will be 
of NICU FCR; interviews will be with intervention arm parents and NICU 
providers. We will use a convergent design and merge data in the analysis and 
reporting phases.  
3) Background  
 
Family -centered rounds (FCR)  are multidisciplinary bedside rounds for 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_242451].[ADDRESS_294155] 
practice for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_65304].7,8 However, because active family engagement 
is required, FCR has only been possible for patients whose families can 
physically be at the bedside during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_100044].  
In the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) , barriers exist that limit family 
presence at the bedside. Critically ill neonates may be hospi[INVESTIGATOR_242452]:  Virtual Family -Centered Rounds in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: 
A Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
Page 2 of 11  HRP -503-PTOTOCOL TEMPLATE -General  
  Template Revision: January 17, 202 0 periods of time.9 Their parents or guardians (“parents” hereafter) often live far 
from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_242453], financial, work, or childcare constraints that 
limit their ability to be physically present in the NICU.10,[ADDRESS_294156] improved near -
term (e.g., lower risk of sepsis and improved cognitive development) and long -
term outcomes (e.g., lower risk of hypertension, diabetes, and obesity).20 
Telehealth is a potential solution to mitigate these challenges. Using existing 
secure  technology, parents can be virtually present at their neonate’s bedside to 
participate in FCR.[ADDRESS_294157] of telehealth on neonatal and parental outcomes.  
 
4) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
 
This study is a randomized trial to compare virtual family -centered rounds 
(FCR) to standard FCR for neonatal intensive care unit ( NICU ) patients . We will 
simultaneously conduct an intervention evaluation of this virtual FCR 
intervention. The unit of randomization is at the subject level (the neonate). The 
site is the UC Davis NICU. To gather necessary data on efficacy outcomes and 
on the 5 dimensi ons for the intervention evaluation ( Reach, Effectiveness, 
Adoption, Implementation, Maintenance) , survey  data will be collected from the 
subjects’ parent or guardian (referred to as “parent” hereafter) , electronic health 
record (EHR) data  will be collected from UC Davis, and daily weekday FCR  
observations will be performed. To gather necessary data for the intervention 
evaluation, qualitative interviews  will be performed.  
 
- INCLUSION: (NEONATES) Neonates aged <365 days admitted to UC Davis 
neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) during the study period who have one or 
more parent or guardian that self -reports their preferred language to be English. 
This parent must also be non-incarcerated and aged ≥18 years .  
- EXCLUSION: (NEONATES) Age > or = [ADDRESS_294158] 
admission.  
 
- INCLUSION: (QUALITATIVE INTERVIEWS) Parents/guardians of the eligible 
patients (described above) and NICU clinicians (e.g., nurses, physicians). Age 18 
years and older.  
- EXCLUSION: (QUALITATIVE INTERVIEWS) Age less than 18 years. Non -
English speaking.   
 
- INCLUSION: (SURVEY) Parents/guardians of the eligible patients (described 
above). Age 18 years and older.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Virtual Family -Centered Rounds in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: 
A Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
Page 3 of 11  HRP -503-PTOTOCOL TEMPLATE -General  
  Template Revision: January 17, 202 0 - EXCLUSION: (SURVEY) Age less than 18 years. Non -English speaking.   
 
5) Study Timelines  
We anticipate this trial will begin ~ 2/1/202 3. We will begin enrolling 
subjects at trial onset. We will enroll subjects (neonates) and assign to 
either the intervention or control arm for [ADDRESS_294159] 
(neonate) will be included for the duration of their hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] . 
We will follow this [ADDRESS_294160] surveys at 0, 30, 
60, amd 90 days from discharge. Therefore, survey data collection will 
continue until 16 months from the trial  onset.  
Regarding qualitative interviews for the intervention evaluation (Aim 3), 
those will continue for 18 months from the trial onset.  
The estimated date to complete this study is therefore ~ 8/1/202 4. 
6) Study Endpoints  
Primary study endpoint  is completing 12 months of trial enrollment. 
Secondary  study endpoint s include (a) completing the 13 months (12 + [ADDRESS_294161] enrollment) of daily weekday rounding observations of 
subjects; (b) completing the last survey for the last discharged patient (at 
90 days from discharge); (c) completing qualitative data anal ysis and 
integration for the mixed methods intervention evaluation.  
7) Procedures Involved  
 
OVERVIEW: The overall objective of this study is to conduct a randomized trial 
comparing virtual family -centered rounds ( FCR) to standard FCR for NICU 
patients and to  conduct an intervention evaluation of the virtual FCR  intervention. 
This study protocol involves the UC Davis NICU (n= 447 neonates) and uses a 
2:1 intervention -to-control arm ratio . The endpoint of the study includes 
completing the 12-month enrollment (intervention delivery) period plus the 1 
additional month of rounding observation data colle ction plus the 90 -day follow -
up parent survey for neonates discharged home during the study period. Thus a 
16-month total period (12 months + 1 month + 90 days). The end of the [ADDRESS_294162] FC R 
(control) versus virtual FCR (intervention) and no more neonates will be eligible 
for the study (which occurs at 12 months ) followed by [CONTACT_242462] [ADDRESS_294163] 
survey recruitment invitation (which occurs [ADDRESS_294164] eligible 
patient is discharged home to obtain 90 -day outcome measures) . Hypotheses 
include the following: (1) The virtual FCR (intervention) group will have a higher 
parent FCR attendance proportion compared to the standard FCR (control) 
group ; (2) Virtual FCR neonates will have (a) greater breast milk feeding, (b) 
reduced growth failure, (c) fewer medical errors, and (d) shortened length of stay  
compared to standard -of-care neonates; (3) Paren ts of virtual FCR neonates will 
report (a) better experience, (b) higher activation, (c) less distress, and (d) better 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Virtual Family -Centered Rounds in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: 
A Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
Page 4 of 11  HRP -503-PTOTOCOL TEMPLATE -General  
  Template Revision: January 17, [ADDRESS_294165] the 
intervention evaluation, we will apply the 5 dimensions of the RE -AIM framework 
(Reach, Effectiveness, Adoption, Implementation, Maintenance) and use a mixed 
methods approach with a convergent design. Data integration will occur by 
[CONTACT_242463] d ata in the analysis and reporting phases.  
 
ASSIGNMENT TO CONTROL VERSUS INTERVENTION: The unit of 
randomization is at the subject (neonate) level. T he study statistician  will 
generate a random allocation list and employ allocation concealment to assign 
eligible subjects with a 2:1 intervention -to-control arm ratio. During the 12 -month 
enrollment (intervention  delivery) period, a  research coordinator will open the 
sequentially numbered assignments to invite parents of neonates assigned to the 
intervention arm to sign up for virtual FCR. Neonates of parents accepting this 
offer will be considered “ subscribed .” For neonates with more than one eligible 
parent , separate subscri ption  invitations will be used for to each parent .  
 
DELIVERY OF INTERVENTION: We will use Extended Care as the software 
interface for virtual FCR. This secure platform meets HIPAA security rules  and 
launches from the electronic health record. Parents will use the Extended Care 
application  on their personal computer or smart device. The NICU medical team 
will use Extended Care on a computer on wheels with a speaker and camera. 
Virtual FCR will be available for parents of subscribed neonates to attend 
Monday through Friday. For neonates with a subscribed parent, a  NICU team 
member will launch an ExtendedCare telehealth visit (“virtual room ”) from the 
patient’s Epic chart. From ExtendedCare , a NICU team member will use the 
“invite” feature to invite the s ubscribed parent (s); the parents then receive a 
message to their email/cell phone  that include s their child’s unique Extended 
Care link. The parent(s) can use this link, if desired, to enter the “virtual room.” If 
a parent joins, they will  establish the live, bidirectional audio and visual 
connection. FCR will then proceed in usual fashion. Parents  can participate in 
virtual FCR as much, or as little, as they choose. They can also participate in 
FCR i n person (standard of care) or not participate at all.  
 
QUALITATIVE INTERVIEWS: The stakeholder engagement team members will  
assist with recruitment of the interview participants. Stakeholders or a research 
team member will recruit  eligible interview participants. They will hand -deliver a 
flyer to the parents/guardians of eligible patients at the time of [i.e., 2 days before 
the anticipated] hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345]. Alternatively, since parents are not often at 
the bedside for in -person recruitment, they will send a secure message from 
StudyPages or make a phone call to invite participants to participate in an 
interview. Non-responde nts will be contact[CONTACT_242464] 7 days later by a research 
coordinator through StudyPages. Clinician (e.g., nurses, physicians)  interview 
participants will be identified by [CONTACT_242465]. 
Recruitment emails  or Secure Chat messages  will be sent to the clinicians . 
Repeat email /message  outreach will be made to the clinician non -respondents at 
2 and 4 weeks following initial outreach. Participants will receive $[ADDRESS_294166] one in -depth 
interview that lasts ~45 minutes. Interviews will be in -person when possible, but 
otherwise by [CONTACT_242466]. Interviews will be audio recorded, 
transcribed, and reviewed for  accuracy by [CONTACT_20679]. Transcriptions will be 
uploaded into ATLAS.ti.  
 
DELIVERY OF SURVEY: Parents will be invited to complete their first survey at 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Virtual Family -Centered Rounds in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: 
A Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
Page 5 of 11  HRP -503-PTOTOCOL TEMPLATE -General  
  Template Revision: January 17, 202 0 the time of [i.e., 2 days before the anticipated] discharge. If a neonate has two 
eligible parents, separate invitations will be sent to each parent. Recruitment will 
occur via giving them a packet at discharge. The packet will contain a recruitment 
letter  (flyer) , a scannable barcode (to access the survey electronically if 
preferred), a website link (another alternative to access the survey electronically 
if preferred), and a paper version of the survey.  Alternatively, since parents are 
not often at the be dside for in -person recruitment, the research assistant  will 
send a secure message /email  from StudyPages or make a phone call to invite 
participants to participate in an interview.  Parents can complete the survey 
themselves or verbally with the research assistant who will directly input verbal 
responses into REDCap. The research assistant will make 3 daily attempts of 
outreach and follow up with non -respondents 7 days later. If a survey is not 
returned within 21 days of discharge, the survey will be considered a non -
response. The survey delivery process from a Secure Chat message /email  or 
phon e call will occur at 30, 60, and 90 days to administer the subsequent survey 
packets (with 3 daily attempts and follow -up 7 days later and a 21 -day response 
time limit). Electronic surveys will be conducted in REDCap . Paper surveys will 
be kept in a locked box in the locked physician workroom until collected by a 
research assistant, who will transfer the data into REDCap and then destroy  the 
paper copy . For parents with more than one neonate enrolled in the study (i.e., 
twins/multiples), the parents will only receive one survey packet per child. The 
survey will be sent to the parents at the time that one of their children first 
discharges from the NICU (a nd each subsequent [ADDRESS_294167] child’s discharge date). For subsequent siblings discharged at later 
dates, a research assistant will use StudyPages to message/call parents to 
obtain the responses to (a) questions #1 and 2 of the 30 -day survey and (b) 
question #1 of the 90 -day survey.  These questions relate to the outcomes of (a) 
30-day revisit/readmission and (b) 90 -day breastmilk feeding.  The research 
assistant will directly  input the responses into REDCap.  
 
DATA COLLECTION: Data collection will include daily weekday virtual FCR 
observations; parent surveys; and review of the EHR, incident reports, and 
helpdesk technical issues log . Outcomes (for Aims 1 -3) will include the following: 
FCR parent attendance  proportion  (captured using weekday rounding 
observations),  length of stay (captured using EHR data), breast milk feeding 
initiation  and breast milk feeding at discharge (captured using EHR data)  and at 
90 days after discharge (captures via parent  via parent/guardian survey ), growth 
failure and growth velocity (captured using EHR data) , time to first social work 
contact (captured using EHR data), temperature instability (captured from an 
existy NICU quality dataset), feeding difficulty (captured from an existy NICU 
quality dataset), central line -associated bloodstream infection (captured from an 
existy NICU quality dataset), central line days (capt ured from an existy NICU 
quality dataset), antibiotics days (captured from an existy NICU quality dataset), 
medical errors (captured using data from EHR, incident reporting system, and 
solicited reports), 30-day revisit and readmission (captured via EHR an d survey) 
parent experience and family -centered care (captured via parent/guardian survey 
at discharge), parent activation ( captured via parent /guardian survey at 
discharge), parent distress : depression and anxiety  (captured via parent/guardian 
survey at 0, 30, 60, 90 days  from discharge), parent sleep ( captured via 
parent/guardian survey at 0, 30, 60, 90 days from discharge), and parent quality 
of life ( captured via parent/guardian survey at 0, 30, 60, 90 days from discharge).  
 
RE-AIM (Aim 3) implementation evaluation data collection will include the 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Virtual Family -Centered Rounds in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: 
A Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
Page 6 of 11  HRP -503-PTOTOCOL TEMPLATE -General  
  Template Revision: January 17, 202 0 following: subscribed vs. not subscribed parents among intervention -arm parents, 
heterogeneity of intervention effects ( interactions between neonate/parent 
characteristics and the intervention effect), virtual FCR attempts with technical 
issues (sounds, video, other), trial -related 24/7 helpdesk line calls, ExtendedCare 
wait time when parent(s) join, ExtendedCare connection time, device model (e.g., 
iPhone, Android, etc.) that parent uses to connect to the ExtendedCare visit, 
interruptions requiring a break  in rounds  due to a delivery or new admission, and 
virtual FCR use with NICU parents post -trial (maintenance).  
 
Data will be collected from both the intervention and control arm subjects. The 
EHR access for data collection will only occur in a retrospective fashion . The 
interaction with the control arm group  parents will therefore include an invitation 
via letter (flyer) to participate in the surveys. The obeservtions of FCR will be 
conducted by [CONTACT_5640] a research team member  or a NICU team member who 
already participates in FCR as part of clinical care . The information being 
recorded from the observations is whether or not parent(s) are present at FCR, 
and if so, what type of attendance (in person vs. virtual).   
 
8) Data and/or Specimen Management and Confidentiality  
☒ I understand that  if this study involves the use of   the UC Davis Health 
Electronic Health Record (EMR/EPIC) also contains the clinical data for 
Marshall Medical Center (MMC). I understand that MMC patient data 
cannot be accessed for research purposes and that I must take the 
necessary steps to ensure that M MC data is not accessed, used, or 
disclosed for UC Davis Health research purposes.  
☐ I undersand that i f this study involves use of UC Davis students’ 
educational records (including records in the PI’s own possession such as 
course exams/assignments), I must consult with the Registrar’s office to 
see if all requirements of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act 
(FERPA) are satisfied.   
 
DATA ANALYSIS: We will analyze subject data according to their assigned 
group (intervention vs. control). We will use descriptive statistics to summarize 
subject -level characteristics. We will compare neonatal and parental 
characteristics between study arms using Pearso n’s Chi -square test for 
categori cal variables, t -test for normally distributed continuous variables, and 
nonparametric equality -of-medians test for non -normally distributed continuous 
variables. Generalized linear models will be used to estimate effect sizes and to 
test hypotheses for study outcomes, using a binary ind icator for intervention 
assignment as the independent variable of interest and including a parsimonious 
set of demographic and clinical characteristics as covariates. We will analyze all 
available data and anticipate high data completion rates, based on ou r pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251]. 
We will conduct sensitivity analyses using multiple imputation approaches for 
missing data to complement the primary analysis.  
 
SAMPLE SIZE: We specified effect sizes of interest for all the trial outcomes and 
determined the necessary sample size to satisfy each. The sample size 
estimation that satisfies length of stay requirements also satisfies requirements 
for all other outcomes of interest,  except for medical errors (which are rare and 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Virtual Family -Centered Rounds in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: 
A Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
Page 7 of 11  HRP -503-PTOTOCOL TEMPLATE -General  
  Template Revision: January 17, 202 0 thus this outcome will be considered exploratory. Outcome distributional 
assumptions were based on data from our pi[INVESTIGATOR_242454]. 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_242455] +/- standard deviation 
(SD) was 3.0 +/- 1.0 days. Minimally clinically important differences (MCID) were 
based on the literature when available or via consensus opi[INVESTIGATOR_3078] n elicited from  
NICU clinician s we c onsulte d. For the  length  of stay outcom e, expert s specified 
that a 25% reduction in geometric mea n length of stay was of interest. A 
randomized sample of 447 neonates (298 intervention, 149 control) subject to 
4% attrition in each arm yields a sufficient sample size (429 neonates) to provide 
80% power (under two -sided testing, alpha=5%) to detect this  MCID. This 
estimated attrition is based on 4 of 110 randomized subjects in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_242456] (e.g., child protective visitation restrictions 
placed after randomization ). Parent -reported outcomes assume a survey 
response ra te of 75% (thus n=321 parents).  Note: Regarding sample size for the 
interviews, we anticipate interviewing ~15 parents, ~10 nurses, and ~[ADDRESS_294168] access to the study materials. The 
knowledge gained from this study will be disseminated in such forms as 
manuscripts and conference presentations; this disseminated information will 
contain no identifying information.  
The possibility of any adverse effects on participants as result of the study 
intervention is minimal given the intervention (virtual FCR in the NICU) is a 
method of communication that has been demonstrated in prior research (a pi[INVESTIGATOR_2284]) to improve care quality without causing harm. The difference for this present 
trial is that it is powered for hypothesis testing and includes additional outcome 
measures .  
A Data Safety Monitoring Plan with an Independent Monitoring Committee 
will be used for this study to provide additional protection.  The Independent 
Monitoring Committee will meet to independently review outcomes on a quarterly 
basis, and as needed based on any reported complications. Safety information 
will be collected by [CONTACT_242467]. The safety monitoring will begin when the 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Virtual Family -Centered Rounds in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: 
A Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
Page 8 of 11  HRP -503-PTOTOCOL TEMPLATE -General  
  Template Revision: January 17, 202 0 trial enrollment begins. The Independent Monitoring Committee will complete 
quarterly reports detailing the study progress, any adverse events, and any 
protocol deviations. The details are as follows:  
• Definition:  An adverse event is any untoward medical occurrence in a 
subject during participation in the study. An adverse finding can include a 
sign, symptom, abnormal assessment, abnormal occurrence, or any 
combination of these. A serious adverse event is any adver se event that 
results in one or more of the following outcomes: death, a life -threatening 
event, inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081], 
a persistent or significant disability or incapacity, or an important medical  
event based upon appropriate medical judgment.  
• Classification:  Adverse events will be labeled according to severity, 
which is based on their impact on the neonate. An adverse event will be 
termed “mild” if it does not have a major impact on the neonate, 
“moderate” if it causes the neonate some minor inconvenience, an d 
“severe” if it causes a substantial disruption to the neonate’s well -being.  
• Attribution Scale:  Adverse events will be categorized according to the 
likelihood that they are related to the study intervention. Specifically, they 
will be labeled definitely unrelated, definitely related, probably related, or 
possibly related to the study intervention.  
• Adverse Event Reporting : Adverse events will be collected by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_242457]. 
Events determined to be unanticipated, serious, and possibly related to 
the study intervention will be reported to the appropriate monitoring 
agencies, including the UC Davis IRB and the funding agency, within [ADDRESS_294169] the intervention evalution that includes the RE -AIM dimensions , all 
eligible subjects will be included in the data collection process. Their data will be 
kept in secure REDCap databases containing only their study ID, and the link to 
their study ID and MRN will be kept in the “Participant Log” that is stored on a 
secure Excel database stored on the secure UC Davis servers.  
This study is evaluating a systems -level intervention; a system -level intervention 
means that we are doing an intervention on how we deliver healthcare. In other 
words, our intervention is a test of change to the healthcare system. In this case, 
the system  is how we deliver family -centered rounds. The study team will not be 
able to determine the feasibility and implementation of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_242458] . It is important that we collect 
data on all eligible  subjects, because we want to ensure that we include 
gathering data from underserved populations in order to learn how to better 
provide them with clinical services that meet/address their unique needs. This 
aspect is particularly relevant for telehealth interventions, whereby [CONTACT_242468]/deliverying telehealth services that do not serve  
diverse populations. It is therefore important to have all of our diverse groups 
represented in our data in order to conduct our comprehensi ve intervention 
evaluation (Aim 3). We recognize the limitation that our survey -based outcomes 
(for Aims 1 and 2) will only gather data from those who complete the survey , and 
thus the conclusions from survey -based data will only be generalizable to similar 
populations as those represented in those surveys . However, our other outcomes 
(that rely on FCR observations  and review of the EHR, incident reports, and 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Virtual Family -Centered Rounds in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: 
A Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
Page 9 of 11  HRP -503-PTOTOCOL TEMPLATE -General  
  Template Revision: January 17, 202 0 helpdesk technical issues log)  will include all our subjects – and thus represent 
diverse groups.  
Since this is a systems -level intervention, only collecting data on consented 
patients will provide Aim 3 (intervention evaluation) results that are biased and 
therefore not useful. We cannot understand how to refine and deliver  our 
telehealth intervention  (and thus improve this clinical service line)  without having 
data on all eligible patients. Although we will need to collect data on every 
patient, the family members in the intervention group can choose if and how 
much to use the intervention (they can decide to never provide their cell phone 
number  and to never use telehealth  for FCR).  
We will be using StudyPages, a secure web -based application developed by [CONTACT_242469].  All study 
personnel involved in this proposed project have received Human Subjects 
Protection and HIPAA education.  
 
9) Data and/or Specimen Banking  
N/A 
10) Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of S ubjects  
 
There is potential minimal risk. There is potential loss of confidentiality; 
however, for all data, only study personnel will have access to these materials. 
Although the research coordinator will view identifiable information from the 
health records, the data downloaded from REDCap to be used for analysis will all 
be de -identified. All data will be destroyed 7 years after completion of the study.  
There is no risk to data security with regards to letting the parents use their 
personal device/computer to conduct virtual FCR, because the telehealth 
connection requires the download and use of the HIPAA -compliant application, 
Extended Care. This telehea lth application platform to be used will be a secure 
platform that meets HIPAA and HITECH data security requirements. Therefore, 
since the telehealth intervention in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_242459] a secure telehealth 
application to conduct virtual FCR, the comm unication will be secure. In this 
study, virtual FCR will only proceed using the HIPAA compliant application, since 
the videoconference connection is established through the HIPAA compliant 
application. No aspects of the virtual FCR encounter will be recor ded nor stored 
in any way.  
There are no anticipated risks to patients with regards to assignment to the 
intervention (virtual FCR). The intervention places no pressure on clinicians to 
alter clinical management. Rather, the intervention assigns the use of telehealth 
as an additional  mode of communication to enhance the in person standards of 
FCR.  
The alternative to virtual FCR is standard in person FCR or to not attend 
rounds at all. The benefits of in person FCR are not needing to communicate 
using a technology interface. However, the risks of in person FCR include the 
inability of the family to b e able to physically be in the NICU during rounds, and 
thus to participate in FCR at all.  
For the qualitative interview participants, there is potential minimal risk. 
Parents (or clinicians) might experience distress discussing their experiences 
during the NICU hospi[INVESTIGATOR_242460]. However, this research team has 
previously conducted  qualitative interviews with NICU parents who were asked to 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Virtual Family -Centered Rounds in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: 
A Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
Page 10 of 11  HRP -503-PTOTOCOL TEMPLATE -General  
  Template Revision: January 17, [ADDRESS_294170] on their experiences when their child was hospi[INVESTIGATOR_057]. In these interviews, 
informants did not report or demonstrate any distress. It is thus unlikely that such 
distress will occur with the proposed study. There exists a minimal risk of loss of 
confidentiality.  
 
11) Withdrawal of Subjects  
 
Subjects will only be withdawn if they no longer meet inclusion criteria . For 
example, this might occur if a neonate (subject) is enrolled but then has a CPS 
placement of visitor restrictions. At that point, we will inform the recruited parents, 
if applicable, that they no longer meet criteria to participate in the trial. This 
circumstance would be no different than their routine care, since a CPS 
restriction would prohibit them from joining FCR; so we would similarly restrict 
then form joining virtual FCR.  
Families randomized to use the intervention can choose to use or not use 
the intervention as they see fit, and it will not impact their participation in the 
study. Families will be free to choose to complete or not complete the surveys 
the week of discharg e. 
 
12) Risks to Subjects  
There is potential loss of confidentiality; however, for all data, only 
study personnel will have access to these materials. Although the 
research coordinator will view identifiable information from the health 
records, the data downloaded from REDCap to be  used for analysis will 
all be de -identified. All data will be destroyed 7 years after completion of 
the study  
 
13) Potential Benefits to Subjects  
It is possible that families who have the intervention available to them find benefit 
in being able to participate in family -centered rounds while not being present in 
the NICU.  
 
14) Multi -Site Research  
N/A 
15) Community -Based Participatory Research  
N/A 
16) Sharing of Results with Subjects  
Results will not be  shared with subjects.  Summary of findings will be 
reported in the form of manuscripts and presentations at scientific 
meetings.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Virtual Family -Centered Rounds in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit: 
A Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
Page 11 of 11  HRP -503-PTOTOCOL TEMPLATE -General  
  Template Revision: January 17, 202 0 17) Prior Approvals  
N/A 
18) Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
 
All information will be kept in secure REDCap or Excel databases and the only 
link between the patient and the REDCap will be a Study ID. We will use a 
“Participant Log” excel file to store data that links the Study ID with the subject. 
This log will include the following information: Study ID, patient name, MRN, 
CSN, intervention vs. control arm, admit date, enrolled date, parent identify ( e.g., 
“mom”), parent cell/email preferred contact, subscription status, and disposition. 
This “Participant Log” will b e stored on the secure UC Davis server . 
Families will be free to use the intervention if/when it works for them. Families 
randomized to the intervention can opt out of using it entirely, with no penalty to 
them or their child. Families are free to answer (or not answer) the surveys the 
week of discharge  and at 30, 60, and [ADDRESS_294171] access to the data.  
 
19) Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
N/A 
20) Economic Burden to Subjects  
N/A 
21) Drugs or Devices  
N/A 
22) Review Requirement s 
        Are there any contractual obligations or other considerations that 
require IRB review of this research, or review at intervals other 
than those required by [CONTACT_45108]?  If ye s, check  
box:  
 
 Yes 
 
 No 
 
  STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
Statistical methods for primary and secondary outcomes  
Our primary analysis  strategy will analyze all available data from participating family 
units  and their members , with groups defined according to the randomized assignment 
(intervention versus control) for that family unit. We will use  graphical and analytical  descriptive 
statistics to summarize infant , parent , and family unit characteristics . We will use methods for 
clustered survey data to adjust confidence intervals  for family units with multiple parental 
respondents . We  will not use cluster -adjusted confidence intervals for family units with multiple 
infants  unless the mean number of infants  per family unit unexpectedly exceeds 1.[ADDRESS_294172] 
characteristics as covariates  (parent age, race , ethnicity, gender, education , transportation 
security, marital status, other children dependents, digital literacy score ). We will specify the 
generalized linear mixed models as linear, logistic, or Poi sson regressions, according to the 
outcome  type.  Random effects will be specified to accommodate the multilevel structure of the 
data and the nesting of longitudinal measurements , when applicable , within parents and the 
nesting of parents and infants  within family units . 
To account for increased exposure among subjects with longer neonatal intensive care 
unit ( NICU ) stays  when analyzing the primary outcome , we will use Poisson regression to 
compare rates for the family -centered rounds ( FCR) parent attendance outcome between 
intervention vs. control group subjects, using the numerator for this outcome as the dependent 
variable and using the logarithm of the  denominator as an offset term. We will also use Poisson 
  regression for analyzing the error rate outcomes, with the offset being the logarithm of the number 
of days in the NICU. The exponentiation of the Poisson regression coefficient for the treatment 
indicator will thus represent an adjusted b etwee n-arm rate ratio for FCR parent  attendanc e. 
For parent experience  and family -centered care , we will use the top -box scoring method 
and assess intervention effects on the individual items as well as on the summary scores.  For 
parent health -related quality of life ( HRQOL ), we will similarly assess the intervention effects on 
the PedsQL ™ Family Impact Module 36 items, eight subscales, and summary scores  (overall 
total score, Parent HRQOL Summary score, and Family Functioning Summary score). To 
accommodate the longitudinal data collection for the HRQOL outcomes, we will use generalized 
linear mixed models that include main effects for time, study arm, and the interaction, to estimat e 
timepoint -specific  intervention effects . We will also evaluate the effect of the intervention o n the 
remaining outcomes .  
Interim analyses  
Interim analyses will not be conducted during this trial.  
Methods for additional analyses  (e.g. subgroup analyses)  
We will conduct mediation analysis to evaluate relationships between parent activation 
and the other secondary and exploratory outcomes.  We will also evaluate relationships between 
FCR attendance and the other outcomes. For example, the intervention effect on HRQOL may be 
mediated by [CONTACT_242470]  a dose -response relationship. Thus, if we find a positive 
intervention effect on  HRQOL , we will explore FCR attendance mediation using similar 
methods.  We anticipate that the intervention effect on the following outcomes will  be mediated 
by [CONTACT_242470] a dose -response relationship : parent experience, family -centered care, 
parent activation, parent HRQOL , length of stay, and breastmilk feeding .  
  We will explore heterogeneity of the treatment effects , using rigorous analyses based on 
including interaction terms for the candidate effect modifier and the intervention effect term(s). 
Candidate effect modifiers will include  residence -to-NICU distance, neighborhood health 
conditions, parent race and ethnicity, parent transportation security, other children dependents, 
parent computer/smart device access, parent internet access, and parent digital literacy score. For 
these terms, each will be evaluated wi thout correction for multiple discovery. Other candidate 
effect modifiers will be evaluated as part of a comprehensive examination of intervention effects 
and for these, we will control the false discovery rate at 10%.  
We will decompose the FCR parent attendance outcome measure by [CONTACT_242471]-person and virtual components . We will explore the type of 
attendance as an outcome variable and as a predictor of the secondary  outcomes. We will include 
a statistical exploration within the intervention arm for whether higher virtual FCR attendance is 
associated with differences in in -person FCR attendance. Additionally, we will fit regression 
models for each secondary  outcome that simultaneously inclu de measures of both virtual and in -
person FCR attendance, allowing us to assess and compare whether the incremental benefits of 
higher FCR  attendance are similar between both types of attendance.   
Methods in analysis to handle protocol non -adherence and any statistical methods to 
handle missing data  
The primary analysis  strategy  – a modified intention -to-treat analysis  – differs from 
intention -to-treat only in that it will not require replacing missing data with  imputed values. This 
‘complete -case’ analysis strategy assumes that missingness is at random. Sensitivity analysis 
using multiple imputation will be performed to assess the potential impacts of nonignorable 
missingness  and alternative approaches for handling infants  whose disposition is not to the home 
  and thus for whom the outcome may not be as applicable. In particular, for the few infants who 
transfer to another unit or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], the parent -reported outcomes and the 30 -day 
revisit/readmission outcomes are of limited applicability . Our modified intention -to-treat analysis 
will include these subjects, but alternative analysis that excludes such outcomes from infants not 
discharged to home would be warranted. We will also estimate alternative treatment effects, such 
as per -protocol and as -treated.  
 