 
 
 
Postmarket Registry for Evaluation of the Superion® Spacer 
[PRESS Registry] 
 
Protocol No.:  16-VISS-01 Rev C 
 
July 20, 2016 
 
 
  
 
Sponsor: 
Vertiflex®, Inc. 
1351 Calle Avanzado, Suite 100 
San Clemente, CA  [ZIP_CODE] 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
This document is a confidenti al communication of Vertiflex®, Inc. The recipi[INVESTIGATOR_651580]®, Inc. except that this document may be disclosed to appropriate ethics 
committees or duly authorized repr esentatives of the U.S. Food a nd Drug Administration or other 
responsible regulatory authorities under the condition that confiden tiality is maintained. 
  
Vertiflex®, Inc., PRESS Registry 
Protocol #: 16-VISS-01 Rev C  20 July 2016  
 
Vertiflex®, Inc.  Page 2 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY INFORMATION. This document and the information contained herein 
may not be reproduced, used or disclosed without the written permission of Vertiflex®, Inc. 
 INVESTIGATOR SIGNATURE [CONTACT_651599]:  Postmarket Registry for Evaluation of the Superion® Spacer 
 [PRESS Registry] 
 
Protocol No.: 16-VISS-01  
 
Date:  July 20, 2016 
 
 
By [CONTACT_651589], the Inve stigator acknowledges that: 
He/she has read the protocol and agrees to comp ly with the protocol in accordance with Good 
Clinical Practices and use of the stipulat ed products as indica ted in the protocol. 
All patients will provide signed Informed Consen t (provided by [CONTACT_2728]) prior to enrollment in 
the registry. 
Where/if applicable, Investigator agrees to conform to all procedur es agreed to, or required by, the 
Institutional Review Board or Independent Ethics Committee. 
All data relevant to the clinic al evaluation and regarding the subject response and safety, as 
stipulated in the protocol, will be documented and provided to the Sponsor. 
All unanticipated  adverse device effects, and serious adve rse device events that are definitely 
device- or procedure-related, will be reported as requested to the S ponsor within 24 hours. 
 
     
Signature [CONTACT_651600]®, Inc., PRESS Registry 
Protocol #: 16-VISS-01 Rev C  20 July 2016  
 
Vertiflex®, Inc.  Page 3 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY INFORMATION. This document and the information contained herein 
may not be reproduced, used or disclosed without the written permission of Vertiflex®, Inc. 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS  
Investigator Signature [CONTACT_3490] [ADDRESS_874504] DESCRIPTION 5 
 2.1 Device Description 5 
 2.2 Indications for Use 6 
3 POSTMARKET SURVEILLANCE PROCEDURES 6 
 3.1 Registry Design 6 
 3.2 Registry Endpoints 6 
 3.3 Duration and Extent of Registry 7 
 3.4 Registry Population & Source of Patients [ADDRESS_874505]-Operative Follow-Up Assessments 8 
4 SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS 9 
 4.1 Serious Adverse Events 9 
5 TERMINATION OF PARTICIPATION 9 6 DEVICE EXPLANT AND RETRIEVAL 10 
7 INVESTIGATOR RESPONSIBILITIES 10 
8 SPONSOR OBLIGATIONS 10 
 8.1 Investigator(s) Training [ADDRESS_874506] OF APPENDICES 10 
  
Vertiflex®, Inc., PRESS Registry 
Protocol #: 16-VISS-01 Rev C  20 July 2016  
 
Vertiflex®, Inc.  Page 4 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY INFORMATION. This document and the information contained herein 
may not be reproduced, used or disclosed without the written permission of Vertiflex®, Inc. 
 Postmarket Registry for Evaluation of the Superion® Spacer 
[PRESS Registry ] 
Protocol No. 16-VISS-01 
 
PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS 
 
Title Postmarket Registry for Evaluation of the Superion® Spacer 
Short Title PRESS Registry  
Protocol Number 16-VISS-01 
Sponsor Vertiflex® Inc. 
1351 Calle Avanzado, Suite 100 San Clemente, CA [ZIP_CODE] 
Registry  Treatment Superion® Indirect Decompression System (IDS) 
Control Treatment None 
Registry  Design Prospective, single arm, multi-center 
Registry  Objective The purpose of this postmarket surveillance registry is to gather 
evidence documenting the perform ance and clinical outcomes 
associated with treatment of moderate degenerative lumbar spi[INVESTIGATOR_651581]
® Indirect Decompression System (IDS) . 
Registry  Population Patients ≥45 years of age suffering from symptoms of neurogenic 
intermittent claudication secondary to a confirmed diagnosis of 
moderate degenerative lumbar spi[INVESTIGATOR_651582] L1 to L5. 
Number of Subjects A minimum of one hundred (100) patients will be enrolled in the 
registry. 
Number of Sites A minimum of twenty (20) sites will participate. 
Registry  Enrollment Approximately [ADDRESS_874507] data for the primary evaluation.  Registry dur ation is approximately 24 months 
based upon 12 months’ enrollment plus 12 month follow-up for 100 patients.  Sponsor reserves the ri ght to enroll additional patients. 
Endpoints  VertiFlex® Patient Satisfaction Survey:  A score of ≥3 in each 
questionnaire component is considered clinically significant;  
 Visual Analogue Scale (VAS):  An improvement in back and leg 
pain of 20 mm (on a 100 mm scale) vs. baseline is considered clinically significant. 
 Achievement of Self-Defined Functional Objective.  A score of ≥3 
is considered evidence of significant improvement in function. 
Other Data Collected  Reports of serious procedure- or  device-related adverse events; 
 Intraoperative metrics including es timated blood loss, operative time, 
type of anesthesia, and time to discharge. 
 
 
Vertiflex®, Inc., PRESS Registry 
Protocol #: 16-VISS-01 Rev C  20 July 2016  
 
Vertiflex®, Inc.  Page 5 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY INFORMATION. This document and the information contained herein 
may not be reproduced, used or disclosed without the written permission of Vertiflex®, Inc. 
 1 PURPOSE 
The purpose of this postmarket registry  is to gather evidence documenting the performance and 
clinical outcomes associated with treatment of moderate degenerative  lumbar spi[INVESTIGATOR_651583]® Indirect Decompression System (IDS). 
[ADDRESS_874508] DESCRIPTION 
The Superion® Indirect Decompression System (IDS) (Superion® implant)  is a spi[INVESTIGATOR_651584], and is implanted by [CONTACT_651590]-invasive methods through a 
cannula with patient under general or local anesthesia.  The implant provides indirect 
decompression of spi[INVESTIGATOR_153315] , and functions as a spi[INVESTIGATOR_237889]-blocke r to prevent 
compression of neural elements in extension.  Th e device was approved by [CONTACT_941] U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) for commer cialization in the U.S. via PreMarket Approval (PMA) on May 
20, 2015.1 
2.1 Device Description 
The Superion® implant is available in five (5) sizes, from 8mm to 16mm in 2mm increments, to 
accommodate a range of spi[INVESTIGATOR_651585].  It is co mposed of Titanium 6Al-4V alloy conforming to 
ASTM Standard Specification F136,  Standard Specification for Wrought  Titanium-6 Aluminum-4 
Vanadium ELI (Extra Low In terstitial) Alloy for Surgical Implant Applications .  Figure 1  depi[INVESTIGATOR_651586]. 
Figure 1: Superion® Indirect Decompression System (IDS) in situ  
  
Lateral View A/P View 
 
  
1For a complete Summary of Safety and Effectiveness Data  (SSED) derived from the clinical trial supporting FDA 
approval of the Superion® PMA, please refer to the SSED posted on the FDA website at 
http://www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf14/P140004b.pdf .  

Vertiflex®, Inc., PRESS Registry 
Protocol #: 16-VISS-01 Rev C  20 July 2016  
 
Vertiflex®, Inc.  Page 6 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY INFORMATION. This document and the information contained herein 
may not be reproduced, used or disclosed without the written permission of Vertiflex®, Inc. 
 The device may be implanted under general or local (e.g., conscious sedation) anesthesia.  A 
percutaneous or mini-open approach is used fo r placement of a cannula vi a sequential dilation.  A 
sizing tool is employed to determine the proper device size, and the Superion® implant is then 
inserted through the cannula and deployed under fl uoroscopic guidance betw een spi[INVESTIGATOR_651587].  The im plant serves thereafter to mainta in distraction between the spi[INVESTIGATOR_651588].  This main tains the intervertebr al space and prevents 
narrowing of the canal by [CONTACT_651591].  Wher e a second, contig uous level is 
also symptomatic, the same proce dure is used to place a Superion® implant at that level. 
2.2 Indications for Use 
Patients will conform to indica tions and contraindications delineated in the Superion® labeling. 
[ADDRESS_874509] clinical 
experience with use of the Superion® Indirect Decompression System (IDS) in the treatment of 
moderate degenerative lumbar spi[INVESTIGATOR_16083].  A minimum of twenty (20) sites will be selected to 
participate, enrolling a minimu m of one hundred (100) patients. 
Patient selection will conf orm to labeled indications for use, and physicians will treat patients in 
accordance with physician labeling and the Superion® Surgical Technique Manual.  All physicians 
must have completed trai ning in the use of the de vice provided by [CONTACT_651592]®. 
3.2 Registry Endpoints 
Registry endpoints will include  the following outcomes reflective of clinical effectiveness: 
 Vertiflex® Patient Satisfaction Survey:  A score of ≥3 in each questionnaire component 
will be deemed a clinically meaningful outcome.  
 Visual Analogue Scale (VAS), Back and Leg Pain:  An improvement of 20 mm (on a 100 
mm scale) from baseline is considered  a clinically meaningful outcome. 
 Achievement of Self-Defined Func tional Objective.  A score of ≥3 is considered evidence 
of significant improvement in function.  
In addition, other information to be collected will include: 
 Reports of Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) dete rmined by [CONTACT_651593]- or device-related.  
Perioperative information that  will be collected includes: 
 Type of anesthesia 
 Operative time (min.) 
 Estimated blood loss (cc) 
 Time to discharge (hrs.) 
Vertiflex®, Inc., PRESS Registry 
Protocol #: 16-VISS-01 Rev C  20 July 2016  
 
Vertiflex®, Inc.  Page 7 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY INFORMATION. This document and the information contained herein 
may not be reproduced, used or disclosed without the written permission of Vertiflex®, Inc. 
  
3.3 Duration and Extent of Registry 
Patients included in this registry will be assessed pre-operatively for eligibility in accordance with 
labeled indications for use, and will return for follow-up visits at 3 weeks (±2 weeks), 6 months 
(±2 months), and 12 months (±2 months) post-tr eatment.  Designed to enroll a minimum of one 
hundred (100) patients, Vertiflex® may elect to enroll additional patients. 
3.4 Registry Population and Source of Patients 
The registry population will consis t of male and female patients ≥45 years of age, with symptoms 
of neurogenic intermittent claudication and a c onfirmed diagnosis of moderate degenerative 
lumbar stenosis at one or two contiguous levels fr om L1 to L5, meeting th e labeled indications for 
use of the Superion® Indirect Decompression System (IDS) .  Patients will be identified and 
recruited by [CONTACT_651594]/or their designated  research staff.  The clinician Investigator at 
each site is responsible for verifying that a potentia l registry patient meets all eligibility criteria, as 
described in the labeled indications for use, and is not contraindicated. 
Patients will be considered evaluable after Informed  Consent has been signed, the Investigator has 
verified eligibility, and Vertiflex® has assigned a unique pa tient identifier number. 
3.5 Registry Procedures 
Data will be collected from all patients partic ipating in the registry pre-operatively, intra-
operatively, and at follow-up visits at 3 weeks (± 2 weeks), 6 months (±2 months), and 12 months 
(±2 months) post-treatment (See Visit Schedule, Appe ndix A).  Data will be  recorded on approved 
Case Report Forms provided by [CONTACT_651592]®.  Procedures associated w ith individual visits are as 
follows: 
3.5.1 Pre-Operative Assessment 
The following information will be collected an d documented on the Pre-Operative Assessment 
Case Report Form (Appendix B) by [CONTACT_3433] e Investigator or his/her authorized clinical research staff at 
the time of pre-operative assessment: 
 Confirmation of Eligibility 
All potential registry participants shall be confirmed as meeting eligibility requirements, 
as described in labeled indicati ons for use and contraindications. 
 Informed Consent 
All patients seeking to participate in the regi stry, and whose eligibil ity has been confirmed 
by [CONTACT_737], will be required to sign Sponsor-provided Informed Consent prior to 
enrollment. 
Demographic Information 
Vertiflex®, Inc., PRESS Registry 
Protocol #: 16-VISS-01 Rev C  20 July 2016  
 
Vertiflex®, Inc.  Page 8 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY INFORMATION. This document and the information contained herein 
may not be reproduced, used or disclosed without the written permission of Vertiflex®, Inc. 
 Date of birth, gender, height, weight, and smoking history will be collected. 
Establishment of Self-Defined Functional Objective 
3.5.2 Intra-Operative Assessment 
Perioperative metrics will be collected and documented on the Treatment Case Report Form 
(Appendix B) at the time of treatment, including: 
 Device size(s) 
 Device lot number(s) 
 Surgical level(s) treated 
 Type of anesthesia 
 Duration of surgery (min.), measured from star t of anesthesia administration to completion 
of skin closure 
 Estimated blood loss (cc) 
 Time to discharge (hrs.), measured from co mpletion of skin closure to discharge from 
treating facility 
In addition, any intra-operative co mplications/serious adverse even ts deemed by [CONTACT_651595]- or device-related wi ll be documented, as  described in §4. 
3.5.[ADDRESS_874510]-Operative Follow-Up Assessments 
At each follow-up visit, i.e., at 3 weeks (±2 weeks), 6 months (±2 months), and 12 months (±2 
months) post-treatment, the following informa tion will be collected and documented on the 
Follow-Up Visit Case Report Form (Appendix B): 
 Patient identification number and initials, and da te of follow-up visit and follow-up interval 
(e.g., 3 weeks, 6 or 12 months, etc.) will be re corded by [CONTACT_11219]/or his/her 
authorized clinical research staff. 
 Patients will complete a Vertiflex® Patient Satisfaction Survey.  A score of ≥3 in each 
questionnaire component will be deemed a clinically meaningful outcome.  
 Patients will complete a Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) for each leg, and for back pain.  An 
improvement of 20 mm (on a 100 mm scale) fr om baseline is consid ered a clinically 
meaningful outcome. 
 Patients will indicate the extent to which they  have achieved their Se lf-Defined Functional 
Objective, on a 1 to 5 scale, with 1 indicating no progress at all, and 5 indicating complete 
achievement. 
In addition, the Investigator a nd/or his/her authorized clinical  research staff will collect and 
document: 
Vertiflex®, Inc., PRESS Registry 
Protocol #: 16-VISS-01 Rev C  20 July 2016  
 
Vertiflex®, Inc.  Page 9 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY INFORMATION. This document and the information contained herein 
may not be reproduced, used or disclosed without the written permission of Vertiflex®, Inc. 
  Reports of any Serious Adverse Events (SAE s) occurring since the last visit, and 
determined by [CONTACT_651596]- or device-related.  
 
4 SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS (SAEs) 
All Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) deemed by [CONTACT_651597]- or 
device-related  must be documented on the SAE Case Report Form (Appendix B). 
4.1 Serious Adverse Events 
An adverse event is regarded as a Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  if the injury or illness: 
A) Results in death 
B) Is life-threatening, 
C) Results in or prol ongs hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] 
D) Results in permanent impairment of a body function or permanent damage to a body 
structure, or 
E) Necessitates medical or surgic al intervention to preclude pe rmanent impairment of a body 
function or permanent damage to a body structure. 
The Vertiflex® Clinical Research group must be notified of all Serious Procedure- or Device-
Related Adverse Events  within 24 hours at: 
Vertiflex®, Inc., Clinical Research 
1351 Calle Avanzado, Suite 100 
San Clemente, CA [ZIP_CODE] [LOCATION_003] 
Tel:  ([PHONE_13501] 
Fax: ([PHONE_13502] 
[EMAIL_12370] 
5 TERMINATION OF PARTICIPATION 
Patients may voluntarily withdraw from the registry  at any time for any reason.  The Investigator(s) 
may elect to withdraw a subject fr om the registry at any time due to  lack of compliance or for any 
reason unrelated to the registry trea tment if such a decision is in the patient’s best medical interest. 
6 DEVICE EXPLANT AND RETRIEVAL 
In the event of a device removal,  the device and the Investigator’s written explanati on of the event 
will be sent to Vertiflex® following instructions from Vertiflex®. 
 
7 INVESTIGATOR RESPONSIBILITIES 
Investigators will be deemed responsible for the following: 
Vertiflex®, Inc., PRESS Registry 
Protocol #: 16-VISS-01 Rev C  20 July 2016  
 
Vertiflex®, Inc.  Page 10 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY INFORMATION. This document and the information contained herein 
may not be reproduced, used or disclosed without the written permission of Vertiflex®, Inc. 
  This registry must have initial and con tinuing approval (at l east annually) from an 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) respons ible for approving clinical studies. 
 Acquisition of signed Informed Consent from each patient before performing any registry-
related activities. 
 Conduct of the registry in conformance with  this protocol, and with Good Clinical 
Practices. 
 
8  Vertiflex® OBLIGATIONS 
8.1 Investigator(s) Training 
Vertiflex® will provide appropriate training to each I nvestigator that includes didactic and hands-
on elements, e.g., cadaver lab, sawbones model.  Training will including surgical procedures in 
accordance with the Superion® Surgical Technique Manual, selec tion of appropriate  implant sizes, 
instrumentation for implantation, indications fo r use of the device, contraindications, and 
management of complications.  Vertiflex® will also provide appropriate training to the operating 
room staff at each investigational site, where applicable. 
8.2 Vertiflex® Registry Termination 
Vertiflex® may close enrollment or terminate the re gistry at any site, at any time, for non-
compliance to GCP guidelines or this protocol, or for other valid reason. 
8.3 Registry Monitoring 
Vertiflex® may elect to monitor the regi stry during its active phase.  Any such monitoring visits 
will be scheduled by [CONTACT_651598], and monitoring will be carried out 
in compliance with GCP guidelines. 
[ADDRESS_874511] OF APPENDICES 
 Appendix A:  Visit Schedule 
 Appendix B:  Case Report Forms 
 