 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intermediate Vision in Patients with Clareon IOLs Compared to Eyhance IOLs  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
17 Jan  2022 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Intermediate Vision in Patients with  Clareon  IOLs Compared to 
Eyhance IOLs  
PROTOCOL  BEC001-69901155, [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 Non -interventional (None).  
J. Morgan Mi chelet ti, MD
Berkeley Eye Center, Houston , [LOCATION_007] STUDY TREATMENTS: 
Principal Investigator:          
[INVESTIGATOR_146554]:  
Background: 
T
he recently launched Eyhance IOL is a monofocal designed to slightly extend the depth of 
focus. 
Indications for use “TECNIS Eyhance IOL for the visual correction of aphakia in adult patients 
in whom a cataractous lens has been removed by [CONTACT_146556].”  
In two prior Vivity registration studies, the AcrySof IQ monofocal lens was used as the control lens and showed functional intermediate vision (~20/32) via binocular IVA measurement.    
Defocus curves also demonstrated a slightly extended depth of focus with the AcrySof IQ and mean vi sual acuities remained above 0.0 logMAR (20/20 Snellen) between +0.50D~-0.50D 
defocus.  
Clinical data is needed to determine if the Clareon monofocal IOLs  can provide similar range of 
vision as the Eyhance monofocal IOLs.  
Clinic al Hypothesis: 
Patients with bilateral Eyhance IOLs may have improvements in intermediate vision, however, it 
has previously been reported that bilateral Clareon  IOLs also provide improved intermediate 
vision (see Vivity - Directions For Use).  
This study a ims to determine the non -inferiority of bilateral Clareon  IOLs compared to bilateral 
Eyhance IOLs at intermediate vision.  
Scientific Rationale:  
The Eyehance IOL was approved as a Level A M odification of the ZCB00 IOL, thus no clinical 
data was required for that approval.  The infe rence is that the Eyhance provides an extended 
range of vision due to the slight modification to the optic design Study Objectives:  
Compare distance and intermediate visual acuities  and a defocus curve in patients with bilateral 
Clareon Monofocal IOLs versus bilateral Eyhance IOLs . 

OVERALL STUDY DESIGN 
This is a non- interventional prospective, single center, bilateral, non- randomized, open- label, 
two-arm comparative study of the outcomes for patients following successful, uncomplicated 
cataract surgery . [ADDRESS_167749] had bilateral implantation of an Eyhance IOL  (DIB00/DIU***)  or Clareon  
IOL (CNA0T0 /CCA0T 0) at the time of uncomplicated cataract surgery. These patients will then 
be assessed  at least [ADDRESS_167750] -operatively . 
Duration:  
12 months or longer to meet required enrollment.  
Administration:  
Patients with healthy eyes and previously implanted Eyhance IOLs or Clareon  IOLs will be 
offered the opportunity to participate in the study.  Visit Schedule:  
All subjects will undergo 1 visit.  At the study visit and after informed consent, the subjects’  
demographic information will be collected,  and the subject  will have the following testing:  
1) Manifest refraction  (both groups)  
2) Binocular corrected distance visual acuity (B DVA ) at 4m (both groups)  
3) Distance corrected intermediate visual acuity  (DCIVA ) at 66 cm  (both groups)  
4) Distance targeted -corrected binocular  distance and  intermediate  visual acuity with 
+0.25D offset  (Clareon group)   
5) Binocular distance corrected defocus curve from +1.0 D to - 3.0 D  at 0.5D steps, with 
0.25 D steps between -0.50 D  and + 0.50 D  
STUDY POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS:  
Condition  
Patients with health y eyes  and uncomplicated bilateral implantation of Eyhance IOLs or Clareon  
IOLs . 
Number of Subjects:  
Under the assumption that the difference between  binocular t argeted c orrected i ntermediate 
visual acuity between the two arms is 0.[ADDRESS_167751] deviation for 
each measurement is 0.15 logMAR, a power of 80% and Type I error probability of 0.05. 
Source: Kohn MA, Senyak J. Sample Size Calculators [website]. UCSF CTSI. [ADDRESS_167752] 2021. 
Available at https://www.sample -size.net/ [Accessed 28 September 2021]  
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria (all study criteria apply to each study eye unless otherwise 
indicated):  
Inclusions  
1)Adults, at least [ADDRESS_167753] 
removal by [CONTACT_146557] a clear corneal incision in both eyes.
2)Implantation of bilateral Clareon IOLs or Eyhance IOLs (DIB00/DIU***).
3)Able to comprehend and willing to sign informed consent and complete all required 
testing procedures
4)Best Corrected Distan ce Visual Acuity (BCDVA) projected to be 0.10 logMAR
(Minimum Angle of Resolution) or better
5)Clear intraocular media
6)Minimum of two weeks post YAG capsulotomy to treat  PCO
7)Residual refractive astigmatism ≤0.75 diopters
8)Post op refractive results for the Clareon subjects are from 0.00 to -0.50 SE
9)Post op refractive results for the Eyhance subjects are from +0.25 to -0.25 SE
E
xclusions 
Subjects will not be permitted to enroll in this study if they meet any of the following exclusion criteria:  
1) Any corneal abnormality, other than regular corneal astigmatism (as determined by [CONTACT_094] -
operative testing ) that in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_146555](s)
of the study
2) Any complication during cataract surgery (capsular tear, vitrectomy, etc)
3) History of or current retinal conditions or predisposition to retinal conditions
4)Amblyopia or strabismus in either eye
5) History of or current anterior or posterior segment inflammation of any etiology
6) Any form of neovascularization on or within the eye
7) Glaucoma (uncontrolled or controlled with medication)8)Optic nerve atrophy
9)  Subjects with diagnosed degenerative eye disorders  
10)   Postoperative CDVA worse than 0.10 logMAR in either eye.  
11)  Subjects who have an acute or chronic disease or illness that would confound the results 
of this investigation (e.g. immunocompromised, connective tissue disease, clinically 
significant atopic disease, diabetes, etc)  
Outcome Measures : 
Primary Endpoints:  
1. Non-inferiority of Target -corrected Binocular Intermediate (66 cm) Visual Acuity with  
Offset : Target -corrected binocular intermediate (66 cm) visual acuity of Clareon 
monofocal subjects at - 0.25 sphere versus Eyhance subjects at plano sphere. 
2. Non-inferiority of Distance Corrected Binocular Intermediate Visual Acuity : Distance 
corrected binocular intermediate visual acuity (measured at 66 cm) of Clareon subjects versus Eyhance subjects with both groups set at plano sphere.  
3. Non-inferiority of Best Corrected Distance Visual Acuity : Comparison of Best Corrected 
Distance Visual Acuity (measured at 4m) of Clareon subjects versus Eyhance subjects.  
4. Non-inferiority  of Target -corrected Binocular Distance (4 m) Visual Acuity With Offset : 
Comparison of Best Corrected Distance Visual Acuity (measured at 4m) of Clareon subjects versus Eyhance subjects.  
5. Binocular Distance Corrected Defocus Curve: Comparison of the binocular distance corrected defocus curve of Clareon subjects versus Eyhance subjects from +1.0D to -3.00D. 
Secondary Endpoints : 
1. Post-operative Spherical Equivalent  
2. Post-operative Residual Astigmatism  
Statistical Analysis   
Welch Two Sample t -test for parametric data and Wilcoxon rank- sum test for non- parametric 
data.  Non -inferiority will be defined as within 0.1 LogMAR. 