IM Redacted    
IM Redacted    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clinical Assessment of Skin Quality and Efficacy of 
Dermal Line Improvement Following Four Bipolar 
Radiofrequency Microneedling Treatments  
 
NCT 05085730  
Document Date:  11/17/2022  
  
IM Redacted    
IM Redacted   Clinical Assessment of Skin Quality and Efficacy of 
Dermal Line Improvement Following Four  Bipolar 
Radiofrequency Microneedling Treatments  
 
  
  
SPONSOR  InMode  
 
TESTING & AMINISTRATIVE 
FACILITY   
UT Southwestern Medical Center  
[ADDRESS_1241994]. Abby [CONTACT_887420], MD  
Jasmine Panton, MBe  
 
 
1. Background  
 
The human skin aging process is characterized by [CONTACT_887421], atrophy of the 
extracellular matrix, and reduced collagen synthesis [1]. Loss of collagen in the dermis is of 
aesthetic concern, as it is the main structural suppo rt in the dermis and its loss results in skin 
laxity. Photo -damaged skin, mostly due to UVR, causes degradation of elastic fibers , which is 
histologically seen as disorganized tangles of elastin. Additionally, as we age, skin tends to 
appear more dry due t o its poor hydration and turgor capacity [1]. The use of minimally invasive 
aesthetic treatments in reducing signs of aging has been gaining in popularity over surgical 
treatments in recent years [2]. Several energy types including, laser, radiofrequency, infr ared, 
and ultrasound, have been developed for facial rejuvenation [3]. These treatments induce 
controlled thermal damage to the dermis and cause collagen contraction and neocollagenesis 
resulting in skin tightening over several months [2]. The effects of facial rejuvenation treatments 
on collagen have been well defined in literature,  however, the role of elastin in facial 
rejuvenation has not been well studied.  
 
In facial skin aging, the skin loses elasticity and begins to sag. Minimally invasive bipolar 
radiofrequency produces a controlled thermal injury in a fractional manner witho ut damaging 
the dermal -epi[INVESTIGATOR_211472], epi[INVESTIGATOR_211473] [5]. Radiofrequency, unlike lasers, are 
chromophore -independent providing better penetration than lasers, and spare sweat glands, 
sebaceous glands, and hair follicles [5,6] .  
 
The InMode Morpheus [ADDRESS_1241995] six months for this purpose.  
Additionally, our research team conducted a study using Ulthera, an ultrasound device, 
approximately 10 years ago; the results of this study led to its FD A approval for the treatment 
of lax neck skin.  We are also finishing a study looking at another bipolar radiofrequency, 
microneedling device.   
 
2. Purpose  
 
The primary objective of this study is to evaluate the safety and efficacy of a bipolar fractional 
radiofrequency treatment via use of the In Mode Morpheus 8 System to achieve skin texture and 
quality change and to treat  facial fine lines and wrinkles  of the lower face .  
 
3. Study D esign  
 
This is a single center, unblinded, non -randomized, non -controlled study designed to follow a 
total of up to thirteen  (13) qualified and consenting subjects receiv ing [ADDRESS_1241996] -procedural photos.  These photos wil l be identifiable full face photos, and subjects 
will be adequately informed of such.  One unblinded clinician’s assessments of satisfaction will 
be characterized using the Lemperle Wrinkle Assessment Scale, a four -point Allergan ski n fine 
line scale and a four -point Allergan Skin Roughness scale at baseline, 3 month follow up and 6 
month follow up visits. The five -point Global Aesthetic Improvement Scale (GAIS) will also be 
used at [ADDRESS_1241997] photos taken using 
the VISIA Imaging system and will underg o high -resolution ultrasonography, transepi[INVESTIGATOR_569676] (TEWL) measurements and/or BTC [ADDRESS_1241998] -treatment for histological evaluation (tissue structure, elastin, collagen 
and hyaluronic acid expression) and gene expression assessment (elastin, other major ECM 
molecules and elastin related genes).  
 
From these exploratory procedures the improvement in skin quality and dermal lines of the 
lower face and jawline can be evaluated in comparison to pre -treatment assessments.  
 
4. Study Population  
 
This is a single -site study at UT Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas in the Department of 
Plastic Surgery. Up to thirteen  (13) subjects will be enrolled and treated .  
 
4.1. Subject Enrollment  
Subjects who are interested in treatment for facial fine lines and  wrinkles  will be recruited 
for the study.  Prospective patients will be screened to check if they are acceptable 
candidates . Subjects meeting eligibility requirements will be scheduled for a n official  
screening visit. Additionally, if subjects express an interest in the procedure during a clinic 
appointment with [CONTACT_887430] or [CONTACT_887431], he or she may discuss the study with them and 
assess the treatment area.  If a subject is deemed a good candidate, [CONTACT_887430] or Dr. C ulver 
will connect the patient with a research coordinator or delegated member of their research 
team to answer any further questions. Potential subjects will have the study explained to 
them, will be asked about their willingness to be involved in the stu dy, and their willingness 
to sign an informed consent form. Included in this interview will be questioning from the 
investigator or staff member about any privacy concerns the individual may have . 
 
4.2. Informed Consent Form  
An IRB-approved  informed  consent  form  (ICF),  explaining  the purpose,  design,  risks  and 
duration  of the study,  will be given  to each  candidate  subject  before  participation  in any study  
procedures.   The candidate  subject  will be given  as much  time  as needed  to read  the ICF and 
will have  the opportunity  to have  any study -related  questions  answered  to their  satisfaction  
prior  to signing  the ICF.  An original  signed  copy  for each  subject  participating  in the study  will 
be retained  in the study  file and each  subject  will receive  a signed  copy.   By [CONTACT_887422],  subjects  indicate  that they  are willing  to have  their  full-face  photograph  and 
acknowledge  that these  photos  may  be used  for scientific  publication.  If the subjects  decline  
permission  to be photogr aphed,  they  may  not participate  in the study  since  the photographic  
documentation  of treatment  outcome  is an important  measure  of evaluation.  The candidate  
subject  will be ineligible  to participate  in this study  without  a signed  ICF.   
 
5. Eligibility  Criteria  
 
IM Redacted    
IM Redacted   5.1. Inclusion Criteria  
[ADDRESS_1241999] is willing not to  undergo any type of aesthetic procedure that could 
confound the study device treatment effects until he/she completes the study.  
 
5.2. Exclusion Criteria:  
1 Active localized or systemic infections, that may alter wound healing.  
2 Immunocompromised subjects.  
3 Subjects with coagulation disorder.  
4 History of skin photosensitivity disorders, or use of photosensitizing 
drugs (e.g., tetracycline or sulfa drugs).  
5 Pregnant and/or lactating (All female volunteers will be advised 
about using birth control during the peri od of study).  
6 5 on the Lemperle Wrinkle Assessment Scale or 4 on the Allergan Fine 
Line Scale and/or Allergan Skin Roughness Scale s 
7 Scarring in areas to be treated.  
8 Tattoos in the treatment areas to be treated.  
9 Significant open facial wounds or lesions.  
10 Severe or cystic acne in treatment areas.  
11 Current active smoker.  
12 Use of Accutane (Isotretinoin) within the past 6 months.  
13 Use of topi[INVESTIGATOR_211475] 48 hours.  
14 Use of prescription anticoagulants.  
15 Pacemaker or internal defibrillator.  
16 History of skin dis orders resulting in abnormal wound healing (i.e. 
keloids, extreme dry and fragile skin).  
[ADDRESS_1242000] has a history of allergy to lidocaine or ester -based local 
anesthetics.  
22 Subjects with  significant cardiac history or rhythm disturbance who 
may be unable to tolerate lidocaine with epi[INVESTIGATOR_238].  
IM Redacted    
IM Redacted   23 Subjects with any skin pathology or condition in the treatment area 
that could interfere with evaluation or with the use of typi[INVESTIGATOR_887409], during or after treatments 
(e.g. psoriasis, rosacea, eczema, seborrheic dermatitis, vitiligo, hyper 
or hypo -skin pi[INVESTIGATOR_887410]).  
[ADDRESS_1242001] -treatment  
2 Clinician’s Global Aesthetic Improvement Scale (CGAIS) at [ADDRESS_1242002] Global Aesthetic Improvement Scale (SGAIS) at [ADDRESS_1242003] -
treatment  
4 Exploratory skin measurements using high resolution ultrasound, 
TEWL measurements (Bio Aquaflux) and BCT 2000 to assess skin 
thickness, density, firmness as well as the integrity of the stratum 
corneum  
5 Micro -biopsies for histological evaluation (tissue str ucture, elastin, 
collagen and hyaluronic acid expression) and gene expression 
assessment (elastin, other major ECM molecules and elastin related 
genes)  
 
7. Safety Endpoint  
IM Redacted    
IM Redacted    
Safety will be determined based on adverse event data collected from both the 
Morpheus 8 treatment visit s and all follow -up evaluations of the treated areas.  
The Primary Safety Endpoint will be the incidence rate, severity, and relatedness 
of adverse events observed in the study.  All adverse events that arise during the 
course of the study  will be recorded and summarized in the final study report.  
 
8. Study Visit Procedures  
 
8.1. Screening  Visit: Visit [ADDRESS_1242004].  All interested subjects will be given the Informed Consent Form 
with adequate time for review. The Investigator and/or designee will address questions and 
concerns raised by  [CONTACT_423]. Those subjects who elect to participate, will sign the 
Consent Forms prior to any study procedures.  
 
Subjects will be screened to ensure that they meet all study criteria.  The following 
enrollment and screening activities will be performed:  
1. Discuss the bipolar fractional radiofrequency device with each subject presenting for 
treatment  
2. Obtain informed consent and HIPAA authorization  
3. Collect any appropriate medical and surgical history including current medications, 
skin type, recent sun exposu re, allergies, major illnesses, etc.  
4. Evaluation of pre -existing skin conditions that may have potential study impact  
5. Urine pregnancy test for women of childbearing potential  
6. Examination of the treatment area by [CONTACT_099]  
7. Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_151592] l ocation and ap proximate area of treatment site(s)  
 
This visit will take about 1 hour.  
 
8.2. Treatment Visits: Visit [ADDRESS_1242005] Treatment Visit (Visit 2) activities may be combined with the Screening Visit  (Visit 
1).   
 
A member of the study team will ask subjects if they experiences any change in their health 
since their previous visit. If an adverse event (AE) is reported then the Investigator or 
designated clinician will be informed and an AE form will be completed for their review.  
 
The following activities will be  completed before the first treatment for research purposes:  
1. Obtain close up and standard photography  
2. Obtain surface area assessments via the Vectra H2 3D Imaging System and Standup 
Vectra  
3. Assess skin using multiple established objective scales including t he Lemperle 
Wrinkle Assessment, Allergan Fine Line and Allergan Skin Roughness Scales.  
IM Redacted    
IM Redacted   4. Obtain high -resolution ultrasound images, TEWL measurements (Bio Aquaflux) and 
BTC [ADDRESS_1242006], the skin will be cleansed and prepp ed 
with an antiseptic. A trained staff member will apply a topi[INVESTIGATOR_15413] (benzocaine, 
lidocaine, tetracaine) and shortly thereafter a local anesthetic (1% xylocaine with 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_887411]) will be injected for additional pain control. The trea tment 
parameters will be determined by [CONTACT_887423]’  
skin texture, thickness, and lines. In general, the skin of the lower face will be treated at 
several depths , with two successive passes per depth, ranging fro m 1-[ADDRESS_1242007] cases a 12 - and 24 -point tip will be utilized and then followed by [CONTACT_887424].  Energy settings will be chosen by [CONTACT_887425]’  skin texture, thickness, and lines.  The settings will range from 20 -40.   
 
 The following activities will be performed on all subjects:  
 
1. The study treatment (bipolar fractional  radiofrequency) per study treatment 
guidelines provided  
2. Review of post treatment expectation and management for the treatment as 
detailed in the study device instruction for use (IFU)  
3. All expected (e.g., edema, erythema) and unexpected (e.g., burn, bliste r) 
treatment adverse events will be documented and graded  
  
 
 Post -treatment Care and Precautions   
Appropriate post -treatment care instructions will be provided as deemed appropriate 
by [CONTACT_80476].  Post treatment assessment will be performed.  
Subjects will be instructed that blistering, bleeding, oozing, strong pain, swelling 
persisting for more than 72 hours, or signs of infection (e.g., pus, drainage, fever) are 
cause for immediate concern and they should contact [CONTACT_1755]/or his 
designee, to be evaluated.  Downtime after treatment typi[INVESTIGATOR_211479] 
0-2 days.  
 
This visit will take about 1 hour.  
 
 
IM Redacted    
IM Redacted   8.4 Follow -Up Visits (Visits 6 and 7) 
At a minimum, all subjects will return for follow -up at 3 months (+/ - 7 days) and 6 months 
(+/- 7 days) after treatment.   
 
The following activities will be performed on all subjects during the follow -up visits:  
 
1. The physician or study staff will perform an examination of the skin of the 
treatment area.  
2. All expected (e.g., edema, erythema) and unexpected (e.g., burn, blister) 
treatment local skin responses will be documented and graded at every visit  
3. Adverse Event Review  
4. Query the subject regarding any ch ange in health since enrollment into the study  
5. Perform a detailed cutaneous exam of the treatment area, review and record 
any local adverse events related to cutaneous changes  
6. Collect an updated surgical history and record any change in concomitant 
medicat ions or treatments.  
7. Obtain close -up and standard photography  
8. Obtain surface area assessments via the Vectra H2 3D Imaging System and 
Standup Vectra  
9. Assess skin using multiple established objective scales including the Lemperle  
Wrinkle Assessment, Allergan Fine Line and Allergan Skin Roughness Scales.  
10. Assess skin using both Clinician and Subject Global Aesthetic Improvement Scales 
(GAIS)  
11. Assess patient satisfaction using the Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire  
12. Obtain post -treatment high -resolution ultrasound images, TEWL measurements 
(Bio Aquaflux) and BTC 2000 images  
a. Noninvasive  skin measurements will be obtained at each Follow -up Visit  
(#6-7) 
13. Collect two 0.33mm biopsies using WellTech Rapid -Core 0.33mm Biopsy Punch 
post -treatment. The biopsy will be taken from the cheek adjacent to the 
nasolabial fold within the designated area for treatment. One biopsy will be used 
for histological studies and the other for gene expression studies  
a. Biopsies will be obtained at each Follow -up Visit (# 6-7) 
14. Other assessments may be conducted per the clinical sites standard practice, 
such as collection of vital signs.  
 
 These visits will take about [ADDRESS_1242008] for an Event Follow -up Visit within 24 
hours.  At this visit the Investigator or his designee will:  
 
IM Redacted    
IM Redacted   1. Obtain a complete history of the event in question as well as conduct an 
examination of the subject and determine if the reported event qualifies as an 
Adverse Event.  If the event is determined to be an Adverse Event, an Adverse 
Event (AE) case report form and Event Follow -up (EF) Visit case r eport form must 
be completed.  One AE case report form should be used to track the history of an 
individual AE throughout the period of the study.   
2. Collect an updated medical and surgical history along with recording of 
concomitant medications or treatments.  
3. Take photographs of the subject with attention to the area in question.  
4. Render treatment for the event, if any, as determined by [CONTACT_887426].  
 
Additional follow -up visits may also be required after the last schedule d visit to assess 
resolution of adverse events.  
 
9. Subject Instructions  
 
Subjects will be provided with the following instructions to follow during the study:   
 
9.1. Washout Period and/or Pre -Study Instructions  
No topi[INVESTIGATOR_887412] [ADDRESS_1242009] arrives having not 
removed all makeup, he/she will be required to remove the residual makeup at the 
clinic and wait at least [ADDRESS_1242010] has a history of 
safe usage of the foundation.  
IM Redacted    
IM Redacted   3 Subjects should abstain from undergoing any dermatological treatments  during the 
entire study duration.  
 
10. Schedule of Events  
 Visit 1  Visit 2 Visit 3 Visit 4 Visit 5 Visit 6 
(Month 3 ) Visit 7 
(Month 6)  
Procedures  Screening# Treatment 
1# Treatment 
2 Treatment 
3 Treatment 
4 Follow Up 
1 Follow Up 
2 
Informed Consent  X       
Eligibility Criteria  X       
Demographics  X       
Medical History/ Concomitant 
Medications  X X X X X X X 
Physical Exam   X       
Urine Pregnancy  X     
   
InMode Treatment   X X X X   
Standard Photographs   X    X X 
Surface area assessment 
using H2 3D Imaging and 
Standup Vectra   X    X X 
CGAIS/SGAIS     
  
  
 X X 
Patient Satisfaction 
Questionnaire        X X 
Objective Assessments^   X    X X 
Non-invasive Skin Tests*    X    X X 
Biopsy   X    X X 
Safety Assessment   X X X X X X 
Blinded Evaluations        X 
 
 
# Treatment visit activities may be conducted at the Screening Visit  
^ Lemperle Wrinkle Assessment Scale, Allergan Fine Line Scale, Allergan Skin Roughness Scale  
* TEWL measurement, BTC -2000, and/or high frequency ultrasound images will be taken  
 
11. Assessments  
Note that the order of the assessment s listed below may be altered from the order indicated in 
the study visits in order to help study flow, or at the recommendations of the Sponsor or 
Investigator. Any change in the order of procedures will not compromise study data.  
11.1. Assessment of Facial Wrin kling  
Assessment of facial wrinkling will be performed at baseline  and at  3-months and [ADDRESS_1242011] -treatment. Facial wrinkling will be assessed using the Lemperle Wrinkle Assessment 
Scale9. Wrinkling in the following regions - forehead, glabellar folds, p eriorbital, preauricular 
areas, cheek, nasolabial folds, upper lip, marionette lines, corners of mouth, chin, and neck - 
can be assessed according to scale’s definitions  (See Appendix I).  
 
IM Redacted    
IM Redacted   11.2. Assessment of Fine Lines  
Assessment of fine lines will be performed at baseline  and at  3-months and  6-months post -
treatment. Fine lines will be assessed using the Allergan Fine Line Scales for Facial Fine Lines 
11. Fine line s on the midface/cheeks will be assessed according to the scale’s definitions (See 
Appendix I Ia and I Ib). 
 
11.3. Allergan Skin Roughness Scale  
Assessment of skin roughness will be performed at baseline and at [ADDRESS_1242012] -treatment. Skin roughness will be assessed using the Allergan Skin Roughness Scale13. 
Skin roughness will be assessed according to the scale’s definitions based on descriptions of 
severity of skin coarseness, crosshatching and elastosis in the midface area (See  Appendix 
IIIa and IIIb).  
 
11.4. Clinician’s Global Aesthetic Improvement Scale (CGAIS)  
Subjective assessment of aesthe tic improvement will be performed at [ADDRESS_1242013] -treatment  (See Appendix IV) .  
The scale should be completed in two steps:  
[ADDRESS_1242014]’s pre -
treatment photographs of the face and neck, and  
[ADDRESS_1242015]’s pre -treatment photographs to the current 
post -treatment photographs of the face and neck.  
 
11.5. Subject’s Global Aesthetic Improvement Scale (SGAIS)  
Subjective assessment of aesthetic improvement will be performed at [ADDRESS_1242016] -treatment (See Appendix IV).   
 
11.6. Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire  
Subjective assessment of patient satisfaction will be performed at [ADDRESS_1242017] -treatment (See Appendix V).  
 
11.7. Imaging Procedures  
Prior to  photography procedures, clinic personnel will ensure that subjects have a clean face 
and neck with no makeup as described in the study procedures. Subjects will remove any 
jewelry from the area(s) to be photographed and equilibrate for at least [ADDRESS_1242018] from the face .  
 
IM Redacted    
IM Redacted   Subjects will be instructed to adopt neutral, non -smiling expressions with their eyes gently  
closed for VISIA. Subjects will be carefully positioned for each photograph, directly facing 
the camera for the center view and turned at a 45° angle for the right and left side views.  
[ADDRESS_1242019] a total of 3 
full-face ima ges taken (right side, left side, and center view) using the following 
lighting conditions:  
Standard lighting 1: visible (bright)  
Standard lighting 2: visible (flat)  
Cross -polarized : 
UV-NF 
[ADDRESS_1242020] -treatment.  
 
11.8. Noninvasive Procedures  
Biox Aquaflux  will be used to measure transepi[INVESTIGATOR_7044] (TEWL) measurements 
which evaluate barrier function of the skin epi[INVESTIGATOR_887413]. The BTC 2000 will be used to measure skin laxity, 
viscoelastic de formation, stiffness, energy absorption, elasticity, and deformation values of 
skin.  All procedures will be performed  on the submental area.   
 
11.9. Skin Biopsies  
Two 0.33 mm punch biops ies will be taken from the cheek adjacent to the lateral upper lip 
at Visit  2, Visit 6 and Visit 7. Prior to biopsy the area will be cleaned with alcohol and a local 
numbing agent, 0.5% -1% Lidocaine with epi[INVESTIGATOR_238], will be used to anesthetize the area 
being biopsied . If bleeding is present, pressure will be held on the biopsy site until bleeding 
stops.  Immediately after collection, biopsies for histology and gene expression will be put in 
4% PFA and RNA -Later solution, respectively. Biopsies will be stored in a cooler  for transfer 
to the Plastic Surgery Research Lab at UTSW for molecular analysis.  
 
11.10.  Blinded Evaluation  
Blinded evaluation will be performed by [CONTACT_887427], non -treating clinicians to 
determine if the InMode Morpheus8 System is effective in improving the  appearance of 
facial and neck skin quality and dermal lines.  
 
At study conclusion, the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_887414] , physician  evaluators 
to assess photos of subjects taken pre - and post -treatment.  The evaluators will be trained 
IM Redacted    
IM Redacted   by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_887415].  The evaluators  will be  blinded to subject information and will 
only know that the study consisted of multiple treatment visits an d follow up visits at 3 
months and 6 months. They will be provided a set of photos taken at three different visits  – 
pre-treatment , [ADDRESS_1242021] -treatment  – in a randomized and 
unidentifiable order. No information will be provide d that may allow them to determine the 
baseline from follow up imaging. Evaluators will be asked to assess the  sets of pi[INVESTIGATOR_887416], Allergan Fine Lines and Allergan Skin Roughness scales . After 
completion of the scales, the raters  will be unblinded and asked to complete the Clinical 
Global Aesthetics Improved Scale (CGAIS).  
 
The source documents will be prepared and distributed to the blinded evaluators by a 
member of the study staff.  A decreased score for each assessment will indicate an 
improvement  for the indicated parameters.  
 
12. Statistical Methods of Analysis  
This initial study will include change from baseline analysis.  
 
The primary outcome measure of effectiveness will be a paired comparison of baseline to all 
applicable post -baseline time points using data obtained from transepi[INVESTIGATOR_887417], high resolution ultrasonography, BTC 2000 measurements, biops y results, and 3D 
imaging results.  Photographs and 3D video of treated skin at follow -up visits will be compared 
to baseline for blinded scoring evaluations.  Mean of the change from baseline (defined as post -
baseline value minus baseline value) will be estimated at post -baseline time points for 
applicable parameters.  
 
The following will be calculated and re ported for each evaluation parameter at the applicable 
post -baseline time point(s):  
Percent mean change from 
baseline =  (visit mean score – baseline mean score) 
x 100  
baseline mean score  
 
For Clinician ’s Global Aesthetic Improvement Assessment, the null hypothesis that the mean 
score is equal to 4 (no change) will be tested.  
 
13. Non -Significant Risk Determination  
In accordance with the definition of “Significant Risk Device” provided in the U.S. Code of 
Federal Regulations 21 CFR 812.3, the study device to be used in this research study has been 
determined to be a Non -Significant Risk (NSR) device based on the following:  
a)  It is not an implant  
IM Redacted    
IM Redacted   b)  It is not purported or represented to be for use in supporting or sustaining human 
life and do not present a potential for serious risk to the health, safety or welfare of 
a subject  
c)  It is not for a use of substantial importance in diagnosing, curing, mitigating, or  
     treating disease or otherwise preventing impairment of human health  
d)  Use of the device poses no risk to the health, safety, or welfare of a subject  
 
14. Device Description  
The In Mode Morpheus8 System is a minimally invasive bipolar radiofrequency (RF) 
microneedling device FDA -cleared for full -body adipose tissue remodeling.  The fractional RF 
device, with adjustable penetration depth and energy delivery, contains [ADDRESS_1242022]  
 
 
15. Potential Risks  
Blistering, burning, and infection: (Rare)  
A crust, blister or superficial wound can occur at the treatment area.  The risk of 
infection will be minimized by [CONTACT_211492].  
 
Bruising:  (Rare)  
A mild bruising may occur at the treatment area as a result of radiofrequency 
exposure. This is usually transient and resolves in a few hours to few days.  
 
Transient edema and/or erythema : (Occasionally)  

IM Redacted    
IM Redacted   May develop within the irradiated areas but are usually temporary and fade within 
24-72 hours.  
  
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9491]: (Rare)  
Radiofrequency exposure can cause pi[INVESTIGATOR_211484] - (and 
hypopi[INVESTIGATOR_85152]. Although this is usually temporary, it may be permanent on 
rare occasions. Sun avoidance and/or the use of a total sun block (SPF 30 or higher) 
will help minimize the intensity and duration of any pi[INVESTIGATOR_9491].  
 
Scarring: (Rare)  
As with any form of energy exposure, there is a small risk of scarring. However, 
this is minimized by [CONTACT_141083].  
 
Allergic Reaction: (Rare)  
There is a possibility of an allergic or toxic reaction to anesthesia used to numb 
the areas. Subject s will be questioned with regard to any history of allergies and 
carefully monitored for signs of allergic reaction.  
 
Biopsy  
Risks associated with biopsy include: 1) scarring - a small risk of scarring, which can be 
mitigated by [CONTACT_141083]; 2) allergic reaction - there is a possibility of an 
allergic or toxic reaction to anesthesia used to numb the areas. Subjects will be questioned with 
regard to any history of allergies and carefully monitored for signs of allergic reaction . 
 
Photogra phy 
The subject may be uncomfortable with sitting still for an extended period of 
time or from turning his/her body in various positions. Subjects may be sensitive 
to the bright and repeating flashes from the camera, which can sometimes cause 
headaches, ir ritation of the eyes, discomfort, aftereffects such as seeing spots, 
and in rare cases, could stimulate a migraine headache or epi[INVESTIGATOR_141064].  
 
Photographs include a risk of identification, as these will be full face photos. 
Privacy will be protected to  the greatest extent possible. Photos will only be 
identified by a unique subject identification number that contains no personal 
identifying information. All photos will be stored on a password secure drive, 
with only access by [CONTACT_2710]. For res earch purposes, photos may be 
used in scientific publications.  
 
Noninvasive procedures (exploratory)  
1. Biox Aquaflux will be used to measure transepi[INVESTIGATOR_418202] (TEWL) 
measurements which evaluate barrier function of the skin epi[INVESTIGATOR_887418]. The standard 
time for TEWL measurements should take approximately [ADDRESS_1242023] advantages over existing technologies currently in use (lasers, 
ultrasound, etc.) because of its combination of bipolar fractional radiofrequency and 
microneedling technology. This technology may lead to better clinical outcomes  for an 
understudied area.  
 
17. Adverse Events  
17.1. Definitions  
Adverse Event  
An adverse event is any untoward medical occurrence, unintended disease or injury, or 
untoward clinical signs (including abnormal laboratory findings) in subjects, users or 
other persons,  whether or not related to the investigational medical device.  
Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect  
An unanticipated adverse device effect (UADE) is any serious adverse effect (defined 
below) on health or safety, any life -threatening problem or death caused  by, or 
associated with a device, if that effect, problem, or death was not previously identified 
in nature, severity, or degree of incidence in the protocol; or any other unanticipated 
serious problem associated with a device that relates to the rights, s afety, or welfare of 
subjects.  
 
A serious adverse event (SAE) is any adverse event that:  
a) led to death,  
b) resulted in life -threatening illness or injury  
c) resulted in permanent impairment of a body structure or body function  
d) resulted in in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_285904],  
e)   resulted in medical or surgical intervention to prevent permanent impairment to 
body structure or body function, or  
IM Redacted    
IM Redacted   f) led to fetal distress, fetal death, congenital abnormality,  or birth defect  
 
17.2. Reporting  
Adverse events, and unanticipated adverse device effects (UADE) are collected from the 
time of subject consent until the subject exits the study. A description of the adverse event 
or device event, date of onset, severity, action taken, relations hip to study treatment and 
outcome are documented in the case report form.   
 
The Investigator will submit to the reviewing IRB a report of any unanticipated adverse 
device effect (UADE)) as soon as possible, but in no event later than [ADDRESS_1242024] learns of the event (CFR 812.150(a)(1)).  
 
18. Subject Safety and Data Monitoring  
For this protocol, which involves the use of a non -significant risk device, the Investigator will be 
responsible for the conduct of the study including accrual, subject experience, attrition, 
patterns of expected adverse events and/or unexpected adverse ev ents, any protocol 
deviations or violations, and any changes in the risk/benefit analysis.   
 
Subjects will be asked about any adverse events throughout the study by [CONTACT_5984]. 
Subjects will be asked to contact [CONTACT_887428].  An 
unscheduled visit will be arranged so that the Investigator can clinically evaluate and 
photograph these findings. All subjects will be discontinued from the study if their problem 
remains unchanged/becomes worse. The Investigator ca n decide to stop the study if he/she 
believes that the participants’ participation is no longer safe or if another treatment may be 
more helpful. The IRB or FDA may stop the research for the safety of the participants.  These 
adverse events will be documen ted and reported as required for compliance with applicable 
regulations.   
 
All study records and information will be identified by [CONTACT_49252]. All subject 
identifiers will be removed from all documents. The link between subject name [CONTACT_846334] -protected files at the study site. Documents 
containing identifying information will be kept in locked files in the research staff’s locked 
office. All electronic study data will be password protected with access lim ited to members of 
the research team. No direct identifying information will be shared with any outside entities, 
unless required by [CONTACT_17513] (FDA and IRB).  Electronic data (electronic data entry - 
Case Report Forms) , if used , will be password protected.   
 
Photographs of the subject’s face will be taken at Enrollment/Treatment and Follow -Up  
visits. These photographs will be identified by [CONTACT_211494]. Subject confidentiality will be 
protected to the greatest extent possible.  Quantitative s urface area assessments will be done 
on lateral 3D images taken at baseline and compared with 3D images obtained at all follow -up 
visits.  
 
IM Redacted    
IM Redacted   This study will be performed in accordance with Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act. These guideline s will be followed specifically with regards to the privacy and confidentiality 
of subject care and study records.  Personnel associated with Investigator’s office and the 
governing Institutional Review Board, have the right to review the data, including p hotographs, 
collected during this study.   
 
19. Protocol Deviations  
Emergency deviations (deviations necessary to avoid immediate apparent harm or protect life 
or physical well -being of subjects or others) and major deviations as defined by [CONTACT_275719] w ill be reported to the IRB within [ADDRESS_1242025] time 
for use of high -resolution ultrasound should take approximately 5 minutes. Transepi[INVESTIGATOR_569676] (TEWL) measurements will be used to evaluate ba rrier function of the skin epi[INVESTIGATOR_887419]. The standard time for TEWL 
measurements should take approximately [ADDRESS_1242026] time for BTC 2000 should take approximately 5 minutes.  
 
Biopsies will be taken using 0.33mm biopsy punches of the submental area. Biopsies will allow 
investigators to co rrelate changes seen in skin measurements with histology and gene 
expression. Time for two biopsies will take approximately five minutes. Biopsies for histology 
will be fixed immediately after collection in 4% PFA followed by [CONTACT_887429]. Biopsies 
for gene expression will be put in RNA -Later solution and transferred to the Plastic Surgery 
Research Lab for gene expression analysis. Whole genome sequencing will not be performed, 
we will only be analyzing proteins and RNA expression related to collagen,  elastin, and the 
extracellular matrix production.   
 
21. References  
 
1. Tobin DJ. Introduction to skin aging. J Tissue Viability. Feb 2017;26(1):37 -46. 
2. Hantash BM, Ubeid AA, Chang H, Kafi R, Renton B. Bipolar fractional radiofrequency 
treatment induces neoelastogenesis and neocollagenesis. Lasers Surg Med. Jan 
2009;41(1):1 -9. 
IM Redacted    
IM Redacted   3. Alster TS, Tanzi EL. Noninvasive lifting of arm, thigh, and knee skin with transcutaneous 
intense focused ultrasound. Dermatol Surg. May 2012;38(5):754 -759.  
4. Gold MH, Sensing W, Biro n J. Use of micro -focused ultrasound with visualization to lift 
and tighten lax knee skin (1.). J Cosmet Laser Ther. Oct 2014;16(5):225 -229.  
5. Alexiades -Armenakas M, Newman J, Willey A, et al. Prospective multicenter clinical trial 
of a minimally invasive te mperature -controlled bipolar fractional radiofrequency system 
for rhytid and laxity treatment. Dermatol Surg. Feb 2013;39(2):263 -273.  
6. Gold M, Taylor M, Rothaus K, Tanaka Y. Non -insulated smooth motion, micro -needles RF 
fractional treatment for wrinkle redu ction and lifting of the lower face: International 
study. Lasers Surg Med. Oct 2016;48(8):727 -733.  
7. Dayan, Steven H. MD; Humphrey, Shannon MD; Jones, Derek H. MD; Lizzul, Paul F. MD, 
PhD, MPH, MBA; Gross, Todd M. PhD; Stauffer, Karen PhD, CMPP; Beddingfield , 
Frederick C. III MD, PhD. Overview of ATX -101 (Deoxycholic Acid Injection): A 
Nonsurgical Approach for Reduction of Submental Fat. Dermatologic Surgery : November 
2016 - Volume 42 - Issue - p S263 –S270  
8. Jones DH, Carruthers J, Joseph JH, et al. REFINE -1, a multicenter, randomized, double -
blind, placebo -controlled, phase [ADDRESS_1242027], et al. A classification  of wrinkles. Plastic Reconstr Stug. 
Nov 2001;108(6):[ADDRESS_1242028] 2019;42(S1):S243 -S250.  
11. Carrut hers J, Donofrio L, Hardas B, et al. Development and Validation of a Photonumeric 
Scale for Evaluation of Facial Fine Lines. Dermatol Surg. 2016;42(S1):S227 -S234.  
12. Jones D, Carruthers A, Hardas B, et al. Development and Validation of a Photonumeric 
Scale fo r Evaluation of Transverse Neck Lines. Dermatol Surg.  Oct 2016;42(S1):S235 -
S242.  
13. Donofrio L, Carruthers A, Hardas B. Development and Validation of a Photonumeric 
Scale for Evaluation of Facial Skin Texture. Dermatol Surg.  Oct 2016;42(S1):S219 -S226.  
14. Dayan E , Chia C, Burns AJ, et al. Adjustable Depth Fractional Radiofrequency Combined 
with Bipolar Radiofrequency: A Minimally Invasive Combination Treatment for Skin 
Laxity. Aesthet Surg J.  Apr 2019;39(S1):S112 -S119.   
 
 
 
 
 
22. Appendix  
I. Lemperle Wrinkle Assessment Scale9 
IM Redacted    
IM Redacted    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
II. Allergan Fine Lines Scale11 
a.  b.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
III. Allergan Skin Roughness  Scale for Evaluation of Facial Skin Texture13 

IM Redacted    
IM Redacted   a.  b.  
 
IV. Global Aesthetic Improvement Scale (GAIS)  
 
Rating  Description  
1 Very Much Improved:  Optimal cosmetic result in this subject.  
2 Much Improved:  Marked improvement in appearance from the initial 
condition, but not completely optimal for this subject.  
3 Improved:  Obvious improvement in appearance from initial condition, but a 
re-treatment is indicated.  
4 No Change:  The appearance is essentially the same as the original condition.  
5 Worse:  The appearance is worse than the original condition.  
 
V. Patient Satisfaction Questionnaire  

IM Redacted    
IM Redacted    
 
