 
     
Pediatric Emergency Department Smartphone Otoscope Study (PED -Oto) 
 
Protocol version date: August 16, 2016  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
   
0 PED-Oto Study  protocol  version date: 16Aug2016 
 
PED-Oto Study 
 
1. Investigators:  
Dr. K. Ning Chan , Pediatric Emergency Medicine Fellow, Emory University School of 
Medicine 
[CONTACT_375700] (Andi) L. Shane , Associate Professor of Pediatrics  and Global  Health, 
Emory University School of Medicine and Rollins School of Public Health  
Anna Silverstein,  Research Ass istant, Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta  
[CONTACT_375701] K. Little , Associate Professor of Pediatrics and Emergency Medicine, 
Emory University School of Medicine  
[CONTACT_375702] E. McCracken , Data Analyst/Biostatistician, Emory University School of 
Medicine  
Study Site s: Egleston Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA ; 
Hughes Spalding Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, GA  
 
2. Abstract:  
Acute  otitis media  (AOM),  defined  as acute  inflammation  in the middle  ear, is  a leading  
cause  of health  encounters  and antimicrobial  prescriptions  in children  worldwide.  In the 
first three  years  of life, 80% of children will have  one or more  epi[INVESTIGATOR_375679].  
Internationally,  709 million  cases  of AOM  are estimated to occur annually and 
approximately 2.8 billion  (2006)  dollars  are spent  annually  in the United  States.  
Diagnosis  of AOM  is often  dependent  on a brief view of the tympanic  membrane in  an 
uncooperative  child’s  ear canal  that may be suboptimal for diagnosis. As a 
consequence,  AOM may be inappropriately diagnosed when visualization of the 
tympanic membrane (ear drum) is not optimal.  Improved methods for visualizing the 
tympanic membrane including capturing still images and recording video of the ear exam 
would be beneficial in the diagnosis and management of otic complaints including acute 
and chronic otitis media.  
A smartphone otoscope (CellScope- Oto) is  a pocketsize  attachment that employs  the 
technology  and light source  of a smartphone  to capture reproducible  images  of the ear  
canal  and tympanic  membrane.  Previous studies with this device demonstrated  that 
images taken with both the smartphone otoscope and a camera- fitted conventional  
analogue  otoscope were equivalent with respect to image quality ( IRB00057321)2 and 
that the  smartphone otoscope was acceptable as an educational and diagnostic tool to 
health professional students ( IRB00066495) . A pi[INVESTIGATOR_48505] a similar design to this 
study conducted in two offices of an ambulatory pediatric clinic  demonstrated a trend 
towar d decreased antimicrobial prescription filling among families whose children were 
examined with the smartphone otoscope (IRB00074526)  compared to those who were 
examined with a conventional otoscope . To further assess this trend, we propose an 
evaluation of the impact of device use on antimicrobial prescribing for children with an 
otic complaint i n a pediatric emergency department (PED) setting. 
We hypothesize that use of a smartphone otoscope with the capability to capture still 
images and video will reduc e the rate of antimicrobial prescribing by [CONTACT_375686].  
The Pediatric Emergency Department Oto Study (PED -Oto) will be conducted as a 
1 PED-Oto Study  protocol  version date: 16Aug2016 
 
randomized control study in two affiliated children’s hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3409] s. 
Twenty  volunteer  clinicians will be randomly assigned to use either a smartphone 
otoscope or a conventional otoscope for all otic examinations for a 6-month period. 
Study  outcomes will include:  
1) rates of antimicrobial presc ribing  by [CONTACT_375687] 
a smartphone otoscope compared to the rates of antimicrobial prescribing 
by [CONTACT_375688] a conventional otoscope. 
2) rates of otitis media or otitis  externa diagnoses  by [CONTACT_375689] a smartphone otoscope compared to the rates of  otitis 
media or otitis externa diagnoses  by [CONTACT_375688] a conventional 
otoscope.  
3) clinician acceptability of the assigned otoscopic device. 
Data will be abstracted via retrospective review of the electronic medical record of 
encounters in with an otoscopic exam was performed as part of the diagnostic 
evaluation. We plan to enroll 20 clinician s for the 6-month  study period; 10 who will 
be randomly assigned to use a smartphone otoscope for the 6-month study  period 
and 10 who will be assigned to use a conventional otoscope for all otoscopic exams.  
Use of a smartphone otoscope has the potential  to optimize clinician  ability to 
manage otic complaints, visualize the tympanic membrane, and support antimicrobial 
stewardship.  
 
3. Introduction and Background:  
Acute  otitis media  (AOM),  defined  as acute  inflammation  in the middle  ear, is  a leading  
cause  of health  encounters  and antimicrobial  prescriptions  in children worldwide.  In 
the first three  years  of life, 80% of children will  have one or more  epi[INVESTIGATOR_375680]. The d iagnosis  of 
AOM  is often  dependent  on a brief glance into an uncooperative  child’s  ear canal  and 
incomplete visualization of a tympanic  membrane that may be suboptimal for 
diagnosis. Improved methods of visualizing the tympanic membrane including the 
capability of capturing still images an d video otoscopy (ear exam) have demonstrated an 
impact on the management of children with otic complaints.   
In February  of 2013,  The American  Academy  of Pediatrics  (AAP)  and American  
Academy  of Family  Physicians  (AAFP)  released  revised  clinical  practice  guidelines  for 
the diagnosis  and management  of uncomplicated  AOM  in children  that emphasize 
visualization of the tympanic membrane in making a clinical diagnosis of AOM.  The 
guidelines  further recommended judicious use of antimicrobials  and advocate s for 
active and ongoing  involvement  by [CONTACT_375690]1. 
A pocketsize  smartphone  attachment  that employs  the technology  and light source  of 
a smartphone to capture  reproducible  images  of the external ear canal and  tympanic  
membrane  was developed. Images  and v ideo capture  of multiple images improves 
diagnostic  capability  facilitating  a more  complete  view of the tympanic  membrane and 
optimiz ing three -dimensional  image  capture.  Digital images captured  with the device  
may be incorporated  into electronic  medical  records, facilitating documentation  and 
review over time, an important aspect in the management of pediatric otic conditions .  
 
The smartphone otoscope device has been evaluated in several settings to assess 
2 PED-Oto Study  protocol  version date: 16Aug2016 
 
function and application. A single -center  prospective study published in 2015 
(IRB00057321)[ADDRESS_469955] the otic exam and for future patient care (IRB00066495) . The students 
concurred that the smartphone otoscope enhanced tympanic membrane view and 
diagnostic precision, was easy to use, and preferred it over a traditional otoscope  when 
using the devices to examine each other in an educational setting . A study among 
resident and attending physicians found good correlation between otitis media 
diagnoses when resident and attending physicians  used conventional and smartphone 
otoscopes in an emergency department setting3. The physicians also agreed that t he 
smartphone otoscope enhanced tympanic membrane view and diagnostic precision, was easy to use, and preferred it over a traditional otoscope. A study conducted in a 
neurotrauma clinic found a preference for a smartphone otoscope for use in medical 
educat ion and diagnostic capabilities
4. 
 
This study has two proposed hypotheses and subsequent aims:  
 
Hypothesis  1: Use of a smartphone otoscope by [CONTACT_375691] a pediatric 
emergency department setting for otic examinations will result  in decreased  rates of 
antimicrobial  prescri bing for presumptive otic infectio ns, compared to rates of 
providers  using a conventional  otoscope.  
 
Specific  Aim 1: To compare antimicrobial prescribing  practices for otitis media 
among pediatric  emergency  care clinician s, we will perform a randomized control 
trial study in which pediatric clinician s will be randomly assigned to use either a 
smartphone otoscope or a conventional otoscope for 6 months when an otic 
examination is performed.  
 
Hypothesis 2: Pediatric emergency care clinician s will express a greater acceptability  
for use of a  smartphone otoscope for the examination of children than use of a 
conventional otoscope.  
 
Specific Aim 2: To compare pediatric emergency department clinician  
acceptability of use of a smartphone otoscope with that of a conventional 
otoscope , we will assess clinician  satisfaction and challenges experienced with 
each device during the study period with a written questionnaire.  
     
3 PED-Oto Study  protocol  version date: 16Aug2016 
 
4. Objectives:   
To address the specific aims stated above, w e will utilize  a randomized control  study 
design to compare antimicrobial prescribing practices  of pediatric emergency 
department clinicians  for encounters in which an otic examination is performed while  
using the smartphone otoscope to those clinicians  using  a conventional otoscope.  
(Specific Aim  1). Pediatric emergency care clinician s will be surveyed to assess 
acceptability  of smartphone otoscope use compared to conventional otoscope use 
during the 6-month study period (Specific Aim 2 ).  
 
5. Study Design and Methods:  
We propose a randomized, controlled study. The smartphone otoscope will be used in 
clinical care in the same manner as a conventional otoscope. Twenty volunteer 
Pediatric  Emergency Department clinicians will be randomized  to use either the 
smartphone otoscope  or a conventional otoscope for 6 month s for all non- traumatic  
patient otoscopy (ear examinations ). In the event that a clinician assigned to use the 
smartphone otoscope device  is unable to use the assigned smartphone otoscope 
device,  s/he will be able to use a conventional otoscope for the examination that cannot 
be completed with the smartphone otoscope, with documentation to the study team of 
the reason that the smartphone otoscope could not be used  on a study log. The study 
log, stored in a locked file cabinet , will be reviewed by a member of the study staff in 
real time  to troubleshoot equipment challenges and to monitor study progression. The 
option to use a conventional otoscope device by [CONTACT_375692] .  
 
All encounters in which an otic examination is performed for a non -traumatic chief 
complaint will be considered to be eligible to be included in the study. Eligible 
encounters will be tracked by [CONTACT_375693] a patient identification sticker on 
a log sheet . The log sheet will contain the physician study ID number, date and times of 
shift, patient sticker and a notation  if a clinician substituted a conventional otoscope for 
the smartphone otoscope device . The study log sheet will be stored in a locked file 
cabinet, accessible only to study staff. The electronic medical record will be 
retrospectively  accessed, based on the medical record number listed on the study log 
sheet to collect study -relevant information ( PED-Oto EMR Abstraction Form ) 
including  age of patient , history of otitis diagnoses,  past antimicrobial prescription use, 
antimicrobial prescribed, duration  of antimicrobial prescribed, and instructions given 
specifying the conditions under which to initiate an ant imicrobial, if given . Personal 
identifiers will be maintained only as necessary to link the encounter to the medical 
record for extraction of study -related information. All information will be recorded in a 
passwor d protected electronic database. Paper copi[INVESTIGATOR_375681] a locked file cabinet. Access to both electronic and paper copi[INVESTIGATOR_375682].  
 Information collected as part of the PED -Oto study: 
1. Line listing of patients seen per shift by [CONTACT_375694] 
4 PED-Oto Study  protocol  version date: 16Aug2016 
 
of device substitution, PED-Oto Device Use. 
2. Electronic record medical record review of encounters in which an otoscope 
device was used as reported by [CONTACT_3449] -participant clinicians.  Encounters 
related to ear trauma will be excluded. The PED-Oto EMR Abstraction Form  
will be completed retrospectively by a member of the study staff.  
3. At the conclusion of the [ADDRESS_469956] the otoscope device.  This assessment 
will be known as the PED-Oto Clinician A ssessment . 
 
6. Participant selection : 
The subjects in this study will be 20 randomly selected pediatric emergency care 
clinicians  who perform care at one or both locations (Egleston or Hughes Spalding)  
of a tertiary care pediatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_42619] . Subjects will agree to random 
assignment to either a smartphone otoscope device or a conventional otoscope 
device for the 6- month study period. Informed consent will be obtained from each 
participating clinician prior to the initiation of the study  by a member of the study 
staff. Study participants will be asked to: 1) compi[INVESTIGATOR_5829] a list of patient encounters that 
included  an otoscopic examination for a non- traumatic indication for each shift 
worked during the study period, 2) document and report  epi[INVESTIGATOR_375683] a study -eligible otoscopic 
examination, 3) the [ADDRESS_469957] benefit 
from participation in the study for the individual clinicians. Clinicians assigned to the 
smartphone otoscope arm will be permitted to keep the clip- on otoscopic device, 
without the loaned iPhone, as compensation (approximate retail value $79)  for the 
time and effort related to instruction of device use and completion of study -related 
documentation. Clinicians assigned to use a conventional  otoscope will be given a 
$[ADDRESS_469958] at the completion of the study period. Completion of the 6- month study 
period will be required for compensation.  
 
7. Statistical analysis:  
Statistical  analyses  will predominantly be descriptive with  assessments  of means, 
medians, standard  deviations,  and statistical tests  to correlate device and rates of 
antimicrobial  prescribing practices  within  and among clinicians. Twenty  clinicians ( 10 
assigned to the smartphone otoscope intervention and 10 to conventional otoscopy) will 
participate in the six month study , with a combined [ADDRESS_469959] usable assessments from 800  encounters.  
 
8. Adverse event reporting:  
As this study does not pose more than a minimal risk to subjects, it is unlikely that there 
5 PED-Oto Study  protocol  version date: 16Aug2016 
 
will be a need to discontinue the study due to adverse effects. Rates of completed 
clinician assessments as well as reports of study related issues will be reported in real 
time to  study staff. A dverse events will be recorded and reported using standard IRB 
documentation. Progress reports for each 6-month study period will be presented as 
requested from the funding source.  
 
9. Data and safety monitoring plan (DSMP):  
The data safety and monitoring plan will consist of periodic  review of the clinician 
assessments by [CONTACT_375695]. 
Due to the minimal risk nature of the study, an independent data and safety monitoring committee will not be convened.  Standards for stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_375684]. Study staff will immediately be convened and the issues will be addressed on an urgent basis.  
 
10. Device information: 
The device is manufactured by [CONTACT_375696], Inc. The device is not FDA approved for the indication and there is no IDE. The trade name [CONTACT_375699]- Oto and it is 
considered to be a non -significant risk device. This device is class 1, 510(k) exempt. 21 
CFR Part 874 (ear, nose, and throat devices) includes Regulation Number 874.4770 
(Otoscope), a Class I, 510(k) exempt device only when used in the external ear canal. When used in the external ear canal, a premarket notification application and FDA clearance is not required before marketing an otoscope in the U.S. This is a reusable 
device that is used with a single use disposable ear tip that is placed in the external ear canal.  The research team is responsible for device maintenance.  Any parts of the devic e having contact [CONTACT_375697][INVESTIGATOR_375685]. The study team or clinician will keep the device on the person or locked in a research team office. The study team is responsible for trac king 
use of the device and dispensing the device.  
 
References:  
1) Monasta L,  Ronfani  L, Marchetti F, et al. Burden of disease caused by [CONTACT_375698]:  systematic review  and global estimates. PLoS  One.  2012;7(4):e36226.  
2) Rappaport KM, McCracken CC, Beniflah J, Little WK, Fletcher DA, Lam WA, 
Shane AL. Assessment of a Smartphone Otoscope Device for the Diagnosis and Management of Otitis Media. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 2015 Jul 7. pii: 0009922815593909. PMID: 26156976  
3) Richards JR, Gaylor KA, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_41985]. Comparison of  traditional otoscope to 
iPhone otoscope in the pediatric ED.  Am J Emerg Med. 2015 
Aug;33(8):1089 -92. doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2015.04.063. Epub 2015 May 2.  
4) Sahyouni R, Moshtaghi O, Rajaii R, Tran DK, Bustillo D, Huang M, Chen 
JW. Evaluation of an iPhone Otoscope in a Neurotrauma Clinic and as an 
Adjunct to Neurosurgical Education Insights Neurosurg. 2016;1(1). pii: 4. 
Epub 2016 Jan 29.  
5) Soni A.  Ear Infections  (Otitis  Media)  in Children (0- 17): Use and Expenditures,  
2006. Statistical Brief #228.  December 2008 ed. Rockville,  MD: Agency  for 
Healthcare Research and Quality.  
6 PED-Oto Study  protocol  version date: 16Aug2016 
 
6) Tunkel  E, et al. The Diagnosis and Management of Acute Otitis Media. Pediatrics ; 
DOI: 10.1542/peds.2012- 3488  
7) Vergison A, Dagan R, Arguedas A, et al. Otitis  media and its  consequences:  
beyond the earache. Lancet Infect  Dis. Mar 2010;10(3):195- 203.  
 
7 PED-Oto Study  protocol  version date: 16Aug2016 
 