Cover Page 
 
Robot-Assisted Therapy and Motor Learning: An Active Learning Program for Stroke  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
  
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
Document Date: September 14, 2016 
Infusing Robot -Assiste d Therapy with Motor Learning Principles: An Active Learning Program for Stroke (ALPS)   
Susan Fasoli ScD OTR/L            
   
ORGANIZATION AND DETAILED PROTOCOL  
 
Title: Infusing Robot -Assisted Therapy with Motor Learning Principles: An Active Learning 
Program for Stroke (ALPS)  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 Protocol #: 2015-P- 002107 
 
Version Date:  9/14/16  
 PI: [INVESTIGATOR_97332] E. Fasoli, ScD  OTR/L 
 
I. Background and Significance  
Stroke is the leading cause of long -term disability in older adults in the [LOCATION_002]. At 
six months after stroke, up to 65%[ADDRESS_889767] upper extremity (UE) impairments that inhibit functional use of the paretic arm during daily activities. Stroke- related motor deficits can persist long term, contributing 
to loss of independence in activities of daily living (ADL) in more than 70% of stroke survivors
[ADDRESS_889768] orthoses provide clinicians with new 
treatment options to improve upper extremity (UE) motor capacity and performance after stroke. 
Previous studies have shown that robot -assisted therapy is as effective as more labor -intensive 
interventions at increasing motor capacity, as measured by [CONTACT_659833].[ADDRESS_889769] for other principles of  motor learning and experience- dependent 
neuroplasticity .9,10 These principles, including the salience of training tasks, transfer of acquired 
skills to similar activities, and active engagement and problem solving, are key to task -oriented 
training paradigms in stroke ( e.g. constraint -induced movement therapy) but have not been well 
integrated into robot -assisted therapy protocols. The transfer of robot -trained movements to UE 
activities within the home and community needs further exploration before widespread use in rehabilitation practice is expected.  
 
The purpose  of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_659825] a stroke therapy protocol that 
infuses robot -assisted therapy with a structured Active Learning Program for Stroke (ALPS) and 
patient -targeted home action plan f or the paretic arm and hand . The intent of this protocol is to 
teach stroke survivors  ways to better use their weaker arm after stroke during daily activities.  This 
project has the potential to improve the effectiveness of robot -assisted therapy by [CONTACT_659834]-management through active problem identification and problem solving, and specifically 
Infusing Robot -Assiste d Therapy with Motor Learning Principles: An Active Learning Program for Stroke (ALPS)   
Susan Fasoli ScD OTR/L            
   
addressing the transfer of acquired skills (e.g. UE motor capacity) to the performance of UE tasks 
during activities of daily living (ADL). The ALPS protocol will be relevant to clinical practice 
because it will provide clinicians with a structured, patient -centered motor learning approach to 
facilitate use of the paretic arm and hand. In addition, comparisons between our two intervention groups (robot -assis ted therapy vs. robot -assisted therapy [RT] and task -oriented training [RT -
TOT]) will add to our scientific knowledge of whether the combination of robot therapy and therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] -directed task -oriented training provides added benefit to RT alone. We will exam ine 
participant outcome measures across domains of the International Classification of Functioning 
(ICF)
11 to provide insights regarding mechanisms that underlie the recovery of motor function after 
stroke.  
 
II. Specific Aims 
The specific aims of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_56096]:  
 
Aim 1 : To develop and refine a structured Active Learning Program for Stroke (ALPS) that 
integrates motor learning strategies with a patient -targeted home action plan to be used with 
either 1) robot -assisted therapy (RT) or 2) combined robot -assisted therapy and task -oriented 
training (RT- TOT) for the paretic arm and hand after stroke, in preparation for a larger clinical trial.  
 
Hypothesis 1.1 : RT and combined RT- TOT protocols that incorporate ALPS training will 
be feasible and well- tolerated by [CONTACT_4317].  
Hypothesis 1.2:   After intervention, participants in both treatment groups will identify and 
implement a greater number of motor learning strategies during UE tasks in clinic and home settings and will report increased self -efficacy as mea sured by [CONTACT_659835] (CAHM) scale.   
 
Aim 2:  To examine effects of ALPS training and a patient -targeted home action plan combined 
with either 1) RT or 2) RT -TOT on paretic UE motor capacity and performance during daily 
activitie s, using outcome measures across ICF domains.  
 
Hypothesis 2.1 : Compared to RT alone, RT- TOT will yield similar outcomes on clinical 
measures of UE motor capacity (e.g. Fugl- Meyer Assessment, Wolf Motor Function Test), but 
greater gains on measures of UE function in the home and community (e.g. Motor Activity Log, UE accelerometry data via wearable sensors).  
 
III. Subject Selection  
We will recruit up to [ADDRESS_889770] (IRB) and all participants will provide thei r informed consent prior to 
study participation.  
 Inclusion criteria
:  
• Moderate UE hemiparesis (i.e.  some ability to move shoulder, elbow & hand and initial 
score on the Fugl -Meyer Assessment (FMA) between 21- 50/66) ) 
Infusing Robot -Assiste d Therapy with Motor Learning Principles: An Active Learning Program for Stroke (ALPS)   
Susan Fasoli ScD OTR/L            
   
• Intact  cognitive function to understand and actively engage in the ALPS robotic therapy 
procedures (Montreal Cognitive Assessment Score >/=26/30)12 during initial evaluation 
visit   
Exclusion criteria :  
• No more than moderate impairments in paretic UE sensation, passive range of motion, 
and pain that would limit ability to engage in therapy  
• Increased muscle tone as indicated by [INVESTIGATOR_27809] >/= 3 on the Modified Ashworth Scale;  
• Hemispatial neglect or visual field loss measured by [CONTACT_659836]  13 
• Aphasia sufficient to limit comprehension and completion of the treatment protocol  
• Currently enrolled or has plans to enroll in other upper limb therapy/research during the 
study period  
• Contraindications for robot -assisted therapy including recent fracture or skin lesion of 
paretic UE  
 
IV. Subject enrollment  
 
Recruitment Methods:  
Potential subjects may be identified by [CONTACT_93576]:  
• Printed flyers given to rehabilitation departments of local hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600].  
• Flyers posted in the outpatient clinics, therapy gyms and in public spaces inside and 
outside of the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  
• The Partners RSVP for health website.  
• Contact [CONTACT_584025].  
• Research recruitment emails, for example Spaulding Rehabilitation Network Research 
Recruitment emails, and Social Medias.  
• Contact [CONTACT_659837] (RPDR).  
• Stroke Survivors who previously volunteered to be contact[CONTACT_659838] a study staff.  
• Attending physicians and therapi[INVESTIGATOR_276546]/outpatients to the study. We will provide the physicians with study  flyers.  
 
Eligible patients will contact [CONTACT_659839]. 
 
At the first point of contact (usually a phone call), study staff will administer a phone-
screening questionnaire  to see if subjects are eligible for the study.  Potential subjects who are 
deemed eligible during this initial contact [CONTACT_659840]- person screening to ensure 
that all inclusion and exclusion criteria are met . If a prospective subjec t fails this  screening, he/she 
will be excluded from the study.  
 
Informed consent will be obtained by [CONTACT_659841]’s human subject protection educational r equirements, and the CITI 
Program in Protection of Human Subjects, in compliance with all Federal regulations regarding such training. Prospective subjects will be interviewed to determine preliminary eligibility. 
Infusing Robot -Assiste d Therapy with Motor Learning Principles: An Active Learning Program for Stroke (ALPS)   
Susan Fasoli ScD OTR/L            
   
Informed consent will be obtained and subjects will be enrolled in the study prior to any clinical or 
laboratory testing. Subjects will be given a copy of the IRB approved consent form during the 
initial interview, and study staff will explain in detail the nature of the informed consent process, 
study purpose and procedures, time commitments, risks, potential benefits, treatment 
alternatives, rights as research participants, study staff contact [CONTACT_3031], confidentiality 
procedures, and arrangements for medical care provided in case of injury during the study. 
Subjects will be given adequate time to consider their decision and encouraged to ask questions, 
both during the initial interview and throughout the study. The subject’s decision- making capacity 
and ability to give consent will be assessed by [CONTACT_978] (Fasoli) or Catherine Adans -Dester, 
Research Coordinator/Manager  in the Motion Analysis Lab at SRH , using the University of [LOCATION_004] 
at San Diego (UCSD) Brief Assessment of Capacity for Consent Questionnaire. The subject must 
demonstrate an understanding of the study, that it is research, and answer questions re: the risks 
and benefits involved in the procedures.   
Specifically, t he informed consent will be obtained by [CONTACT_458] (Fasoli) or 
Catherine Adans -Dester , Research Coordinator/Manager in the Motion Analysis Lab at SRH . The 
testing and intervention protocol  will be described and the research space and equipment  will be 
shown to the subject. Study staff  will clearly explain all procedures and risks of the protocol  
outlined in the informed consent form (ICF). The subject will be given adequate time to consider 
his/her  decision and encouraged to ask questions, both during the initial interview and throughout 
the study. A member of the study staff will answer any questions regarding the study at the time 
consent is given.   Enrollment will begin when the subject thoroughly understands and signs the 
informed consent form.   Participants will be provided with a signed copy of the completed consent 
form. Once enrolled, the subject may pause or terminate his/her participation at any time during 
the study. Participants will be randomized to one of two treatment groups (robot -assisted therapy 
[RT] or robot -assisted therapy plus task -oriented training [RT -TOT]) according t o a randomization 
sequence prepared by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Fasoli.  
 
V. Study Procedures 
 
Study procedures will occur in the Motion Analysis Lab (MAL) . The study involves up to 24 visits in total to 
be completed within  a 16 week period. The total duration may vary within this 16 week period to 
accommodate missed study visits.  
1. MAL Visit Day 1 : Screening and enrollment  
2. MAL Visit Days 2 -3: Baseline outcomes assessment battery . We will equip participants 
with Actical wearable sensors  for home-based accelerometry data collection.  
3. MAL Visit Days 4 -21: Intervention. We will retrieve Actical wearable sensors at after 
baseline data collection at the onset of intervention visits.  
4. MAL Visit Days 22 -23: End -of-intervention outcomes assessment battery . We will 
equip participants with Actical wearable sensors for home -based accelerometry data 
collection.  
5. MAL Visit Day 24 : Follow- up outcomes assessment battery.  We will equip participants 
with Actical wearable sensors for home- based accelerometry data collection. 
 
 
,QIXVLQJ5RERW$VVLVWHG7KHUDS\ZLWK0RWRU/HDUQLQJ3ULQFLSOHV $Q$FWLYH/HDUQLQJ3URJUDPIRU6WURNH$/36
6XVDQ)DVROL6F'275/  

6FKHPDVWXG\SURFHGXUHVIORZ
 0$/9LVLW'D\6FUHHQLQJDQGHQUROOPHQW SURFHGXUHVGHVFULEHGLQVHFWLRQ,9
 0$/9LVLW'D\V%DVHOLQHRXWFRPHVDVVHVVPHQWEDWWHU\ DGPLQLVWHUHGZLWKLQD
ZHHNSHULRGEHIRUHLQWHUYHQWLRQ (TXLSZLWK$FWLFDOZHDUDEOHVHQVRUV 
7KHFOLQLFDODVVHVVPHQWVHVVLRQZLOOODVWDSSUR[LPDWHO\òWR KRXUVDQGWKHVWDQGDUGL]HG
PHDVXUHVOLVWHGLQ7DEOHZLOOEHDGPLQLVWHUHG$OODUHUHOLDE OHDQGYDOLGPHDVXUHVRI8(
PRWRUFDSDFLW\DQGIXQFWLRQ0LQLPDOGHWHFWDEOHFKDQJHVFRUHVK DYHEHHQUHSRUWHGIRUWKH
)0$0RWRU$FWLYLW\/RJDQG6WURNH,PSDFW6FDOH7KHFOLQLFDOHYDOXDWRUZLOOEHEOLQGHG
WRWKHSDUWLFLSDQWV¶JURXSDVVLJQPHQWDQGVWXG\K\SRWKHVHV
$VVHVVPHQWV(QGRILQWHUYHQWLRQ
$VVHVVPHQWVPRQWKIROORZXS
VHVVLRQV
5RERW$FWLYH
/HDUQLQJ3URJUDPIRU
6WURNH$/36

*URXS,
VHVVLRQV
5RERW$/36
7DVN2ULHQWHG
7UDLQLQJ
*URXS,,
,QWHUYHQWLRQ
$VVHVVPHQWV%DVHOLQH
6WURNHVXUYLYRUV
,QIRUPHGFRQVHQW
DQGILQDO
VFUHHQLQJ
5DQGRPL]DWLRQ
Infusing Robot -Assiste d Therapy with Motor Learning Principles: An Active Learning Program for Stroke (ALPS)   
Susan Fasoli ScD OTR/L            
   
Kinematic data indicative of movement quality will be collected via 3- D motion capture  (Vicon 
Motion Systems Ltd. [LOCATION_006]) in the Motion Analysis Laboratory (MAL) during reach/grasp tasks 
with the paretic arm. Variables of interest may include index of curvature (IOC) (ratio of actual 
distance the hand travels to the most direct distance), movement smoothness (number of 
times hand trajectory = 0 during reach), trunk displacement (degrees of movement in sagittal, planar, and transverse planes), and interjoint coordination (range of angular motion at the shoulder, elbow and wrist).
17,[ADDRESS_889771] extension, and finger flexion/extension. We anticipate that this quantitative 
assessment will require an additional 1- 1/2 hour/session at baseline and discharge.  
Surface electromyographic (SEMG) data
 may be gathered during the kinemat ic testing 
protocol above to study the characteristics of muscle activation patterns in stroke survivors 
during the performance of arm reaching movements. Data will be collected using Cometa 
WavePlus wireless surface electrodes with 16 channels (www.cometasystems.com) for the 
detection of EMG activity from muscles that are involved in the performance of upper extremity 
movements. We will follow the SENIAM (Surface Electromyography for the Non-Invasive 
Assessment of Muscles) guidelines to place electrodes on several muscles involved in the 
performance of the arm reaching movements. Muscles may include the following: rhomboid major, latissimus dorsi, infraspi[INVESTIGATOR_100755], superior trapezius, deltoid - anterior part, deltoid - medial 
part, deltoid - posterior part, pectoralis major, clavicular head, triceps brachii, lateral/medial 
heads, biceps brachii (short heads), biceps brachii (long heads), brachialis, brachioradialis, pronator teres, extensor carpi [INVESTIGATOR_659826]. The EMG on the back, 
shoulder, upper arm and forearm will be attached using bio- adhesive double sided tape and 
secured with Coban.  
We may ask permission from study participants to video record them during the performance of the above- described clinical tests and the lab- based assessm ents.  
Home Based Accelerometry – Wearable Sensors
:  The Actical physical activity monitoring 
system (http://www.philips.com) is a multi- directional, waterproof sensor used to quantitatively 
measure UE activity during everyday living situations. Sensors will  be worn on both wrists 
during [ADDRESS_889772] UE activity in the home/community.[ADDRESS_889773]. Bonato’s Motion 
Analysis Laboratory (MAL) at SRH have used this device and will analyze de- identified raw 
data in order to examine changes in arm movement pre- to post -intervention (e.g. the amount 
and laterality of use).   
 
The proposed assessment timeline is below (Table 1). 
  
Infusing Robot -Assiste d Therapy with Motor Learning Principles: An Active Learning Program for Stroke (ALPS)   
Susan Fasoli ScD OTR/L            
   
ICF Domain/Ass essments  Baseline  Discharge  1-month 
Follow-up 
UE Function : 
Fugl-Meyer Assessment – UE, pain, sensation subtests 20,21 
Modified Ashworth Scale 22 
MAL: 3 -D motion capture/SEMG analysis UE reach/grasp                         
                              
X 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X  
X 
X 
 
Activities & Participation : 
Wolf Motor Function Test [ADDRESS_889774] Scale 25 
Confidence in Arm & Hand Movement (CAHM) 26 
Home- Based Accelerometry/Wearable Sensors   
X 
X X 
X 
X  
X X X 
X 
X 
  
X X X 
X 
X 
Table 1. Assessment Timeline.  
 
3) MAL Visit Days 4- 21: Intervention. Retrieve Actical wearable sensors.  
Participants will be randomly assigned to one of two treatment groups:  
A. Robot -Assisted Therapy ( RT) + ALPS  protocol to enhance active problem solving, 
confidence in UE use, and transfer of training to functional UE tasks, and all will be 
provided a home action plan.  
B. Robot -Assisted Therapy ( RT) + Task -Oriented Training ( TOT) + ALPS  protocol to 
enhance active problem solving, confidence in UE use, and transfer of training to 
functional UE tasks, and all will be provided a home action plan.   
Robot -Assisted Therapy ( RT): Participants will receive robot -assisted UE therapy using two 
commercially -available rehabilitation devices available for use at SRH: the Armeo®Spring 
(Hocoma AG, Switzerland) and Amadeo (Tyromotion. Graz. AU)(Figure 1). The Armeo®Spring is 
a passive exoskeletal spring suspension system that provides repetitive practice of virtual goal -
directed reaching tasks for the paretic UE. A distal sensor that detects grasp pressure allows the 
grasp/release of virtual objects during games. The amount of gravity assist and virtual task 
demands are adjusted by [CONTACT_659842] m ovement therapy. 
During the first treatment session, the Armeo®Spring will be adjusted for the participant’s arm size and required angle of suspension (approximately 45° shoulder flexion, 25° elbow flexion) and the workspace will be measured via standard p rocedures.  
 The Amadeo robotic system provides position- controlled exercises during computerized games 
that emphasize grasp and release of the paretic hand.  Participants will be seated comfortably with the forearm/wrist strapped to an adjustable splint attached to the robot device with the wrist 
Infusing Robot -Assiste d Therapy with Motor Learning Principles: An Active Learning Program for Stroke (ALPS)   
Susan Fasoli ScD OTR/L            
   
in approximately neutral position. A small magnetic disc is secured to the distal phalanx of each 
digit for connection to the robotically controlled 
slide that guides movement. Each one hour  
session will include visually evoked games that provide active- assistive training of collective, 
sequential and individual flexion and extension of the digits as well as isometric 
flexion/extension contractions. Rest periods will be offered between games,  as needed. 
Task challenge for each training device will be incrementally increased or decreased based 
on participant performance.  
 
All participants will receive 1 hour sessions, 2-
3x/week for 6 -9 weeks (total 18 sessions), 
divided into two 9 session treatment blocks. The two treatment blocks will be given in order, with all participants receiving proximal training via Armeo®Spring during the first block followed by 
[CONTACT_659843] 2. All training sessions for one treatment block will be completed before proceeding to the next. The robot training sessions will follow standard 
protocols that provide highly repetitive movement training, and the number of games/repetitions 
completed in each session will be recorded. Participants may miss up  to 3 appointments, and we 
will reschedule the following day or week at a time that is mutually convenient. Participants who miss 4 consecutive appointments may be removed from the study.  
 
Active Learning Program for Stroke ( ALPS ): 
ALPS development and implementation will be 
based upon principles of experience dependent neuroplasticity as described by [CONTACT_659844] & Jones;9 
empi[INVESTIGATOR_659827] -oriented training programs for individuals 
with stroke;10,27,[ADDRESS_889775] not been well -infused into prior robot training 
programs. These constructs will be implemented during RT and RT -TOT sessions and will be an 
integral component of the home action plan. Preliminary examples of protocol components are highlighted in Table 3 below.  
 
Motor Learning Principles  Example  
Use it or lose it 9,10,27  
 Identify interfering and changeable impairments  
Provide targeted UE training based on individual’s 
motor capacity  
Salience of training tasks 9,10 Establish clear patient -centered goals  
Transference 9,10 Facilitate UE self -management through active 
problem identification and problem solving  
Feedback 28,31  Provide knowledge of performance  
Encourage self -assessment an d discovery  
Motivation 10,29,30  
 Assure challenging and meaningful practice  
Address self -efficacy and confidence  
Table 3. ALPS Motor Learning Principles.  
 
Task -Oriented Training ( TOT): Participants randomized to the robot and task -oriented training 
(RT-TOT) group will receive therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] -guided task -oriented training in addition to RT during 20 -30  
Figure 1. Armeo and Amadeo.  

Infusing Robot -Assiste d Therapy with Motor Learning Principles: An Active Learning Program for Stroke (ALPS)   
Susan Fasoli ScD OTR/L            
   
minutes of each 1 hour treatment session. The participant’s baseline performance on the FMA 
will be reviewed, and the FMA keyform and patient -targeted treatment activities outlined by 
[CONTACT_659845] 32,[ADDRESS_889776] potential for improvement during 
TOT. The treatment dose (duration and frequency of therapy sessions) will be equivalent across 
RT and RT -TOT groups.  
  Home Action Plan: 
All participants in the RT and RT -TOT groups will be provided a home action 
plan to encourage implementation of ALPS principles during practice of patient -targeted tasks in 
the home and community.  
 
The tasks selected for the home action plan (HAP) will be based on the participant’s identified 
upper extremity (UE) goals and/or therapi[INVESTIGATOR_659828] a) the current focus of robot therapy 
(i.e. shoulder/elbow, hand) and b) scores on the FMA key form. Because of this participant -
centered approach there will be no core tasks included in every HAP, however, similarities may 
be observed across individuals. Participants will identify an UE task to be completed at home and 
the ALPS strategy or strategies they will use to facilitate performance weekly. A brief self -report 
questionnaire to collect ordinal data on ALPS strategy use, HAP performance, frequency, & perceived difficulty will be administered by [CONTACT_659846] 3
rd therapy session. 
Particip ant’s engagement in the home action plan will be rated using a 3 point Likert type scale29 
and patient -targeted UE tasks will be updated as needed. A similar questionnaire will be 
administered during the follow -up assessment to gain information regarding t he participant’s 
engagement in home practice after formal therapy has ended. Participants will be instructed that completion of the HAP is voluntary and will not affect their therapy in any way. The intent of the HAP is to provide documentation of home car ry-over. It is not designed to be a comprehensive 
home exercise program.  
 
 
4) MAL Visit Days 22- 23: End-of intervention outcomes assessment battery
 
(administered at discharge assessment after 18 treatment sessions) Equip with Actical 
wearable sensors.  
 
The same assessment battery as the one performed at baseline will be re- administered.  
 
5) MAL Visit Day 24 (Final Visit) : Follow-up outcomes assessment battery  
(administered at [ADDRESS_889777] -therapy) Equip with Actical wearable sensors.  
The same assessment battery as the one performed at baseline will be re- administered, except 
for the Motion Capture and EMG analysis.  
 
VI. Biostatistical Analysis 
 
Separate repeated measures analyses  of variance (2 group x 3 time points) will examine 
changes in scores for each o utcome measure across  a) baseline, b) discharge and c) follow -up 
assessments. Descriptive statistics will be used to compare key group characteristics, including 
age, hand dominance, side of lesion, and years of education. Group comparisons will be 
assessed by [CONTACT_60679] -square analyses for categorical data and t -tests for continuous data. The data 
collected from this pi[INVESTIGATOR_659829] a power analysis of a larger clinical trial.  
 
Infusing Robot -Assiste d Therapy with Motor Learning Principles: An Active Learning Program for Stroke (ALPS)   
Susan Fasoli ScD OTR/L            
   
VII. Risks and Discomforts  
 
Subjec ts will not  be at higher risk for injury during the research protocol than during  their 
usual daily  activities, and they will be supervised by [CONTACT_659847].  Staff in [CONTACT_276566]’s MAL and [CONTACT_659856] have  
extensive experience with the measurement tools  (e.g. motion capture, wearable sensors)  and 
intervention devices (Armeo & Amadeo) used in this study, and have maintained excellent safety 
records at SRH and at institutions outside the Partners network. Research staff will be trained in 
the proper use of all study devices prior to use with participants to assure safety. Potential risks 
and discomforts are described below:  
During  the camera -based motion analysis assessments, it is possible that the use of 
adhesive tape to secure reflective markers or electromyo graphic sensors to the skin may cause 
skin irritation. We will minimize this risk by [CONTACT_659848].  
 
The Actical wearable sensors used in this study are powered by [CONTACT_659849]. Black velcro straps 
from the manufacturer will be used to secure the sensors to the participants’  wrists. For persons 
with sensitive skin, we will modify these straps with Velfoam strappi[INVESTIGATOR_659830].  
 
All laboratory equipment meets or exceeds hospi[INVESTIGATOR_444570].  
Robot -assisted therapy with the Armeo device is very unlikely to cause injury as the Armeo has 
no actuated components. The straps of the device may cause redness of the skin. We will assure 
proper upper limb positioning during intervention and will pad the straps as needed so they are 
comfortable for the sub ject.  
 
Unlike the Armeo, the Amadeo is equipped with actuated components (i.e. motors) 
capable of independent motion. As stated in the manufacturer’s instruction manual, risks are 
minimal when the Amadeo is used according to instructions. Small injuries, such as pi[INVESTIGATOR_659831], however, numerous safety features  and procedures  have been 
implemented to minimize risk of injury. These include a system controller designed to avoid 
excessively fast movements of the finge rs/thumb; sa fety limits set for the estimated interaction 
forces during finger motions, and two emergency switches  to immediately shut off robot power in 
the event of a malfunction. Height adjustments of the Amadeo will be performed with caution so 
injury does not occur when lowering the device to ensure proper positioning for therapy. We will 
ensure that fingers are not in contact [CONTACT_659850]. During intervention, small magnets  are attached to the subject ’s fingers and thumb 
via medical tape to provide a safe and easily  removed connection to Amadeo’s actuated finger 
slides. This tape can be replaced by [CONTACT_659851]. During task -oriented t raining in which subjects are asked to perform 
several sets of common, task -oriented movements , it is possible that they will feel discomfort due 
to fatigue or muscle soreness  as they increase their tolerance to exercise. During robot -assisted 
therapy and task-oriented training, participants may take rest breaks as needed to minimize 
possible fatigue or muscle soreness following multiple repetitions of upper limb movements.   
 
VIII. Potential Benefits  
Infusing Robot -Assiste d Therapy with Motor Learning Principles: An Active Learning Program for Stroke (ALPS)   
Susan Fasoli ScD OTR/L            
   
Potential benefits of robot -assisted therapy for the paretic arm af ter stroke include 
reductions of motor impairment however, the transfer of robot -trained movements to UE activities 
within the home and community has not been well studied. The proposed study aims  to develop 
and refine a stroke therapy protocol that infuses robot -assisted therapy with a structured Active 
Learning Program for Stroke (ALPS) and patient -targeted home action plan. If successful,  it has 
good potential to improve the effectiveness of robot -assisted therapy by [CONTACT_659852]-
management  of the paretic arm  and specifically addressing the transfer of acquired skills (e.g. UE 
motor capacity) to everyday  UE tasks . These methods could benefit rehabilitation practice by 
[CONTACT_659853] a structured motor learning approach  to en hance recovery of UE function 
during stroke intervention.  
 
IX. Monitoring and Quality Assurance 
 
Approval of protocol, informed consent procedures, and recruitment will be obtained from 
the IRB during annual reviews.  Because this study’s procedures pose relatively low risk to subjects, monthly  data and procedural reviews by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or site respons ible investigator ([CONTACT_276567])  in consultation with study staff will be sufficient to identify and ameliorate any potential 
safety issues.  However, any safety concerns about the exercise equipment or clinical protocol 
will be brought to the attention of t he P.I. at the time they occur, and  immediate action will be 
taken . [CONTACT_659856] and [CONTACT_276566] will be responsible for determining whether the research should 
be altered or stopped in the event that participant safety is at risk.  
 
Study staff will report any adverse event within [ADDRESS_889778] supervision of the PI (Fasoli). 
Although the study evaluator (Adans -Dester) is highly experienced with the administ ration and 
scoring of the outcome measures used in this study, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_659832].  
 Subjects  will be assigned a study number, which will be used for all documentation, except 
for master lists (electronic and paper) matching subjects ’ names and study numbers and intake 
interview forms.  The master list and interview forms will be kept in a secure location in locked offices  at SRH .  No non- study staff will have access to any identifiable patient study data or 
demographic information.  All participants will be informed of their privacy rights and sign a HIPAA -
compliant authorization form previously approved by [CONTACT_276563].  All v ideotapes of 
assessment sessions will be stored securely in the Motion Analysis Laboratory at Spaulding 
Rehabilitation Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]; only investigators listed on the study application will have access to them. The videotapes will be stored for the duration required by [CONTACT_659854]; should NIH standards change prior to destroying the tapes, we will adhere to new regulatory standards.  
  No personally  identifiable data will be sent to or viewed by [CONTACT_659855] ([CONTACT_659856]’s home institution) .  Only co -investigators and 
study staff will have access to the data from the study.  Study data will be maintained on 
Infusing Robot -Assiste d Therapy with Motor Learning Principles: An Active Learning Program for Stroke (ALPS)   
Susan Fasoli ScD OTR/L            
   
computers with password- codes accessible only to study staff, and hard data will be kept in locked 
cabinets and offices  at SRH .   
 
  
Infusing Robot -Assiste d Therapy with Motor Learning Principles: An Active Learning Program for Stroke (ALPS)   
Susan Fasoli ScD OTR/L            
   
References  
1. Cauraugh JH, Kim SB. Chronic stroke motor recovery: duration of active neuromuscular 
stimulation. J Neurol Sci. Nov 15 2003;215(1- 2):13 -19. 
2. Mozaffarian  D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, Arnett DK, Blaha MJ, Cushman M et al.  
Circulation. 2015;131:  e29-e322, published online before print December 17 2014, 
doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000152.  
3. Cirstea MC, Levin MF. Improvement of arm movement patterns and endpoint control 
depends on type of feedback during practice in stroke survivors. Neurorehabil Neural 
Repair . 2007;21(5):398 -411. 
4. Lo AC, Guarino PD, Richards LG, et al. Robot -assisted therapy f or long -term upper -limb 
impairment after stroke. N Engl J Med. 2010;362(19):1772 -1783.  
5. Kwakkel G, Kollen BJ, Krebs HI. Effects of robot -assisted therapy on upper limb 
recovery after stroke: a systematic review. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2008;22(2):111 -
121. 
6. Norouzi -Gheidari N, Archambault PS, Fung J. Effects of robot -assisted therapy on stroke 
rehabilitation in upper limbs: systematic review and meta- analysis of the literature. J 
Rehabil Res Dev.  2012;49(4):479- 496. 
7. Mehrholz J, Hadrich A, Platz T, Kugler J, Pohl M. Electromechanical and robot -assisted 
arm training for improving generic activities of daily living, arm function, and arm muscle 
strength after stoke. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2012(6). Art. 
No.:CD006876. doi:  10.1002/14651858.CD006876.pub3.  
8. Rand D, Eng JJ. Disparity between functional recovery and daily use of the upper and 
lower extremities during subacute stroke rehabilitation. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 
2012;26(1):76 -84. 
9. Kleim JA, Jones T A. Principles of experience- dependent neural plasticity: implications 
for rehabilitation after brain damage. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2008;51(1):S225- 239. 
10. Winstein CJ, Wolf, S.L. Task -Oriented Training to Promote Upper Extremity Recovery. 
In: Stein J, Harvey, R.L., Macko, R. F. Winstein, C.J., Zorowitz, R.D. , ed. Stroke 
Recovery & Rehabilitation. [LOCATION_001]: Demos Medical Publishing; 2009:267- 290. 
11. World Health Organization.  ICF : International classification of functioning, disability and 
health / World Heal th Organization. World Health Organization Geneva 2001.  
12. Toglia J, Fitzgerald KA, O’Dell MW, Mastrogiovanni  AR, Lin CD. The Mini -Mental State 
Examination and Montreal Cognitive Assessment in persons with mild sub -acute stroke: 
Relationship to functional outcome. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2011;92:[ADDRESS_889779] - Examiner's Manual ; 2001.  
14. Wagner JM, Rhodes JA, Patten C. Reproducibility and minimal detectable change of three -dimensional kinematic analysis of reaching tasks in people with hemiparesis after 
stroke. Phys Ther. 2008;88(5):652- 663. 
15. Lang CE, Edwards DF, Birkenmeier  RL, Dromerick AW. Estimating minimal clinically 
important differences of upper -extremity measures early after stroke. Arch Phys Med 
Rehabil 2008 89;1693- 1700.  
16. Lin K.C., Fu T, C.Y. Wu, et al., Minimal detectable change and clinically important 
difference of the Stroke Impact Scale in stroke patients. Neurorehabil Neural Repair , 
2010. 24(5): p. [ADDRESS_889780], McGuirk TE, et al. Effects of trunk restraint combined with 
intensive task practice on poststroke upper extremity reach and function:  a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. 
Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2009;23(1):78 -91. 
Infusing Robot -Assiste d Therapy with Motor Learning Principles: An Active Learning Program for Stroke (ALPS)   
Susan Fasoli ScD OTR/L            
   
18. Michaelsen SM, Dannenbaum R, Levin MF. Task -specific training with trunk restraint on 
arm recovery in stroke: randomized control trial. Stroke. 2006;37(1):186 -192. 
19. Lemmens RJM, Timmermans AAA, J anssen- Potten YJM, Pulles SANTD, Geers RPJ, 
Bakx WGM. et al. Accelerometry measuring the outcome of robot -supported upper limb 
training in chronic stroke: A randomized controlled trial. PLoS ONE.  2014; 9(5):e96414. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0096414.  
20. Fugl-Meyer AR, Jaasko L, Leyman I, Olsson S, Steglind S. The post -stroke hemiplegic 
patient. 1. a method for evaluation of physical performance. Scand J Rehabil Med. 
1975;7(1):13 -31. 
21. Gladstone DJ, Danells CJ, Black SE. The Fugl -Meyer assessment of motor recovery 
after stroke: a critical review of its measurement properties. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 
2002;16(3):232 -240. 
22. Bohannon RW, Smith MB. Interrater reliability of a modified Ashworth scale of muscle 
spasticity. Phys Ther. 1987;67(2):[ADDRESS_889781] as outcome measure for research in patients after stroke. Stroke. 
2001;32(7):1635 -1639.  
24. Uswatte G, Taub E, Morris D, Light K, Thompson PA. The Motor Activity Log- 28: 
assessing daily use of the hemiparetic arm after stroke. Neurology. Oct 10 
2006;67(7):[ADDRESS_889782] 
scale version 2.0. Evaluation of reliability, validity, and sensitivity to change. Stroke. 
1999;30(10):2131 -2140.  
26. Lewthwaite R, Blanton S, Zerigue A, Winstein CJ, SL. W. Validity and reliability of the Confidence in Arm and Hand (CAHM) scale. Unpublished manuscript. 2011.  
27. Hidaka Y, Han, CE, Wolf SL, Winstein CJ, Schweighofer N. Use  it and improve it or lost 
it: Interactions between arm function and use in humans post stroke. PLoS Comput Biol  
2012; 8(2):e1002343. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002343.  
28. Timmermans AAA, Spooren AIF, Kingma H, Seelen, HAM. Influence of task -oriented 
training content on skilled arm -hand performance in stroke: A systematic review. 
Neurorehabil Neural Repair.  2010; 24(9); [ADDRESS_889783], CJ, Nelsen, MA, Lewthwaite, R et al. 
Interdisciplinary comprehensive arm rehabilitation evaluation (ICARE): A randomized 
controlled trial protocol. BMC Neurology  2013;13:5.  
30. Winstein, CJ, Lewthwaite, R., Blanton, SR, Wolf, LB, Wishart, L. Infusing motor learning 
research into neurorehabilitation practice: A historical perspective with case exemplar from the accelerated skill acquisition program. JNPT 2014;38:190- 200. 
31. Boyd LA, Winstein CJ. Explicit information interferes with implicit motor learning of both 
continuous and discrete movement tasks after stroke. JNPT . 2006;30(2):46- 57. 
32. Woodbury ML, Velozo CA, Richards LG, Duncan PW. Rasch analysis staging 
methodology to classify upper extremity movement impairment after stroke. Arch Phys 
Med Rehabil  2013; 94:1527- 33. 
33. Velozo CA, Woodbury ML. Translating measurement findings into rehabilitation practice: 
an example using Fugl -Meyer Assessment -Upper Extremity with patients following 
stroke. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2011;48(10):1211 -1222.  
 