Study Title: Stimulation of the prefrontal cortex reduces intentions to commit aggression: A 
randomize d, double -blind, placebo- controlled, stratified, parallel- group trial  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
IRB Approval Date: November 6, 2017  
  
Choy, O., Raine, A., & Hamilton, R. H. (2018). Stimulation of the prefrontal cortex reduces 
intentions to commit aggression: A randomize d, double -blind, placebo- controlled, 
stratified, parallel- group trial. The Journal of Neuroscience, 38, [ADDRESS_949516] of the University of Pennsylvania and the trial protocol was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]).  
Participants  
Eighty -six healthy adults (≥ 18 years of age) were recruited in Philadelphia between 
April [ADDRESS_949517] during the course of one visit to the study  
site. In addition to assessments conducted at baseline, participants were followed up one day after the experimental session using a web -based questionnaire. Exclusion criteria included 
contraindications to brain stimulation, including metallic implants n ear the electrode sites, 
unstable medical conditions, neurological, cardiovascular, or psychiatric illness, participation in another non- invasive brain stimulation study on the same day, history of adverse reactions to 
tDCS, and lack of email access. Writt en informed consent was obtained from all participants. 
 
tDCS Intervention   
tDCS was administered by [CONTACT_699482] a battery -driven, constant -
current stimulator (TCT Research). Two anodal electrodes were placed over the DLPFC 
bilaterally (F 3 and F4) according to the International 10- 20 EEG system. A constant current of 
2mA (1mA to each DLPFC site) was applied for 20 minutes through saline -soaked sponge 
electrodes (5x5cm). A single extracephalic cathodal electrode (5x7cm) was placed at the posterior base of the neck in order to minimize unintentional effects of inhibitory stimulation on brain activity.  
 Following standard tDCS protocol, stimulation commenced after a [ADDRESS_949518] 2 seconds. The tasks performed during tDCS are understood to influence the behavioral after -effects of stimulation (Gill et al., 2015) . Thus, 
during the stimulation session, all participants performed the Psychology Experiment Building 
Language
 (Mueller and Pi[INVESTIGATOR_11826], 2014)  version of two cognitive tasks that are known to engage the 
DLPFC, the Psychomotor Vigilance Task (Dinges and  Powell, 1985; Cui et al., 2015) , followed 
by [CONTACT_699483] (Bechara et al., 1994; Ernst et al., 2002) . Although participants in 
both intervention arms received the same electrode placement and ramp -up/down times, 
stimulation for the sham control group was discontinued after 30 seconds. This has proven to be effective for blinding as participants habituate to the sensation of stimulation within seconds of current initiation (Gandiga et al., 2006) .  
 
Intentions to commit aggression. Behavioral inten tions to commit aggressive acts were 
assessed using two hypothetical vignettes, which have been studied in samples with similar 
characteristics to ours (Hannon et al., 2000; Mazerolle et al., 2003) . Brief scenarios describing 
two types of aggression, physi cal assault and sexual assault, were presented to participants who 
responded to the anticipated likelihood that they would commit the aggressive act. Responses 
were measured on a scale ranging from zero (no chance at all) to ten (100 percent chance).  
 Perceptions of moral wrongfulness. To assess moral perceptions of the aggressive acts, 
participants were asked to rate how morally wrong it would be to act as the protagonist in the scenario on a scale from 0 (not at all) to 10 (very). Aggregate measures o f aggressive intent and 
perception of moral wrongfulness were created by [CONTACT_699484] (Armstrong and Boutwell, 2012) . 
 
Aggression. The voodoo doll task is a reliable and validated behavioral analog meas ure 
of aggression (DeWall et al., 2013) . In this task, participants were shown a computer -based 
image of a doll that represented a partner or a close friend. They were told that they were given the opportunity to release their negative energy to that individual by [CONTACT_699485][INVESTIGATOR_2115] (0 -
51) in the doll as they wished. Instructions did not use the word “voodoo”. Stabbing the doll with more pi[INVESTIGATOR_699480].  
 
Randomization and Stratification  
At the initial visit, participants wer e randomized into an active stimulation or 
sham/placebo condition using a computerized urn randomization procedure (Stout et al., 1994) . 
The stratification factors were age (18 years/19 years/20 years and above), sex (male/female), 
and ethnicity (Caucasian /non- Caucasian). This stratification was used to balance groups on key 
demographic variables.  
 
Blinding  
Participants and experimenters were blind to the tDCS condition assignment. The trial 
adhered to established procedures to maintain separation between staff that conducted the 
stimulation and staff that engaged with the participant. In each experimental session, only one experimenter who set up the tDCS procedure had knowledge of the participant’s allocation. To further ensure blinding, all participants were kept blind to
 the objective of the study and outcome 
measures were not taken in the presence of research staff as they could lead to biased results.  
 In the 3 cases where double blinding was compromised due to the inability of having 
more than one ex perimenter at a session, the cases were excluded from analyses. To assess 
adherence to blinding procedures, James’ (James et al., 1996)  and Bangs’
 (Bang et al., 2004)  
blinding indices were calculated using the participants’ and blinded experimenters’ guess es 
about group assignment at the end of the experimental session.  
Statistical Analysis Plan  
One-way ANCOVA was used to test g roup differences in intentions to commit 
aggression and the behavioral measure of aggression. Baseline measures were examined as 
possible covariates: variety of crime throughout the lifetime, aggression, GPA, trait anxiety, 
social adversity, psychopathy, t he lack of premeditation and sensation- seeking dimensions of 
impulsivity, and self -control.
 
In addition to a Self -Report Crime Questionnaire that asked participants to indicate the 
number of times they had committed 36 criminal and delinquent acts ranging from white -collar 
and blue -collar offenses (e.g. fraud and shoplifting) to non- criminal, deceptive behaviors (e.g., 
cheating on an exam), participants’ baseline levels of aggression were assessed using the 
Reactive- Proactive Aggression Questionnaire (Raine  et al., 2006) . Trait anxiety was assessed 
using the 20- item Spi[INVESTIGATOR_73593] -Trait Anxiety Inventory (Spi[INVESTIGATOR_2996], 1983) . A social 
adversity  index was obtained based on responses to 14 items obtained from demographic 
questionnaires. Items included parent  unemployment, mother’s low education, father’s low 
education, parental separation or divorce, placement in a foster home, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], or other institution during childhood, having 5 or more siblings, born to a teenage mother, a ratio of people per room (inc luding bedrooms, living room, dining room, and kitchen) of 1.0 and above, 
brought up in public housing, parents’ use of welfare or food stamps from the government, father or mother had been arrested, father or mother has had problems with alcohol or drugs, father or 
mother has had physical illness, such as heart or lung problems, father or mother has had mental illness, such as alcoholism, major depression, schizophrenia, or anxiety. To assess psychopathic traits, the short form of the Self -Report of Psycho pathy -III (SRP -SF) questionnaire, comprising 
29 items, was administered (Paulhus et al., 2009) . Additionally, scores were obtained from the 
lack of premeditation and sensation- seeking subscales of the short -form version of the UPPS -P 
Impulsivity Scale (SUP PS-P) (Lynam, 2013) , and self -control was assessed using the 13- item 
Brief Self -Control Scale (Tangney et al., 2004) . 
 
 Following recommendations, stratification variables and baseline measures that were 
associated with the outcomes were adjusted for, whil e variables with baseline imbalances were 
not (Committee for Proprietary Medicinal Products, 2004; Kahan et al., 2014) . Effect sizes were 
calculated using partial eta squared.  
 
To provide information on a mechanism of action accounting for any effect of tD CS on 
aggressive intent, change in perceptions of moral wrongfulness was examined using ANCOVA. We tested whether enhanced moral judgment mediated group differences in intent to commit aggressive acts through a bootstrappi[INVESTIGATOR_699481] o on SPSS (Hayes, 
2013) . 10,[ADDRESS_949519] of treatment group on intention to commit aggression (Ditlevsen et al., 
2005; Hayes, 2013) . Hypothesi s tests were two -tailed. Blinding indices were obtained using 
STATA version 14.0 (Stata Corp, 2015). All other statistical analyses were conducted using 
SPSS version 24.0 (IBM Corp, 2016).   
 
  