 
   
 
   
My Diabetes Care: A Scalability and Usability Study  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
February 14, 2023  
         
 
         
 
   
  
Table of Contents:  
 
Study Schema  
1.0 Background 
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
3.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
4.0 Enrollment/Randomization 
5.[ADDRESS_550239] found that 
higher patient activation (i.e., knowledge, skills and confide nce to manage their own health and care) is associated with 
healthy eating, blood sugars monitoring, eye exams and immunizations. Many of these findings were reported in diverse and disadvantaged populations.  
 Patient portals offer a vehicle for interventions aimed at increasing patient activation, improving understanding, and promoting self- management, while overcoming the limitations of costly and difficult to scale face -to-face programs. We 
recently applied u ser-centered design sprint methodology and key strategies for patient engagement to develop a multi -
faceted patient portal intervention, My Diabetes Care (MDC), designed to help patients better understand their diabetes health data as well as support self- management. MDC was embedded within an established patient portal on Epic’s 
MyChart platform and best viewed on mobile devices. MDC uses infographics to visualize and summarize patients' diabetes health data and provides literacy -level appropriate educatio nal and self- management resources. MDC is 
grounded in a well -established Chronic Care Model (CCM) adapted for eHealth (i.e., healthcare practices supported by 
[CONTACT_434179]). By [CONTACT_434180]’s five domains ( self- management 
support, delivery system design, decision support, clinical information systems, and eHealth education), MDC has the potential to create more informed and activated patients leading to improved outcomes.   
 2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
To demonstrate scalability and assess usage patterns, user experience, and to uncover errors in functionality at two study sites prior to a larger randomized trial (to be proposed separately), we will conduct a scalability and usability study 
MDC. The study will utilize questionnaires to quantify participants’ perceptions and responses to the MDC and semi -
structured interviews to comprehensively assess users’ experience, barriers to  use, and reasons for non -use or 
discontinued use. Combining qualitative and quantitative assessments of usability identifies more usability concerns 
than quantitative (e.g., questionnaires) assessments alone. Each participant will have access to the MDC for 1 month from the time of enrollment. This duration allows sufficient time for participants to become familiar with MDC and determine if and how to use MDC in the management of their diabetes.  
 3.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
Participants will be eligible for the study if they have T2DM, currently taking at least one medication for diabetes, are able to speak and read in English or Spanish, are age [ADDRESS_550240] a patient portal account at a participating site (i.e., a Patient Gateway account at Brigham & 
Women’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (BWH) or a My Health at Vanderbilt account at Vanderbilt University Medical Center (VUMC).  
 
We will exclude patients with a medical condition that affects their memory or ability to think, severe visual or hearing impairment, or a medical condition that make it hard for people to understand what they are saying (e.g., dysarthria).  
   
4.0 Enrollment/Randomization 
Participants will be able to complete an electronic consent form and enroll online via Research Electronic Data Capture 
(REDCap ™) version 5.0.8.  
 
5.0 Study Procedures  
Setting . The study will be conducted at two sites: (1) the VUMC Primary Care (including Shade Tree Clinic) and Diabetes 
clinics located throughout the greater Nashville, TN area, and (2) the BWH Primary Care clinics located throughout the 
greater [LOCATION_011], MA area. At both sites, an electronic health record (EHR) from Epic Systems Corp. stores all clinical data and p atients receive access to their clinical data via an integrated patient web portal that is accessible on desktops and 
via a native mobile app for iOS and Android mobile operating systems.  
 
Participants and Recruitment . At VUMC, potential participants will be identified automatically using VUMC’s Subject 
Locator to query the EHR for patients with upcoming clinic appointments who meet the discrete inclusion and exclusion 
criteria. In addition, we will use EHR -based recruitment. We will use a Custom Reporting Workbench Report to identify 
established adult patients with type [ADDRESS_550241] udy (i.e., Vanderbilt primary care patients with diabetes) and as such these patients are potentially 
eligible to participate in the study.  
 At BWH, potential participants will be identified using a similar EHR -based recruitment strategy. The BWH EHR will be 
queried to identify patients that meet the eligibility criteria.  
 With permission of the clinic directors at both sites, potentially eligible patients, will be mailed a recruitment letter describing the study and providing contact [CONTACT_434181]. If after receiving the letter, a patient is interested in the study, the patient may contact [CONTACT_434182]. The recruitment letter will include a QR code and URL link to the eligibility screener in REDCap. After reviewing the study eligibility criteria on the REDCap pre -screener, interested patients who believe they are eligible can 
advance to the REDCap Informed Consent Document (ICD). Participants will complete a self- administered electronic 
consent form and enroll online via REDCap. participants may have one or more of these characteristics. Study staff will be available to answer questions of potential participants during the consent process and will also review the ICD and study participation with all patients who enroll. Patients who do not respond to the recruitment letter may be contact[CONTACT_434183].   
 In addition, we will distribute study flyers to participating clinic sites. As with the recruitment letter, the study flyer w ill 
include the QR code and URL link to the eligibility pre -screener in REDCap where interested patients can review eligibility 
criteria, review the consent form, and enroll. If a patient is interested in the study, they may contact [CONTACT_434182]. Contact [CONTACT_3031] (study phone number and e -mail address) is 
included on the study flyer and throughout the REDCap process. In accordance with best practices and to reflect a range 
of patient experience with diabetes and groups with distinct usability needs, we will use oversampling and purposive 
sampling with the aim of achieving approximately 25% or more representation of each of the following characteristics: (a) limited health literacy and (b) age 65 or over, and 40% or more racial and ethnic minorities.  
 
Data Collection and Outcome Measures . Study participants will complete questionnaires electronically via email using 
REDCap ™ at two time points:  enrollment (T 0) and end of study (T 1). Participants will complete an enrollment 
questionnaire (T 0) including basic demographic questions, items about computer usage and internet access, and 
validated measures of health literacy, numeracy, and eHealth literacy.   
 The primary outcome measures (Table 1)  will be: (a) ease of use and satisfaction as assessed by [CONTACT_434184] T
1, (b) system usage data as assessed by [CONTACT_434185] T 1, (c) user experience as assessed by [CONTACT_434186] -structured interviews at T 1. In addition, we will assess pre/post change in the following 
secondary cognitive and behavioral outcomes (Table 1) to estimate effect size and standard deviations for power analyses necessary to plan a subsequent random ized controlled trial to be proposed in a subsequent IRB application.  
 Table 1.  Outcome Measures  
Primary Outcomes  Measures  Variable Type  How Collected  Time Point  
Usability  System Usability Scale   Continuous  Questionnaire  T1 
System usage data  Number of MDC visits  
 Continuous and 
categorical  System 
analytics (if 
available), self-
report  T1 
User experience  Unique study specific items to assess participants’ perspectives on content, 
layout, acceptance, and particular features and functionality  Categorical, 
Qualitative  Questionnaire, 
Interviews  T1 
Secondary Cognitive/Behavioral Outcomes  
Diabetes knowledge  Revised Brief Diabetes Knowledge Test (DKT2)  Continuous  Questionnaire  T0 and T 1 
Diet adherence  Summary of Diabetes Self-Care Activities (SDSCA) – Diet Subscale  Continuous  Questionnaire  T0 and T 1 
Exercise adherence  SDSCA – Exercise Subscale  Continuous  Questionnaire  T0 and T 1 
Glucose self -monitoring 
adherence  SDSCA – Self-monitoring of Blood Glucose Subscale  Continuous  Questionnaire  T0 and T 1 
Medication adherence  Adherence to Refills and Medications Scale (ARMS)  Continuous  Questionnaire  T0 and T 1 
Diabetes self -efficacy  Perceived Diabetes Self -Management Scale (PDSMS)  Continuous  Questionnaire  T0 and T 1 
Diabetes distress  Problem Areas in Diabetes Scale (PAID) -5 Continuous  Questionnaire  T0 and T 1 
Knowledge of Diabetes 
Measures  Unique study specific items to assess participants’ knowledge of measures of 
diabetes health status  Categorical  Questionnaire  T0 and T 1 
Diabetes Readiness for 
Change  Four items assessment resources to assess stage of change based on the 
Transtheoretical Model (TTM) of behavior change. It includes questions on 
physical activity, medication management, glucose self -monitoring, and diet.  Categorical  Questionnaire  T0 and T 1 
 
Based on pi[INVESTIGATOR_48124], we estimate time to completion for questionnaires to be 20 minutes at T 0 and T 1. Participants will 
be compensated $40 for completing the enrollment questionnaire, $35 for completing the study end questionnaire, and $[ADDRESS_550242] one -on-one, semi -structured interviews with a 
subsample of participants including participants from each of the purposively sampled groups (see Recruitment  above). 
This methodology is most appropriate for in- depth assessment of patients’ perceptions and reactions regarding a 
proposed intervention. Interviews are preferred over focus groups for understanding usability because focus groups can amplify bias and individu al opi[INVESTIGATOR_6153]. Interviews will take place by [CONTACT_434187].  Interviews will last approximately 30 -40 minutes. A trained interviewer will use a semi- structured 
interview guide to facilitate the interview and elicit in -depth understanding of participants’ perceptions and experiences 
with specific MDC functionality as well as barriers to use, and reasons for non -use or discontinued use. Additional 
participants will be interviewed until saturation is reached. Saturation will be defined  as no new usability concerns 
raised in the preceding two interviews and typi[INVESTIGATOR_434178] 10 and 30 interviews. Participants will be compensated an additional $[ADDRESS_550243] 
to compare the mean SUS score at T1 to the threshold score of 71 indicative of “good” usability. If the distributions of 
SUS scores suggest asymmetry  or nonnormality, the non -parametric  sign test ( highly asymmetrical) or  Wilcoxon signed -
rank  test (non -normality ) will be performed in lieu of one -sample  t-tests. To assess whether there was a significant 
improvement in the continuous secondary cognitive/behavioral outcomes from baseline to end of study (T0 to T1), we will perform two -sided paired t -tests on the pairwise differences. If any of the distributions of pairwise differences 
suggest asymmetry or nonnormality, the non -parametric Wilcoxon signed -rank sum test will be performed in lieu of 
paired t -tests. We will use the McNemar’s test for to compare paired proportions.  