Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 1 of 30
Protocol Title:
Ketamine Treatment for  Pediatric-
Refractory Obsessive-Compulsive  Disorder  
(OCD)
Protocol Number:
[ADDRESS_573248] Approval:
02/13/2015
Expi[INVESTIGATOR_5952]:
01/25/2019Version Date:
01/17/2018
Clinic:
Children's Day Unit
Contact [INVESTIGATOR_678]:
[INVESTIGATOR_449723], MD
Email: [EMAIL_8626]
Telephone: 646-774-6318Co-Investigator(s):
Helen Simpson, MD
Moira Rynn, MD
Cover Sheet
Choose ONE  option from  the following that is applicable to  your study
If you are creating  a new protocol, select "I am submitting a new protocol." As 5 Year Renewals are no 
longer required,  this option  remains  for historical  purposes.
I am submitting an  annual continuation  without modifications 
Division & Personnel
Division
What Division/Department does the  PI [INVESTIGATOR_100534]?
Child PsychiatryWithin the division/department, what Center  or group are you affiliated with, if  any? 
Pediatric Anxiety and Mood Research Clinic (PAMRC)  / Children's Day Unit (CDU)
Unaffiliated Personnel
List investigators, if any,  who will be participating in this protocol but  are not affiliated with  New  York 
State Psychiatric  Institute or Columbia University. Provide: Full  Name, Degrees and Affiliation.
Evelyn Berger-Jenkins,  MD,  MPH  (Assistant Professor of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center)
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 2 of 30
 
Moira Rynn, MD (Consulting Professor and Chair,  Department  of Psychiatry and  Behavioral Sciences, 
Duke University Medical Center) 
Application for Continuation of Research
Status
Current Status  of Study: 
Subject enrollment is  ongoing.
Summary of  Experiences  to Date
Please provide a summary  of scientific progress of  the study and the experience of research participants,  to 
date. This requirement is designed to allow for  the investigator and  the IRB to  reassess the study’s  risks  and 
benefits in terms  of developments in the  field, changing practice patterns, and  new  IRB policies and  
procedures.We have enrolled [ADDRESS_573249] provided  case  reports  to the IRB highlighting participants' experience.
Funding
Have there  been  any changes in funding status since the prior  approval? 
NoHave the principal  investigator [INVESTIGATOR_100536]/product?Yes
Summary
Have there  been  any study findings, recent literature, or untoward events occuring here or at other sites in  
the past  year which  might  affect the analysis of the  safety, risks or benefits of study participation? 
NoHave there  been  any serious adverse events  (serious and/or unanticipated  problems  involving risks to  
subjects or others  at this  site which occured in the  past year)?  
NoHave all study staff with a  significant role in the design or implementation  of the human subject components 
of this study  received required training in human research subject protections?
YesIs the study covered by a certificate of confidentiality? No
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_573250] there  been  any significant deviations  from the anticipated study recruitment, retention or completion 
estimates? NoComments / additional information 
Sample Demographics
Specify populationAdolescents and young adults with OCDTotal number  of participants enrolled from this population to  date  
5Gender, Racial and  Ethnic Breakdown 
We have screened a total of 9 participants and completed the study with  4 participants.  1 participant is 
currently in the 3-month follow-up period. 
 
Gender:
- Male:1
- Female:  4
 
Race/Ethnicity:
- White:  4
- Mixed race: 1  
Summary of  Current Year's Enrollment and  Drop-out  
Number of participants  who  signed consent  in the past year
3Number of participants  currently enrolled
1Did the investigator  withdraw participants from the study? 
NoDid participants  decide  to discontinue study involvement? 
No
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_573251] indicate if this research will include  any of the following  
procedures
   Psychiatric Assessment
   Collection of Biological  Specimens
   Medication Trial
   Medication-Free  Period or Treatment  Washout
   Off-label  Use of Drug or Device
Population
Indicate which  of the following populations  will be included  in this  research
   Children (ages 13-17)
   Adults
Research Support/Funding
Will an existing internal account be used to support the project?YesDescribe internal account
PC002246     YAC Columbia  account
 
903-4081A    RFMH account
 
903-4132A   RFMH  account 
 
Is the project  externally funded  or is external funding planned?
YesSelect the number of external  sources of funding that  will be applicable to  this study
Funding Source #1
Is the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_40349]/contract the same  as the PI [INVESTIGATOR_40350]? 
YesSelect one of the followingThe grant/contract is currently fundedSource of FundingOtherSponsor
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 5 of 30
NYPH YAC  (Youth Anxiety Center)
Select one of the followingSingle SiteBusiness OfficeCUDoes the grant/contract involve a  subcontract? 
No
Study Location
Indicate if the  research  is/will be conducted at any  of the  following
   NYSPI
   [INVESTIGATOR_100540]/locations
No
Lay Summary of Proposed  Research 
Lay Summary of Proposed Research
This pi[INVESTIGATOR_449724], feasibility and potential efficacy  of ketamine, a 
medication that modulates glutamate in the brain,  as a rapid treatment for obsessive-compulsive  disorder  
(OCD) symptoms in adolescents and young adults with OCD. This study will recruit 10 youth (ages  14-22) 
who are diagnosed with clinically significant  OCD and have failed  at least one  adequate trial  of a Serotonin 
Reuptake Inhibitor (SRI) medication and a course  of Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (CBT)  for OCD in  the 
past. Participants will receive a single  infusion of intravenous ketamine and be  assessed at regular intervals 
post-infusion for up to  14 days. At the  end of the 14-day treatment phase, all  participants  will be  offered 
three months of open treatment for OCD with medication  and/or CBT. The study will be conducted at 
NYSPI [INVESTIGATOR_449725] (IRB#5833, PI: [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Carolyn Rodriguez, now being  analyzed under  IRB#7219, PI: [INVESTIGATOR_124]. 
Helen Blair Simpson). Promising data will lead  to a grant application to  the National  Institutes of Mental 
Health for a full-scale  randomized controlled  trial.  
 
Background, Significance  and Rationale
Background, Significance and Rationale
Overview:
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 6 of 30
Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a disabling illness that  usually begins by [CONTACT_449738], persists for 
life, and impairs function. There have been  no new classes of Food  and Drug Administration  (FDA)-
approved medications to treat children  and adolescents with OCD since the  development of serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SRIs)  over  [ADDRESS_573252] a 
2-3 month lag  time  before clinically  meaningful improvement. Thus, there is a compelling need for 
alternative pharmacological treatments in adolescents with OCD. At the same time, there has been a surge in 
our understanding of  the pathophysiology of OCD: it is associated with abnormal functioning of a 
corticostriatal circuit, and  there are known abnormalities within the glutamate neurotransmitter system  (e.g. 
glutamate is the main excitatory chemical  that helps nerve cells communicate).  These  basic science findings  
have recently prompted excitement in testing medications that target glutamate to decrease OCD symptoms.Background & Rationale: 
In this study,  we will evaluate  the feasibility,  tolerability, and preliminary efficacy of ketamine,  a 
medication that modulates glutamate in the brain,  as a rapid treatment for OCD symptoms  in adolescents  
and young adults with OCD. Our rationale  for using ketamine is threefold. First, glutamatergic 
abnormalities in corticostriatal circuits may underlie  OCD symptoms  based  on human imaging, genetic, and 
animal studies; 1-[ADDRESS_573253] been associated  with  OCD severity. 4, 5 Thus, 
medications that modulate  glutamatergic neurotransmission (e.g.,  riluzole, memantine, minocycline) may be 
effective.5, [ADDRESS_573254] shown promise for OCD in case reports or open  trials, 7-
9 but neither is FDA-approved for use in children; riluzole also  has significant liabilities in  terms of adverse 
events and cost. [ADDRESS_573255], we found in a small randomized controlled trial that unmedicated OCD adults had a  near  cessation  of 
obsessional thoughts during an intravenous ketamine infusion; these effects  were  maintained in  half of the 
patients for up to one week.14 These  exciting findings  lead  to two questions: 1) is this type of  study  
acceptable and  feasible in youth; 2) are ketamine’s effects similar in  adolescents and young adults?  This 
proof-of-concept study has the potential  to pave the way to  rapid-acting treatment strategies for adolescents 
and young adults with OCD. 
Our decision to allow  participants to remain on their prescribed SRI medications  during  the study is based 
on a review of the  literature. There are no known interactions between these medications. Additionally, 
three published psychiatric studies have  allowed patients to concurrently take antidepressant medications 
and ketamine.15-[ADDRESS_573256]  a combined  sample size of 92 participants,  and there were no related 
adverse events.   Refer  to the uploaded  chart titled "SRI - Ketamine Literature Summary" for more  
information.
Specific Aims and Hypotheses
Specific Aims and  Hypotheses
Specific Aims:
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_573257]  of ketamine  on the symptoms of OCD in 
adolescents and young adults ages  14-22. The symptoms of OCD are  evaluated  using a number of validated 
scales designed to measure their  clinical  status. The  specific aims of the study are as follows:
 
Aim 1.  To assess  the acceptability, feasibility and tolerability of a  single ketamine  infusion in adolescents 
and young adults with OCD.
Aim 2.  To assess  the effects of ketamine on OCD severity.
 
Primary Hypothesis:
Adolescent and young adult OCD patients will have  a reduction in OCD symptoms immediately following  
the ketamine infusion.
Description of Subject Population
Sample #[ADDRESS_573258] racial distribution to be approximately 73% White,  18% Black,  9% Asian, and for the ethnic  
distribution to be approximately 22%  Hispanic.  We expect the sample to  be 50% female.
Description of subject population
We will recruit 10 adolescents and young adults (post-pubertal, ages 14-22) with  OCD using similar criteria  
as in the  prior study in adults [ADDRESS_573259] one  adequate  trial 
of an SRI  medication and a course of CBT for OCD. They will be  free of medication or on a stable  dose of 
an SRI medication , score ≥ 16 on the Children’s  Yale-Brown Obsessive  Compulsive Scale  (CYBOCS)  prior 
to entering the study  and report  at least moderate severity of  obsessions  and/or  compulsions.
Recruitment Procedures
Describe settings where recruitment  will occur
The study will recruit participants from the Anxiety Disorders Clinic (ADC), directed  by [INVESTIGATOR_124].  Simpson, as 
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 8 of 30
well as the  CAPES Evaluation  Service  and the Children’s Day Unit (CDU), which  are directed by [INVESTIGATOR_124].  Laura 
Mufson. The  ADC  screens over 200 adults (≥ 18)  with  OCD a year. The CAPES/CDU  provides  free expert 
consultation, evaluation, and treatment  referrals  for children and  adolescents  suffering  from mood  and 
anxiety disorders. OCD  self-help organizations such as the International  OCD  Foundation will be contact[CONTACT_449739].
Participants (ages 14-22)  and their parent/caregiver  will be assessed by [CONTACT_2717]-approved phone screen  
(IRB# 7058R (formally 6019R), IRB# 6574). For participants ages 18-22, the research team  will obtain 
permission from  the participant before speaking to his/her  parent/caregiver. We do not  communicate to 
families that we will destroy their  screening information if  they do not come in for a study visit. Regardless 
of study participation,  we enter the information  from the phone screens into a  deindentifed and password 
protected database.
 
How and by [CONTACT_60504]/or recruited? 
Research staff on the CDU and ADC may approach and discuss the research study with  potential 
participants who  have  given permission to be contact[CONTACT_3015].  Drs. Goldberg  and Simpson will be 
responsible for  fully  explaining the details  of the study,  answering  any questions, and consenting the 
participants if they are  interested  in the  study. 
 
How will the study be  advertised/publicized? 
IRB-approved radio/newspaper/web advertisements,  flyers and RecruitMe will be used to  recruit  
participants.
 
Do you have ads/recruitment material requiring  review at this time? 
NoDoes this study involve a  clinical trial?
YesPlease provide the NCT Registration Number[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Concurrent Research Studies
Will subjects in this  study participate in or be recruited from other studies? 
YesDescribe concurrent research  involvement
Participants may  be recruited  from  the following ongoing studies:
“Evaluation  at the NYSPI  [INVESTIGATOR_449726].” (IRB# 7058R)
“MRS Glutamate Measurement in Healthy  Controls and People with  OCD."  (IRB #6218)
"Novel Medication Strategies Targeting Brain Mechanisms in  Pediatric OCD." (IRB #6574)
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 9 of 30
"Attaining and Maintaining Wellness  in OCD."  (IRB #6628)
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria
Name [CONTACT_40443]/sub sampleOCD ParticipantsCreate or insert table to describe the inclusion criteria and  methods  to ascertain them
CRITERION METHOD OF ASCERTAINMENT
1) Participant must be 14-22 years  of age  at the  time 
of consent (post-pubertal)Phone screen,  inquiry at  time of consent 
by [CONTACT_327178]  
2) Participant and a parent/guardian must be able to read and understand English
Phone screen,  inquiry at  time of consent 
by [CONTACT_327178]  
3) Participant must be physically healthy and weigh 
at least 25kg. If female, must not be pregnant.Clinical interview by [CONTACT_449740],  
physical examination, EKG, and blood tests
4) Participant must fulfill  DSM-V  criteria  for OCD, 
OCD being  the principal disorder  (i.e.,  currently the 
most severe and  in need of treatment)  and have  had 
OCD for at least six  months. Clinical interview and results of ADIS-C/P
5) Participant must score ≥ 16 on the Children’s Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale  
(CYBOCS) prior to entering the study, report at least moderate severity of  obsessions and/or  
compulsions..CYBOCS administration by [CONTACT_449741],  
OCD-VAS
6) Participant must have tried and  failed  at least one 
adequate trial of an SSRI medication or  
clomipramine and  a course  of CBT  unless the  
participant is  unable (or unwilling) to access or 
tolerate CBT  treatment.
 
a.  In order  to meet criteria  for having had at  least 
one adequate trial  of an  SRI medication, 
participants must have been  on a stable and minimal  
adequate dose of  at least one SSRI  medication or 
clomipramine as defined by [CONTACT_449742]  
[ADDRESS_573260] refused further  SRI trials. Congruent  
with the literature,  the range of minimally adequate 
doses to treat OCD are as  follows: Clomipramine 
(Anafranil) 75-100  mg/day; Fluoxetine (Prozac) 20-
60 mg/day; Paroxetine or Paroxetine CR  (Paxil)  20-
40 mg/day; Sertraline (Zoloft)  50-100  mg/day; 
Fluvoxamine (Luvox) 100-200 mg/day; Citalopram 
(Celexa) 20-40 mg; Escitalopram (Lexapro) 10-20 
mg/day for a minimum  of [ADDRESS_573261] 8 sessions of Exposure and 
Response Prevention Therapy (EX/RP) by a 
licensed clinician  trained in doing CBT for OCD. A 
CBT expert on our team will ensure  that the 
clinician administering these  exposures  has had 
adequate training and experience in providing this 
treatment. Participants may also be considered  if 
they are unable to access  or unwilling to pursue 
CBT treatment.
7) Participant is off all psychotropic and other types of drugs  likely to interact  with  glutamate  for at least 
14 days  before starting  the study. The exceptions 
are SRI medications and short acting 
benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_449727] 
(which can be taken up to 24 hours prior to ketamine infusion). Participants  will be  off 
neuroleptics for 1 month and off  fluoxetine  for 6 
weeks prior to  the study. Phone screen,  clinical interview, 
consultation with  referring physician
8) For participants  younger than 18, written  
informed assent by [CONTACT_449743]. For participants  18 and  older, written 
consent by [CONTACT_449744]/parent to provide information.Consent interview by [CONTACT_449745]
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 11 of 30
CRITERION METHOD OF ASCERTAINMENT
1) Family history of a  first degree relative with psychosis 
or substance  abuse/dependence.Clinical interview
2) History  of violence Clinical interview
3) Presence of psychotic symptoms or lifetime  diagnosis 
of schizophrenia including any auditory or  visual 
hallucinations or presence of delusional  thinking, bipolar 
disorder, substance-induced psychotic disorder,  psychosis 
due to general  medical  condition. Clinical interview, ADIS-C/P
4) Severely  depressed patients with the Children’s 
Depression Rating Scale (CDRS) ≥ 60 or judged clinically to be at risk of  suicide. Clinical interview, ADIS-C/P and CDRS
5) Current diagnosis of an eating  disorder. Clinical interview, ADIS-C/P
6) Current or  past history of PTSD or significant trauma. Clinical interview, ADIS-C/P
7) Current or  past diagnosis of substance  
abuse/dependence. Clinical interview, ADIS-C/P
8) Current or  past diagnosis of autism or a related  
disorder.Clinical interview
9) Current or  past diagnosis of pediatric autoimmune  
neuropsychiatric disorders associated with streptococcus (PANDAS). This will be defined by [CONTACT_4868]: abrupt onset of OCD symptoms (often  with 
comorbid tics) with a relapsing –remitting  symptom  
course, a temporal  association between symptom 
exacerbations and a  Group-A beta-hemolytic  
streptococcal (GAS)  infection,  association with 
neurological abnormalities during exacerbations (adventitious movements, motoric hyperactivity, urinary hesitancy), and prepubertal  age of onset.Clinical interview
10) Participants planning to commence  cognitive-
behavioral therapy during the period  of the study or those 
who have begun CBT  within 8 weeks prior to enrollment.Phone screen,  clinical interview, consultation 
with current provider
11) Documented history of hypersensitivity  or intolerance 
to ketamine.Clinical interview
12) Female participants  who are either pregnant  or 
nursing or  female participants of child  bearing  age who 
are sexually active and not taking hormonal  birth control.Medication evaluation  
13) History  of significant  medical condition  that might 
increase the risk of participation. This would include  
hypertension (BP > 140/90), chronic  congestive heart 
failure, tachyarrhythmias,  myocardial ischemia, 
intracranial mass  lesions, head injury, globe  injuries, 
hydrocephalus or a  thyroid disorder.Clinical interview and medical examination
14) Concurrent use of any  medications that might increase Clinical interview
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 12 of 30
Waiver of Consent/Authorization
Indicate if you are requesting any of the following consent waiversWaiver of consent for  use of records that include protected health information (a HIPAA waiver of 
Authorization) NoWaiver or alteration of consentYesWaiver of documentation of consent NoWaiver of parental consent No
Consent Procedures
Is eligibility screening  for this study conducted under a different IRB protocol?
NoDescribe procedures  used  to obtain consent  during  the screening  process 
Prior to initiating screening procedures, Drs. Goldberg or Simpson  will obtain consent from the participant 
(if 18 or older) or participant's parent/legal guardian by [CONTACT_449746]. Families will have a chance  to review the consent form  thoroughly and ask any questions prior to  
signing.Describe Study Consent ProceduresDrs. Goldberg or Simpson will answer any questions the participant or participant's parent/legal guardian may have and will obtain written  consent.  The participant/participant's parent/legal guardian will receive a 
copy of the signed consent.Indicate which of  the following are employed  as a part of screening or main  study consent  procedures
   Consent Formthe risk of participation.  This  would include: St. John’s 
Wort, Tramadol, atracurium or thyroid medication, due  to 
potential adverse  drug-drug interactions.
15) Positive urine screen  for illicit drugs Urine toxicology assessment
16) Inability of participant or parent/guardian  to read  or 
understand English.Phone screen,  inquiry at  time of consent by 
[CONTACT_327178].  
17) Documented history of adverse reaction  to anesthesia. Clinical interview 
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 13 of 30
Justification for Waiver or Alteration  of Consent
Waiver of consent is requested for the  following
The waiver was requested  to allow  us to obtain information on participants’ family history. The  Family  
history screen  (FHS) form  was previously  uploaded  for IRB review. As per Federal  Regulation 45CFR46. 
116(d), (1) The research  involves no more than minimal risk to the subjects;  (2) The waiver or alteration 
will not adversely affect the rights and welfare of the subjects; (3) The research could not practicably be carried out without the  waiver or  alteration; and (4) Whenever appropriate, the subjects will be provided 
with additional pertinent information after  participation.
 
Explain why your research can  not be practicably carried out  without the waiver or  alteration
The FHS is  a standardized questionnaire that will be  used  to screen for the presence of 15 psychiatric 
disorders among the participant’s biological  relatives  and patients with  a family history of psychosis or 
substance use/dependence will be  excluded  from  participating  in this study. It would not  be feasible to  
contact [CONTACT_449747]'s biological  relatives to complete this  form.  Consent  will be obtained from  the 
parents of  patients under [ADDRESS_573262] assent  will be assessed and/or recorded
Drs. Goldberg or Simpson will describe the  purpose and nature  of the  research study. The participant will 
have a chance  to review the assent form  thoroughly and ask any  questions  prior  to signing. If they  decide to 
participate in the study,  they will also receive a copy of the signed  assent form.
Persons designated to discuss and document  consent
Select the names of persons designated  to obtain consent/assent
Goldberg, Pablo, MDSimpson, Helen, MDType in  the name(s)  not found in the  above  list
Study Procedures
Describe the procedures required for this studyOverview: 
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 14 of 30
The current  plan is  for the  study to be conducted at the Children’s Day  Unit  (CDU) at NYPSI and the Irving 
Institute for Clinical and Translational Research  at CUMC. The CDU is an outpatient clinic and a  research  
day treatment program that provides  services  for the psychiatric and  educational  needs  of children  and 
adolescents participating in research protocols at NYSPI. Most of the children  have either failed  or not  
completely responded to first line  treatments  for mood, OCD, or other anxiety  disorders. School  services  are 
provided by [INVESTIGATOR_58027]186X, a [LOCATION_001]  City  public  school  located on the unit during the academic year  from  
September through June.  In addition, during the  [ADDRESS_573263]. Pablo Goldberg, a research nurse, a social  worker,  psychologists, and 
trainees. Although  this protocol is primarily  conducted as an outpatient study, we reserve the opportunity to 
offer admission  to 4 Center (the  4th floor  inpatient  unit) for those  adolescents  in need of  a higher level  of 
care. If an adolescent  requires additional  support, the  adolescent may be admitted to  the CDU partial  day 
program that runs Monday through Friday from 8:30 AM to  3:30  PM where the adolescent  can be  closely 
monitored, receive educational  credit, and additional supportive services. 
Screening:
Upon consenting,  participants will complete all screening procedures  at the  CDU. Screening  may last  from 
1 to 6 weeks to allow  sufficient time to obtain  thorough  medical  and psychiatric history to  ensure the 
patient’s safety and  eligibility/ineligibility in the  study. Screening procedures  include:
         Diagnostic  Assessment: Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule - Child/Parent version  (The  child  
version will be  administered to all participants. The parent version will be  administered  to parents of 
all participants ages 14-17 and to parents of participants  ages  18-22 with their permission). 
         Efficacy Assessments: Children’s Yale-Brown Obsessive  Compulsive Scale (CYBOCS), Children’s 
Depression Rating Scale-Revised (CDRS-R).
Note: Diagnostic and Efficacy Assessments  will be  be administered by [CONTACT_449748]'s Independent 
Evaluators ([CONTACT_449768]-Lukin,  [CONTACT_449769], Juliet Jenkelowitz or Kristin  Toffey).
         Feasibility  and Safety Assessment: Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale  (C-SSRS)
         Clinical Global Impressions Scale  (CGI),  Medical History, Treatment History, Family History, 
OCD Onset form.
         Medical  Assessment: Physical examination, EKG, Tanner Scale, Safety Labs, Vital  Signs  and 
Pregnancy Test (serum)
If clinically indicated,  study  clinicians may administer the Social Communication  Questionnaire 
(SCQ) and/or an  OCPD assessment based  on DSM criteria  (uploaded).  
Note: If the subject has  been screened  under  IRB protocol #6019R “Evaluation at the NYSPI [INVESTIGATOR_449728]” or IRB protocol #6574 “Novel Medication Strategies Targeting Brain 
Mechanisms in Pediatric OCD” within [ADDRESS_573264] any new 
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 15 of 30
medical or  psychiatric diagnoses that would prevent study entry, they  do not need a repeat ADIS or intake in  
order to reduce patient burden and promote data sharing.
Co-Morbid Depression: Patients with co-morbid  depression will be allowed in the study as long  as OCD is 
primary, the Children’s Depression Rating Scale-Revised (CDRS-R) is <60, and patient  is not currently 
suicidal. We would like to include patients with co-morbid MDD  since ketamine has been  shown  to have 
rapid anti-depressant effects 15, 16; thus, assessing the response of these patients to ketamine would allow us 
to understand the  impact of co-morbid  MDD on OCD symptoms (in addition to  our main goal of 
understanding ketamine’s effects  on OCD patients without co-morbidities).
Washout:
In order  to be eligible for  this study, participants must be off all psychotropic medications aside from SRIs 
and other  types of drugs likely to interact with glutamate  for at least  [ADDRESS_573265]  at the 
Pediatric Anxiety & Mood Research Clinic (PAMRC) or by [CONTACT_47991]’s  own physician.  During  this 
washout period,  patients will be monitored at  least weekly in person and by [CONTACT_449749]. Weekly assessments during the  washout period will include the Clinical Global Impressions Scale 
(CGI-S). If a patient’s score on the Global Improvement section of the CGI is a 6 (“much worse”) or 7 
(“very much worse”) during the  washout period, the clinician will take the patient off the protocol washout  
and initiate the 3-month open clinical treatment offered to all patients at the end of the study. Patients  may 
independently elect  to withdraw from standardized  treatment  at any time for any reason, independent of 
their CGI Global  Improvement score. Physical exam, vital signs and adverse  events  will also  be carefully 
assessed during the  washout period.  
Day 1:  Baseline Evaluation  & Ketamine Infusion
Baseline Evaluation
After completing the screening procedures and medication washout  if applicable, participants  will proceed 
to the baseline evaluation.  Baseline  evaluation procedures include:
         Efficacy Assessments: Children’s Yale-Brown Obsessive  Compulsive Scale (CYBOCS), Children’s 
Depression Rating Scale-Revised (CDRS-R), Young Mania  Rating  Scale (YMRS), Clinician 
Administered Dissociative States Scale  (CADSS), Brief Psychiatric  Rating  Scale (BPRS), OCD 
Visual Analogue Scale (OCD-VAS), Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Challenge Scale (YBOCCS), Child  Obsessive-Compulsive  Impact  Scale-Revised  (COIS-R)
         Feasibility  and Safety Assessment: Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale  (C-SSRS)
         Clinical Global Impressions Scale  (CGI)
         Medical  Assessment: Vital Signs and Pregnancy Test (urine) for female participants
Test Day Procedures
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_573266] on an inpatient unit at the Irving Institute for Clinical & 
Translation Research at CUMC. After  completing the baseline evaluation,  if a participant is eligible for the 
study, they will be  escorted to the Irving Institute by [CONTACT_449750]. For the  infusion, the participant’s 
treatment team will  comprise of a  nurse, a Pediatric  Advanced Life Support (PALS) certified  pediatrician 
[CONTACT_449770]-Jenkins and the study MD ([CONTACT_449771]).  At the  site of the infusion, a nurse will  
repeat the  participant’s vital signs, place the IV, and set up the IV infusion  pump.  The ketamine infusion can 
begin as soon as PALS-certified pediatrician is present. After the infusion, the  study  MD and PALS certified 
pediatrician will remain present  to monitor the participant throughout the 2-hour post-infusion observation 
period. 
Ketamine Infusion
Each participant will receive one slow intravenous infusion of 0.5mg/kg ketamine hydrocholoride.  The 
infusion will be given  over a course  of [ADDRESS_573267]’s  first test day. EKG 
will constantly  be monitored prior to, during, and  after  the ketamine infusion. Blood  pressure, heart rate and 
oxygen saturation  will be monitored and  recorded  at 5-minute intervals at baseline  and throughout the 
ketamine infusion.  
In addition  to these  medical assessments,  after 20 minutes from the start of the infusion, the  study MD  will 
monitor participants closely using the Clinician  Administered Dissociative States Scale (CADSS) and 
Clinical Global Impressions Scale (CGI). Participants will also be asked  to complete the 1-item OCD Visual 
Analogue Scale (OCD-VAS) to monitor OCD symptoms over a  rapid time  frame. 
Safety and Termination of Ketamine Infusion
 
In case of nausea  or anxiety, patients  can be administered  anti-nausea medications, such as Zofran  
0.15mg/kg/dose (a medication that helps  to decrease nausea), or anxiolytics such as Ativan (a medication 
that helps  to decrease nervousness)  from the pharmacy formulary. In the case of excessive saliva 
production, Glycopyrrolate, 0.0025-0.005 mg/kg, (a medication  that helps treat hypersalivation) can be 
administered. In  the rare  event of severe agitation, Haldol 0.1mg/kg/day in  divided  doses (an  antipsychotic 
medication that helps decrease severe impulsive behaviors and  uncontrolled movements),  Ativan and  
Cogentin 0.02-0.05 mg/kg (a  medication  that helps  with the side  effects  of Haldol) can be administered as 
well. The most common  and severe adverse effects  of these medication are described in  the "Risks/ 
Discomforts/ Inconveniences" section of this protocol.In case of very high blood pressure  during the ketamine infusion,  the infusion will be  stopped; patients 
blood pressure will be monitored and if there is no decrease after  [ADDRESS_573268] 
common and severe adverse effects of  nitroglycerin  is described in the "Risks/ Discomforts/ 
Inconveniences" section of this protocol.
Post-Infusion
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 17 of 30
Immediately after the infusion is complete,  vital  signs, EKG and  responses on the Clinician Administered  
Dissociative States Scale (CADSS), Clinical Global Impressions Scale (CGI) and  OCD Visual Analogue 
Scale (OCD-VAS) will be recorded by [CONTACT_449751]. 
Infusions will be started in the morning and patients  will be observed for 2 hours after the  infusion  
(ketamine has a  half-life of 10-15 minutes; 2 hours is 8 half lives); the entire visit will last approximately [ADDRESS_573269] day (after  the 2-hour observation period), the study MD will evaluate the 
patient to determine if the effects  of the study drug infusion  have  resolved to  the point that  subjects are  safe 
to return home.  These  evaluation criteria will consist of absence of significant deviations from baseline in 
vital signs, gait, mental status  exam, and assessments listed  in the study flowchart including BPRS and 
CADSS scales. In the  case of an adverse  psychiatric  event, patients  will be  admitted either  to the Pediatric 
Emergency Department at [LOCATION_001]  Presby[CONTACT_380976][INVESTIGATOR_449729] (4 
Center) at the New  York State Psychiatric Institute, if clinically appropriate. The  PALS-certified 
pediatrician will be available  for the duration of the  post-infusion 2-hour observation period. Once patients 
have been cleared  by [CONTACT_449752], adolescents will be required to  leave  the Irving  Center with  a 
parent or guardian and  young  adults will be required to  leave the Irving Center with a parent  or guardian  or 
support person  identified by [CONTACT_146148].
Day 2 – 14:  Post-Infusion Monitoring & Assessments
After the ketamine infusion,  participants will be monitored closely for a  2-week period. The  primary  
measure of change  in OCD  symptoms  will be the  Children’s Yale-Brown Obsessive  Compulsive Scale 
(CYBOCS). This,  along with additional  measures will be administered during  this 2-week period as follows:
          Days 2-[ADDRESS_573270]-infusion:  OCD-VAS  and YBOCCS  are administered during optional daily  phone 
calls (except when they  have an in-person visit on day 3 or 4, during  which these will be 
administered in person). 
The in-person visit  between day 2-[ADDRESS_573271] infusion is not a required study visit and will be  offered on a case-
by-case basis.  During  this period, if the study MD determines that  an in-person visit is needed or if  the 
participant requests  an in-person appointment,  they will be  asked to  come to the clinic  and will complete the 
following assessments. Otherwise these assessments will be completed over the phone. 
          Day 3 or 4: Participants come to the CDU to complete the following assessments:
o   MD ratings: Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS), Young Mania Rating  Scale 
(YMRS), Clinician Administered Dissociative States Scale (CADSS), Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS), Clinical Global  Impressions Scale  (CGI).
o   Medical  assessment: Vital Signs and Pregnancy Test (urine) for  female participants
Note: If a patient’s  score on the Global Improvement section of the CGI  is a 6 (“much worse”) or 7 
(“very much worse”) compared to baseline  at the  day 3 or  4 study  visit, the  clinician  will take the 
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 18 of 30
patient off the protocol  and initiate the 3-month open  clinical treatment offered to  all patients at the 
end of the study.
          Day [ADDRESS_573272]-infusion: Participants complete the following assessments at the CDU or over the phone 
(if participants live far  away):
o   IE ratings: Children’s Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale (CYBOCS), Children’s 
Depression Rating Scale-Revised (CDRS-R), Clinical Global Impressions Scale (CGI).
o   MD ratings: Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS), Young Mania Rating  Scale 
(YMRS), Clinician Administered Dissociative States Scale (CADSS), Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS), Clinical Global  Impressions Scale  (CGI).
o   Self-report forms: OCD Visual Analogue Scale (OCD-VAS),  Yale-Brown Obsessive 
Compulsive Challenge Scale (YBOCCS), Child  Obsessive-Compulsive Impact  Scale-
Revised (COIS-R).
o   Medical  assessment: Vital Signs and Pregnancy Test (urine) for  female participants
 Note: If a patient’s  score on the Global Improvement section of the CGI  is a 6 (“much worse”) or 7 
(“very much worse”) compared to baseline  at the  day 7 study visit, the clinician will take the patient 
off the protocol and initiate  the 3-month open clinical treatment offered to  all patients at the end of 
the study.
          Day 8-[ADDRESS_573273] infusion: OCD-VAS  and YBOCCS are administered  daily  during optional phone 
calls.
          Day [ADDRESS_573274]-infusion: Participants  come to the  CDU to complete  the following assessments:
o   IE ratings: Children’s Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale (CYBOCS), Children’s 
Depression Rating Scale-Revised (CDRS-R), Clinical Global Impressions Scale (CGI).
o   MD ratings: Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS), Young Mania Rating  Scale 
(YMRS), Clinician Administered Dissociative States Scale (CADSS), Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS), Clinical Global  Impressions Scale  (CGI).
o   Self-report forms: OCD Visual Analogue Scale (OCD-VAS),  Yale-Brown Obsessive 
Compulsive Challenge Scale (YBOCCS), Child  Obsessive-Compulsive Impact  Scale-
Revised (COIS-R).
o   Medical  assessments: Safety labs,  vital signs,  pregnancy test (urine) for female  participants.
Follow-up Treatment
Upon completion of the 14-day  study period,  participants will be offered  an additional 3 months  of open  
treatment for OCD (medication management  and/or  CBT) as clinically  indicated based on their  treatment  
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 19 of 30
history. If a participant has not yet had a  trial of Clomipramine, we will offer that medication to  the 
participant following  the 14 day period. In the  event that they prefer to be treated elsewhere, they will also 
be provided with  referrals  to community providers.  With their permission, all  participants  will be  assessed at 
a 3-month follow-up visit.  Participants will be asked  to return to the  CDU to  complete the  following 
assessments: Children’s  Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive  Scale  (CYBOCS),  Clinical Global Impressions 
Scale (CGI), OCD Visual  Analogue Scale (OCD-VAS), Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive  Challenge 
Scale (YBOCCS), and  vital signs.  This will be  pi[INVESTIGATOR_449730], ongoing  
safety, and maintenance of response.
You can upload charts or diagrams if any
Criteria for Early Discontinuation  
Criteria for  Early Discontinuation
 Participants are free  to withdraw from the study at any time for  any reason. Study doctors  are to discontinue 
participants from the study if participants:
Request early discontinuation or withdraw consent.
Experience a serious or  intolerable adverse event that prevents the participant from continuing. 
In the study  clinician's opi[INVESTIGATOR_449731] (CGI-I score  of 6) for two 
consecutive visits. If the  participant begins to show clinical deterioration during the 14-day  treatment  
phase and further continuation under such circumstances would be detrimental to  the participant,  a 
referral will be made for a clinical evaluation  by [CONTACT_449753]. 
In the study  clinician's opi[INVESTIGATOR_449732] a comorbid  
condition such as major depression.  For example, if  a participant became  suicidal or their  symptoms  
of depression increased such that the  depressive  symptoms were much or very much worse relative  
to baseline and the CDRS is no longer  <60, they would  be discontinued  from  the study. 
Are lost to follow-up.
Encounter other conditions (such  as administrative  issues or pregnancy).
If the participant discontinues from the  study  at any time at his/her own request  or at the study doctor's 
request, the reason(s) for discontinuation will be recorded by [CONTACT_1758]. Participants who  have received  
ketamine and withdraw during the 14-day treatment phase will be asked  to return to  the study site for final  
safety assessments  and scheduled for the final study visit.  Participants  withdrawing from the study for 
reasons related to the study medication (usually adverse events) will be  followed  until the event(s)  have 
resolved or  no further  action is required.
 
If a participant is  withdrawn from the  protocol, they will be eligible for up to three  months  of no cost  
treatment on the Children’s Day Unit. They will also  have the option to attend the school program on the 
CDU. If the participant  or the participant’s parent/guardian  would prefer  outside referrals,  arrangements will 
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_573275]  has full responsibility and authority to  refer the participant 
for this clinical evaluation  at any time regarding the  participant’s suitability for remaining  in the study.
 
Blood and other Biological Samples
Please create or insert  a table describing  the proposed collection  of blood or other biological specimens
A blood sample,  approximately one tablespoon (15 cc’s) of blood,  will be  taken at screening and at study 
completion (or  withdrawal, if earlier) for a  total of two tablespoons (30 cc).  These samples will be used for 
safety monitoring, including Chemistry Screen and CBC. The samples will be forwarded to a centralized laboratory for analysis.  Participants may experience a bruise at the site of venipuncture. EMLA cream may 
be used to minimize the discomfort of  venipuncture.
Assessment Instruments
Create a table or give a brief  description  of the  instruments  that will be used for assessment
Anxiety Disorders Interview Schedule  for Children for DSM-IV (ADIS-C/P Revised): This  will be 
administered to the subject (and  parent/caretaker  for those  <18 and those 18-22 with permission) by [CONTACT_449754] (IE) at screening to confirm  the diagnosis of OCD and its age of onset. 
 
Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale,  Child version (CYBOCS): The CYBOCS is a
semi-structured measure  of OCD severity with excellent inter-rater reliability, internal consistency,  and test-
retest reliability. It is validated in those starting at age [ADDRESS_573276]-infusion to determine OCD severity. The CYBOCS will also be  
administered by [CONTACT_449755],  day 7, and day  14 and will be the primary  outcome  measure. As secondary  
outcomes, response will  be defined as a CYBOCS decrease of ≥ 30% and excellent response as a CYBOCS 
of ≤ 10 following the  Pediatric OCD Treatment Study (2004). The CYBOCS  checklist  will be used to 
determine symptom dimensions.
 
Children’s Depression  Rating Scale-Revised (CDRS-R): The  CDRS-R  is a 17-item clinician-administered 
semi-structured interview with good inter-rater reliability and validity  that assesses [ADDRESS_573277]-
infusion and by [CONTACT_449756], day  7 and day 14.
 
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 21 of 30
Clinical Global Impressions Scale (CGI): This is a  clinician rated instrument providing a
single score  for severity and improvement  (from  a 7-point scale) comparing the  patient’s condition during  
each visit on treatment  to the condition at baseline  (before treatment).  The CGI  will be administered by 
[CONTACT_449757].
 
Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale  (C-SSRS):  This is a  semi-structured  clinician  rating of
suicidal behavior, suicide  attempts, and presence and  intensity of suicidal ideation. The assessment will be  
administered by [CONTACT_449758], baseline, day 3 or 4, day 7, and  day 14.
 
Young Mania Rating Scale (YMRS): YMRS is an 11- item clinician administered scale for rating manic 
symptoms. It  will be administered by [CONTACT_449759], [ADDRESS_573278]-infusion,  day 3 or 4, day 
7, and day 14.
 
Clinician Administered Dissociative  States Scale  (CADSS): This  is a clinician rated  instrument  for rating  
degree of dissociation.  A severity  scale will be added: mild, moderate, severe for those items  endorsed on 
interview. It  will be administered by [CONTACT_449759], [ADDRESS_573279]-infusion, day 3 or 4, day  7, and day 14. 
 
Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale  (BPRS): The BPRS is an 18-item observer-scale designed to  assess patients 
with major  psychiatric disorders, particularly  schizophrenia. The BPRS measures  positive symptoms, 
general psychopathology  and affective symptoms.  Some items  (e.g. mannerisms and  posturing) can be rated 
simply on observation  of the patient; other  items (e.g.  anxiety)  involve  an element of self-report  by [CONTACT_4677]. The  BPRS is administered by a trained  clinician via a semi-structured interview  at baseline, [ADDRESS_573280]-infusion, day  3 or 4, day  7, and day 14. 
 
OCD Visual Analogue Scale (OCD-VAS): A one-item scale to  assess OCD symptoms  over  a rapid time 
frame. Patients  will be  asked to report  their  rating on this  scale  prior to, during and after the infusion  as per  
the study flowchart.  
 
Child Obsessive-Compulsive Impact  Scale-Revised  (COIS-R): This  27-item self-report
questionnaire measures  OCD-specific functional  impairment. The  COIS-R-C  is a 3-factor structure youth-
report form. The COIS-R-P is a 4-factor structure parent-report measure  (completed  by [CONTACT_7071]/caretaker 
for those <18 and those 18-22 with permission).  Participants  and their parents will be asked  to complete the 
COIS-R at baseline, day 7, and day 14. 
 
Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive Challenge  Scale  (YBOCCS): A  brief self-report
scale to assess rapid changes in OCD symptoms.  Patients will be asked  to report their rating on this scale 
prior to, during and  after the infusion as per  the study flowchart. 
 
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 22 of 30
Family History Screen  (FHS): This screens for the  presence of 15 psychiatric  disorders  among the 
participant’s biological relatives. It is  administered to a family informant (for those ages 8-17) or to  the 
subject (ages  18-22), who reports on himself/herself  and on other biological  relatives.  It will be 
administered by [CONTACT_327197].
 
Social Communication  Questionnaire  (SCQ): This is a 40 item yes-or-no parent questionnaire to screen  for 
autism spectrum disorders.
DSM-IV OCPD  Assessment:  This is  a semi-structured interview that  assesses  for symptoms of Obsessive 
Compulsive Personality Disorder.  
Please attach copi[INVESTIGATOR_014], unless  standard  instruments are used
Off label and investigational use of drugs/devices
Choose from the following that will be applicable to your study 
   Drug
Select the number of drugs used in this study1
Drug #1
Name [CONTACT_449766]  (see 'Rules')
Explain
We completed the  IND  Decision Worksheet and  it appears  that we do not need to apply  for an  IND 
exception. The IND  Decision Worksheet was previously uploaded for review. 
Research Related Delay to Treatment
Will research procedures result in a delay to treatment?YesMaximum duration  of delay to any treatment  
For enrolled participants that do not require  a medication washout, there will be  no delay to  receiving 
treatment. For enrolled  participants that require a medication washout,  the maximum  delay in initiating  
study treatment will be  two weeks. 
Maximum duration  of delay to standard care or treatment of known  efficacy
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_573281] care or treatment of known efficacy will be 14 
days.Treatment to be  provided at the  end of the study
Upon completion of the acute 14-day treatment period, participants  will be  offered three additional months 
of open treatment  for OCD (medication management  and/or  CBT)  at no cost. This treatment will be offered 
to all participants regardless of response  during the acute study treatment  period. For participants  requiring 
continued OCD treatment  following  this three-month  follow-up  period,  the research staff will refer  the 
patient to his  or her previous providers  or will assist  the participant  and his/her family in  identifying new 
treatment providers.
Clinical Treatment Alternatives
Clinical treatment alternativesCurrently cognitive-behavioral treatment  involving exposure and response prevention (CBT/ERP) and 
serotonin reuptake  inhibitor (SRI) medication  are considered the first  line treatments for OCD. However,  
pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_327162]. CBT/ERP treatment is the mainstay of the treatment for OCD. CBT/ERP alone results in response rates of anywhere between 60% and 80%, but fear of and non-adherence to CBT/ERP are hypothesized to  serve  as barriers to the treatment's efficacy. Subjects 
will have these treatments  explained to them  by [CONTACT_39635], and they will be  offered the option to  
receive referrals for  one or both of these  treatments  rather than participating in the study.
Risks/Discomforts/Inconveniences 
Risks that  could be  encountered during the study period
Risks associated with participation are:  1) distress from discussion about emotional  symptoms;  2)
blood sampling; 3) clinical deterioration  due to being off medication; and 4) medication-related adverse 
events and side effects  from ketamine infusion; 5) medication-related  adverse  events  and side effects from 
Zofran, Ativan, Haldol, Cogentin and Nitroglycerin.   
 
1) Distress from thoughts or  discussion  about emotional symptoms:  Some  participants may experience 
distress or  anxiety  related to participating in these  procedures. Participants will be  monitored  throughout the 
procedures, and  they will be encouraged to report  any concerns. A  psychiatrist  will be  available to  assist the  
participant if needed,  and participants will be removed from the protocol if  their distress or anxiety becomes  
intolerable. Participants and their legal  guardians  will be informed that their  continued  treatment at NYSPI 
[INVESTIGATOR_449733].
 
2) Risks  of blood sampling: A blood sample, approximately one  tablespoon (15 cc’s) of blood, will be  
taken at screening and  at study completion (or withdrawal, if  earlier)  for a total of two tablespoons (30 cc). 
These samples will  be used for safety  monitoring, including Chemistry Screen and CBC. The samples will 
be forwarded to a centralized laboratory for analysis. Participants  may experience a bruise at the site of 
venipuncture. EMLA  cream may be used  to minimize the discomfort of venipuncture.
 
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 24 of 30
3) Risks  of being off medication:  In order  to participate in this  study, participants need to be  off all 
psychotropic medications other than  SRI medications for two weeks prior to  study procedures. This carries  
the risk of the  participant's OCD symptoms worsening, becoming more depressed, and worsening of other 
symptoms including feeling suicidal or risk of suicide. Medications will be slowly stopped in a  safe manner 
as directed by [CONTACT_449760], who will work with the participant's present  treating  doctor.  Participants  will 
closely be monitored during this medication washout period  and they will be offered other medications for 
relief from sleeplessness and anxiety  as needed.  If the participant or study doctor feel that he  or she cannot  
tolerate further delay in treatment, they will be withdrawn from  the study and  treated with  known  OCD 
medications. 
 
4) Ketamine  risks: Ketamine is FDA approved as an  anesthetic in surgical  procedures at higher doses (6 
mg/kg for induction in children and adolescents)  than  the doses  being used in  this study 11 and has also  been 
used safely  in the management of chronic pain in the  pediatric  population  12, 13. In this study, ketamine will 
be carefully administered through an infusion and patients will be  continuously  monitored by a study 
physician. The dose  of 0.5mg/kg has been  safely  administered to  children  and adolescents  without adverse  
side effects in multiple  prior studies of ketamine.17,18
 
The following risks might be associated  with ketamine:
Based on data from the  study conducted by [CONTACT_449761] 14 on ketamine for  the 
treatment of adult  OCD,  there  is a chance that the participant might experience some distress if  
his/her OCD symptoms begin to return  after the infusion. To minimize  this distress, study staff  will 
check in with the  participant and their family  daily and all participants will be offered  up to three 
months of front-line treatment for OCD at no cost after the study. 
Ketamine may produce  temporary symptoms, including vivid dreams, feeling  like you are  floating 
above your  own  body, that your surroundings are strange, or seeing/hearing  things  that are not there 
(illusions/hallucinations). For this reason, any patients with current or past symptoms of psychosis 
will not be permitted  to enroll in this study. Ketamine may also cause temporary  (lasting  at most  1-2 
hours after being  given ketamine) increased  libido (sex drive), euphoria (happy mood),  increased 
thirst, metallic  taste, upset stomach, or  heachache. Participants will be monitored closely for side  
effects during and after the infusion. 
Ketamine may produce  hypersalivation, nausea and in some cases  vomiting. Experienced study 
doctors will be  on site to take  care of  the participant in  the rare  case  that this should happen.
Ketamine can  cause mild increases in your heart rate or blood pressure. Study doctors will closely  
monitor the participant's  heart  rate and blood pressure during  the ketamine administration.
There is a  theoretical risk that exposure to ketamine may predispose susceptible subjects to  
subsequent abuse of  this drug. For this reason,  participants with  a history or  substance abuse or 
dependence will  be asked  not to participate.  
Participants should  not drive a car or engage in hazardous activities  for at least  [ADDRESS_573282]  the participant (and parent,  if applicable) by 
[CONTACT_449762].
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 25 of 30
Should uncomfortable feelings  or thoughts occur,  the ketamine  infusion  can be stopped,  and the study 
discontinued. We will also stop the study for any reason at  the parent or participant's request, or if we 
observe that the participant is experiencing  bad effects from ketamine.
 
Safety and Termination of Ketamine Infusion:
In case of nausea  or anxiety, patients  can be administered  anti-nausea medications, such as Zofran  (a 
medication that helps to decrease nausea), or anxiolytics such as Ativan (a medication that  helps to  decrease  
nervousness) from  the pharmacy formulary. In the rare event of severe  agitation,  Haldol (an  antipsychotic  
medication that helps decrease severe impulsive behaviors and  uncontrolled movements),  Ativan and  
Cogentin (a medication that helps  with  the side effects of Haldol) can be administered as well. The  common 
and severe side effects of Zofran, Ativan, Haldol and  Cogentin  are described below:
Zofran- Most common side effects: Constipation, diarrhea, increased  liver enzymes, headache, fatigue  and 
malaise. Severe  side effects: Serious arrhythmia such as Torsades de pointes and  prolonged  QT interval 
(changes in heart rhythm).Ativan- Most common  side effects:  Asthenia  (weakness), dizziness, sedation, unsteadiness and depression. 
Severe side  effect:  Delirium.
 
Glycopryolate- Most common side  effects:  Flushing,  constipation, vomiting, xerostomia,
headache, urinary  tract infectious disease,  nasel congestion, and nasopharyngitis. Serious
side effects: Bradyarrhythmia, cardiac arrest,  cardiac dysrhythmia, tachycardia,  ventricular
fibrillation, malignant hyperthermia,  nystagmus, seizure, respi[INVESTIGATOR_13374].  
 
Haldol- Most common  side effects:  Constipation, xerostomia (dry mouth), dystonia (abnormal movements), 
extrapyramidal disease (neurological symptoms  such  as: abnormal mood, stiffness, and  tic like behaviors), 
somnolence and blurred vision. Severe side effects: Serious arrhythmia such as Torsades de pointes and  
prolonged QT interval (changes in heart rhythm), agranulocytosis (significant decrease in  white blood  cells), 
seizure, tardive dyskinesia (abnormal neural movements), priapi[INVESTIGATOR_8801] (abnormal erection), and pulmonary embolism (blood clot  in lungs).
Cogentin- Most common side effects: Tachycardia (heart  racing),  constipation,  nausea,  xerostomia (dry 
mouth), blurred vision,  dysuria (painful urination),  urinary retention  (difficulty urinating). Severe  side 
effects: Anhidrosis (dryness in the skin), heat stroke  (increased body temperature), paralytic ileus (bowel  
dysfunction), confusion,  disorientation, drug-induced psychosis  and visual hallucinations.
 
In case of very high blood pressure  during the ketamine infusion,  the infusion will be  stopped; patients 
blood pressure will be monitored and if there is no decrease after  [ADDRESS_573283]  pain as a result of high blood  pressure  or any  other medical  
complications, urgent care will be  provided. The ketamine  infusion  will be terminated if  patients complain 
of any uncomfortable symptoms of rising anxiety  and agitation, or  any other uncomfortable symptoms. The 
common and severe side effects of nitroglycerin are described below:
 
Protocol Summary  Form
[ADDRESS_573284] common side effects:  Contact [CONTACT_8748], erythema, pruritus,  xerostomia,
dizziness, headache,  sedation, somnolence and  fatigue. Severe side effects:
Atrioventricular block.
 
Nitroglycerin- Most common side effects:  Hypotension (low blood pressure), flushing (redness  in the face), 
headache and lightheadedness. Severe  side effects:  Anaphylactoid reaction  (allergic  reactions), 
methemoglobinemia (changes in the structure  of hemoglobin),  raised  intracranial pressure (increased 
pressure in the fluid of the  central  nervous system).
Describe procedures  for minimizing risks
All efforts will be  made to minimize risks and to ensure participant safety.  Participants  will be encouraged 
to relay the emergence of any adverse events  to the study team,  who will attend to  it appropriately. We have 
taken steps to ensure the  safety of subject from  these safety issues  in the following ways:
 
a) Patients will be  assessed and monitored  frequently  during  and immediately after the infusion,  as well as 
for two hours  post-infusion  with assessments by [CONTACT_449763] (i.e. vital signs, scales  of psychosis  and 
dissociation)
 
b) Patients  with medical and psychiatric co-morbidity that  makes participation unsafe or vulnerability to 
psychosis (past history of  psychosis or family  member with schizophrenia) will not  be eligible.
 
c) Patients with history of substance dependence or history of substance abuse in the prior year will be excluded.
 
d) Patients  with any  adverse events associated with the infusion  will be hospi[INVESTIGATOR_057], if  needed.
 
e) Since relief from  OCD symptoms is expected  to be  temporary  for some participants after the ketamine 
infusion, all participants will be offered up to three  months  of  front-line treatment for OCD with  
medications and/or CBT at no cost, regardless of  their response to  the ketamine infusion.
Methods to Protect Confidentiality
Describe methods  to protect confidentiality
Confidentiality will be  maintained by [CONTACT_449764]/her family. Code numbers, rather than names, will be used on all  documents pertaining to the 
participants. All  data will be kept  in locked  files or  on Windows [ADDRESS_573285]. The portion of the database  
that connects  a person’s  identifying information and the code numbers will be  maintained separately and 
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 27 of 30
require a higher level of security clearance on the system. No  individual  will be named or described with 
information that  could allow him/her to be  identified in  published reports.
Clinical data will  be entered into a  Microsoft Access  relational database, checked  for consistency. This  
database is  stored on a network  server securely located behind  the NYSPI [INVESTIGATOR_327172];  a username [CONTACT_449767] a separate password to  access this database. Subjects are 
identified by [CONTACT_449765]; hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_449734]. The data manager will perform random data audits to further ensure the 
integrity of the  data. Server  backups of study databases are  performed nightly; database  copi[INVESTIGATOR_449735]-ROM 
archive disks  are stored separately  for safety.  Drs. Simpson and Rynn will oversee the operation and 
scientific integrity of the  clinical trial and  ensure  that the protocol design, instrumentation,  patient 
recruitment, data collection and analysis yield information that achieves  the major objectives of the study.
Will the  study be  conducted under  a certificate of confidentiality?
No
Direct Benefits to Subjects  
Direct Benefits to Subjects
The potential  benefit of this study is that the  participant may respond to this novel treatment strategy for 
OCD. In a recent study of adults with OCD, ketamine was associated with an  immediate  remission of 
clinical symptoms, and  this improvement  was maintained in some adults for up to  [ADDRESS_573286]  OCD treatment 
(medication management and/or CBT) from the  study team. 
Compensation and/or  Reimbursement  
Will compensation or reimbursement  for expenses  be offered to subjects?
YesPlease describe  and indicate total amount and schedule of  payment(s).  
Include justification for compensation amounts and indicate  if there are bonus  payments.
Participants will be  compensated $75 for the  evaluations done  at the time  of the infusion, and $50 for 
assessments completed at each of  the three  subsequent in-person visits, for  a total compensation of up to  
$225. The compensation takes into account the time  involved,  travel  costs and  parking  in [LOCATION_001]  City, 
and meals or  snacks.
References
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 28 of 30
References
pasting1. Rauch SL, Wedig MM, Wright CI, et al. Functional magnetic resonance imaging  study  of regional 
brain activation during implicit sequence  learning  in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Biol Psychiatry. Feb 1 
2007;61(3):330-336.2. Atmaca M, Yildirim H, Ozdemir H, Tezcan E, Poyraz AK. Volumetric MRI  study  of key brain regions 
implicated in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. Jan 30 
2007;31(1):46-52.3. Graybiel AM, Rauch SL. Toward  a neurobiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder. Neuron. Nov  
2000;28(2):343-347.4. Chakrabarty K, Bhattacharyya S, Christopher R, Khanna S. Glutamatergic dysfunction in OCD.  
Neuropsychopharmacology. Sep 2005;30(9):1735-1740.5. Rosenberg DR, MacMaster FP,  Keshavan MS,  Fitzgerald KD, Stewart CM,  Moore GJ. Decrease in  
caudate glutamatergic concentrations  in pediatric  obsessive-compulsive disorder  patients  taking  paroxetine. 
J. Am. Acad. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry. Sep 2000;39(9):1096-1103.6. Rodriguez CI, Bender J, Jr., Marcus SM, Snape M, Rynn M, Simpson HB.  Minocycline  augmentation of 
pharmacotherapy in obsessive-compulsive  disorder:  an open-label trial. J  Clin Psychiatry. Sep 
2010;71(9):1247-1249.7. Coric V, Milanovic S,  Wasylink S,  Patel  P, Malison R, Krystal  JH. Beneficial effects  of the
antiglutamatergic agent riluzole in a patient  diagnosed  with  obsessive-compulsive disorder and major  
depressive disorder. Psychopharmacology (Berl).  May 2003;167(2):219-220.
8. Stewart SE,  Jenike EA,  Hezel DM, et al. A single-blinded case-control study of memantine in severe  
obsessive-compulsive disorder. J Clin Psychopharmacol. Feb 2010;30(1):34-39.9. Hezel DM, Beattie K,  Stewart SE. Memantine as an augmenting  agent for severe pediatric  OCD. Am J  
Psychiatry. Feb 2009;166(2):237.10. Rynn  M, Puliafico A, Heleniak C, Rikhi P,  Ghalib K,  Vidair H. Advances in Pharmacotherapy for 
Pediatric Anxiety Disorders. FOCUS:  The Journal of Lifelong Learning in Psychiatry. June 2011;9(3): 299-
310.11. Kararmaz A, Kaya S, Turhanoglu  S, Ozyilmaz MA.  Oral  ketamine  premedication  can prevent  
emergence agitation in children after desflurane  anaesthesia. Pediatr  Anaesth. June 2004;14(6): 477-482.
12. Dahmani S, Michelet  D, Abback PS, et al. Ketamine for perioperative  pain management in children: a 
meta-analysis of published studies. Pediatric Anesthesia. Feb 2011;21(6):636–652. 13. Finkel JC,  Pestieau SR, Quezado Z. Ketamine as an adjuvant for treatment  of cancer pain in children 
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 29 of 30
and adolescents. The Journal of Pain. June 2007;8(6):515-521.14. Rodriguez CI, Kegeles LS, Levinson A, et  al. Randomized controlled  crossover  trial of ketamine in  
obsessive-compulsive disorder: proof-of-concept. Neuropsychopharmacology. July 2013;38(12): 2475-2483.15. Bloch MH, Wasylink  S, Landeros-Weisenberger A, et  al. Effects of ketamine in  treatment-refractory 
obsessive-compulsive disorder. Dec 2012;72(11):964-7016. Loo, CK, Gálvez  V, O'Keefe E, et al. Placebo-controlled Pi[INVESTIGATOR_449736], Intramuscular and Subcutaneous  Routes for Ketamine in Depression.  Acta Psychiatrica 
Scandinavica July 2016;134(1):48-56. 17. Singh JB, Fedgchin  M, Daly EJ, et al. A Double-Blind, Randomized, Placebo-Controlled, Dose-
Frequency Study of Intravenous Ketamine in Patients With Treatment-Resistant Depression. American Journal of Psychiatry.  Aug  2016: 173(8):816-26.
18. Berman RM, Cappi[INVESTIGATOR_61625]  A, Anand A, et al. Antidepressant effects of ketamine  in depressed patients. 
Biological psychiatry. Feb 2000;47(4):351-354.19. Zarate CA, Singh JB, Carlson PJ, et al. A randomized trial of an N-methyl-D-aspartate antagonist in treatment-resistant major  depression.  Archives of general psychiatry. Aug  2006;63(8):856-864.
20. Marcus RJ, Victoria  BA, Rushman SC,  Thompson  JP. Comparison of  ketamine and morphine  for 
analgesia after tonsillectomy in children.  Br J Anaesth. Feb 2000; 84(6):739-742.
21. Aspi[INVESTIGATOR_449737], Mayor  A. A prospective randomized controlled study of the efficacy  of ketamine for 
postoperative pain relief in children after  adenotonsillectomy.  Paediatr  Anaesth.  May  2001;11(3):333-336.
22. Team POTS. Cognitive-behavior  therapy,  sertraline, and their combination for children and adolescents 
with obsessive-compulsive disorder: the Pediatric OCD Treatment Study (POTS) randomized controlled trial. JAMA.  Oct 27 2004;292(16):1969-1976.
23. Bloch, M. H., Landeros-Weisenberger, A., Kelmendi, B., Coric, V.,  Bracken, M.  B., &  Leckman, J.  F. 
(2006). A systematic review:  antipsychotic  augmentation with  treatment refractory obsessive-compulsive 
disorder. Molecular psychiatry, 11(7), 622-632.24. Correll, C. U. (2007).  Assessing and  maximizing the safety and tolerability of antipsychotics used in the  
treatment of children and  adolescents. The Journal  of clinical psychiatry, 69, 26-36.
25. Papolos, D. F.,  Teicher, M. H., Faedda,  G. L., Murphy, P., & Mattis, S. (2013). Clinical experience 
using intranasal ketamine  in the treatment of pediatric bipolar  disorder/fear of harm phenotype. Journal of 
affective disorders, 147(1), 431-436.
Protocol Summary  Form
7023
Goldberg, Pablo
Page 30 of 30
Uploads
Upload the entire grant application(s)Upload copy(ies) of unbolded Consent Form(s)OCD Ketamine_Young  Adult Consent Form_UNBOLDED_8.30.17.pdf
OCD Ketamine_Parent of Young Adult Consent Form_UNBOLDED_8.30.17.pdfOCD Ketamine_Parent Consent  Form_UNBOLDED_8.30.2017.pdf
Upload copy(ies) of bolded Consent Form(s)Upload copy(ies) of unbolded Assent Form(s)OCD Ketamine_Adolescent_ Assent_ Form_UNBOLDED_8.30.2017.pdfUpload copy(ies) of bolded Assent Form(s)Upload copy(ies) of the  HIPAA form
HIPAA_Child_Authorization_8.30.17.pdfHIPAA_Adult_Authorization_8.30.17.pdfUpload any additional documents that  may be related to  this study
IE Assessment  of OCPD.pdf
OCD Ketamine Study  Flowchart for PSF_Updated_11.30.15.pdf
OCD Phone Screen  #7023_Updated_12.22.16.pdf
IRB7023_OCD Ketamine  Recruitment_Brochure_Updated_8.15.17.pdf
IRB7023_OCD_Ketamine_Recruitment_Flyer_Updated_12.14.17.pdfIRB7023_OCD Ketamine  Recruitment_Short Study Blurb_Updated_12.21.17.pdf
IRB7023_OCD Ketamine  Recruitment_Long Study  Blurb_Updated_12.21.17.pdf