University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279575], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 1 of 31 Application for Review of Human Research: IRB Protocol Summary  
Biomedical Research  Section II  
 [Version 14  1/6 /2017] 
Principal Investigator :                     [INVESTIGATOR_548236] R. Franklin, Ph.D.  
 
Co-Investigator :                                Reagan Wetherill, Ph.D.  
 
Additional Study Key Personnel :  Anna Rose Childress, Ph.D.  
      
      
PROTOCOL TITLE  
 
1.  Full Title     Baclofen effects on brain and behavior in cigarette smokers    Protoco l # 817101  
 
2.  Brief Title   Baclofen effects in  cigarette smokers   
 
STUDY SPONSORSHIP  
1.  Funding Sponsor National Institute of Drug Abuse/National Institutes of Health  
 
2.  Primary Sponsor  the primary sponsor is the PI, Teresa Franklin  
 
PROTOCOL ABSTRACT  
  
Cigarette smoking is the cause of over 400,000 preventable deaths per year in the [LOCATION_002].  Smoking 
cessation could substantially reduce this burden. However, less than 5% of unaided quit attempts lead to successful 
long-term abstinence. R elapses to smoking are often preceded by a strong desire or craving for a cigarette when 
exposed to  stimuli related to smoking.  Knowledge of the mechanisms underlying stimuli - or smoking cue-induced 
nicotine craving may aid in the search for additional vi able pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_910780].   
  
Functional  magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) is being used to observe the effects of the GABA B agonist, 
baclofen , on the brain’s response to craving.  In this study, craving will be ind uced in  subjects  by [CONTACT_910810] -related cues before and during medication. Subjective measures of craving will be collected throughout 
the cue/fMRI sessions. It is hypothesized that heightened neuronal activation will be seen in the amygdala , the 
ventral striatum, the anterior cingulate, the prefrontal cortex and the insula and that baclofen will modulate these 
responses.  
a 
Pharmacogenetics is a promising and novel addition to neuroimaging studies. Twin, family and adoption studies 
indicate that vulnerability to substance abuse is partially inherited. Individual response to medications will most likely  
be related to genetic p henotypes. Genetics studies, on their own, require huge sample sizes and are expensive; 
however, when combined with neuroimaging, which offers a ‘pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103]’ of individual brains, we can learn why some 
individuals respond to a particular medication and others  do not. For example, evidence suggests that the rewarding 
properties of drugs involve activation of the mesocorticolimbic dopaminergic system, and thus, dopaminergic genes 
will be examined. Candidate dopamine genes include DRD1, DRD2, DRD3, DRD4, DRD5, COMT and DAT. In 
addition,  is also evidence that GABA -ergic mechanisms are involved, particularly the GABA B2 subunit . Therefore,  
we will examine it as well.  The most compelling evidence for a role for variance in dopaminergic components  in 
smoking cue react ivity exists for the dopamine transporter (DAT). Thus, the DAT gene will be our primary focus. 
The DAT gene has two common polymorphisms. One is the 9 variable number tandem repeat (VNTR)  allele  and 
the other is the [ADDRESS_1279576] one 9 VNTR (hetero - 
or homozygotes) while reduced smoking cue responses occur in those homozygous for the [ADDRESS_1279577], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 2 of 31 1.  Overall Objectives  
 
AIM 1  Compare brain and behavioral measures in subjects wh o are carriers of a dopamine transporter ( DAT) 9  
(VNTR: 9 -repeats)  versus 10 VNTR homozygotes  (10/10 -repeats ), actively seeking smoking cessation treatment.   
 
Hypothesis:  We will replicate our original findings of differential brain and behavioral responses to cues mediated 
by [CONTACT_910811]. Brain activity will be enhanced in the interconnected ventral striatum and medial 
orbitofrontal cortex, regions involved i n conditioned drug reward, in 9-repeats compared to 10/10 -repeats. Brain 
and behavioral responses will be significantly greater in 9-repeats compared to 10/10 -repeats.  
 
AIM 2 .  Compare brain and behavioral measures following  3 weeks of baclofen  versus pla cebo  treatment in 
treatment se eking subjects . 
 
Hypothesis:  Baclofen  will modulate resting brain activity —specifically, activity in the lateral orbitofrontal cortex, 
involved in aversive processing, will be greater in baclofen -treated  subjects . Baclofen  will modulate smoking cue 
reactivity: activity in reward -related regions will be blunted in subjects  receiving baclofen , while those receiving 
placebo will display the original signature [CONTACT_910873] -characterized smoking cue reactivity  
paradigm.  Baclofen  will correct vulnerabilities by [CONTACT_910812], 
regions known to respond to reward and in the insula, which is considered an autonomic signaling relay station 
andplays a role in drug crav ing. Although overall effects are expected, inter -individual variability in pharmacological 
response introduced by [CONTACT_910813].  
 
AIM 3 . In a 2 x 2 design ( DAT genotype) x ( baclofen  versus placebo) , examine the interaction  between allelic 
variance in the DAT and baclofen -induced neuromodulatory and behavioral responses.  
 
Hypothesis:  DAT genotype will underlie the inter -individual variability in brain and behavioral responses to 
baclofen . 9-repeats receiving baclofen  will d emonstrate greater reductions in reward -related brain activity and  
smoking behavior compared to 10/10 repeats.   
 
Optional Sub -Study Aim: Conduct an optional sub -study to examine the effects of baclofen on brain responses to 
alcohol cues (compared to non -alcohol cues) and drinking behavior compared to placebo following 4 weeks of 
baclofen or placebo in individuals actively seeking smoking ce ssation treatment and drink heavily. The goals, 
rationale, background and study methods for this objective are described in Appendix I.  
 
2.  Primary Outcome Variable(s)   
  
Brain and behavioral responses to smoking cues will be significantly greater in 9 -repeats compared to 10/10 -
repeats. Although overall effects are expected, inter -individual variability in brain response introduced by [CONTACT_910814]. 9-repeats receiving baclofen  will demonstrate greater reductions in brain 
activity and smoking behavior  compared to 10/10 -repeats.   
 
3.  Secondary Outcome Variable(s)   
 
Pre-medication outcome variables:  
 
9-repeats may have more difficulty labeling their feelings as measured by [CONTACT_910815] (TAS).  
 
9-repeats may  have higher attention deficit (ADHD) symptoms as measured by [CONTACT_910816].  
 
Exposure to smoking cues will not affect how  10-repeats smoke a cigarette whereas 9 -repeats will smoke more of 
their cigarette following cue exposure, as measured by [CONTACT_910817].  
 
During -medication outcome variables:  
 
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279578], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 3 of 31 Following 3 weeks of medication, measures of anxiety and depression may be r educed in baclofen -treated 
subjects compared to placebo -treated subjects, as evinced by [CONTACT_910818] -D and HAM -A. 
 
Throughout treatment, alcohol/other drug craving and use may be reduced in baclofen -treated subjects compared 
to placebo -treated s ubjects as measured by [CONTACT_910819] (AUQ) and reduced 
days of use as measured by [CONTACT_288888] -Line-Follow -Back (TLFB).  
 
Baclofen -treated subjects will show differences in how they evaluate their last cigarette smoked as measu red by 
[CONTACT_910820] (mCEQ).  
 
Post -medication outcome variables  
 
Following the 3-week imaging paradigm and [ADDRESS_1279579] cause of 87% of lung cancer  cases, as well as c hronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 
emphysema and myriad other  devastati ng and fatal diseases. Of the roughly [ADDRESS_1279580] 
desire  to quit,  and 40% make an attempt each year , while less than 5% succeed (1, 2). The deleterious effects of 
smoking  highlight  the importance of identifying the genetic underpi[INVESTIGATOR_910781].  
 There are a host of factors involved in the motivation to smoke and that promote relapse, including stress, 
peer pressure, availability , menstrual cycle phase  and even weight management  (3-7), however, smoking cue ( SC)- 
and withdrawal ( WD)-induced ‘cravings’ are two major motivators t o continued smoking and relaps e (8-11). While 
abstaining , smokers find themselves fixated on smoking to alleviate what they report as intolerable cravings, 
induc ed by [CONTACT_910821]/or reminders to smoke (10, 12-14). WD is a short intense phase of nicotine cessation, 
caused by [CONTACT_910822]. It is characterized by a constellation 
of symptoms, wh ich include irritability, insomnia, fatigue, inability to concentrate, and headache (14). The WD 
symptoms inevitably lead to craving, as smokers know that smoking will provide relief. Inability to combat WD-
induced craving, which declines within a month (15), plays a major role in early  relapse. However,  smokers report 
that SCs, such as the smell of  a burning match, another person smoking, drinking alcohol, and even  internal mood 
states (stress, fatigue, contentment) repeatedly associated with smoking,  can trigge r relapse months or even years 
after quitting. Smokers who p ossess high ‘cue reactivity’ may be  especially vulnerable to relapse initiated by 
[CONTACT_910823] (16, 17).  
 Our group studies appetitive SC -induced motivation , as it occur s long after WD symptoms abate and its link 
to relapse is  not clearly delineated. Further, exist ing medications such as bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_2394], varenicline, and nicotine 
replacement therapy ( NRT) NRT are effective in ‘some’ smokers (2, 18-25), but they do not help a large  majority of 
smokers , which may indicate  the existence of pharmaco -responsive endophenotypes. T he variable treatment 
response to existing  medications may indicate heterogeneity in the relative contribution of SCs and WD to the 
maintenance of dependence. Smokers whose smoking behavior is influenced more by [CONTACT_910824] , whereas , smokers whose relapse is influenced more by [CONTACT_910825]. We suggest that the heterogeneity  in treatment response  is partially mediated 
by [CONTACT_910826] -ergic regulating genes indicating a  ‘pharma co-responsive -
heterogeneity’.  Subsequently, there is a critical need  to identify agents that target cue reactivity to aid cue -vulnerable 
individuals.  
 
Why do some smokers find it so hard to quit?  Inherited vulnerabilities in neurophysiology may underlie compulsion 
to smoke. These vulne rabilities may originate in the mesolimbic DAergic system (26, 27). The dopamine transporter 
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279581], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 4 of 31 (DAT) is responsible for rapid removal of synaptic DA after its release i n response to addictive drugs  and to the 
conditioned cues associated with repeated drug use. Evidence suggests that a functional 40 -base pair VNTR 
polymorphism in the 3’ untranslated region of the SLC6A3  gene, affects DAT availability (28, 29). In molecular 
studies, the 9 -repeat allele is associated with lower expression of the DAT gene, which may lead to sl ower DA 
clearance (30, 31). We hypothesize that a less efficient or less functional DAT may lead to slower reuptake of DA so 
that it lingers longer in the synapse, prolonging the reward message and strengthening the associations between 
nicotine and SCs. As the  incentive value of SCs is enhanced,  so is the craving and associated brain activity triggered 
in their presence.  Thus, we evaluated  the impact of genetic variation in the DAT gene on brain and beh avioral 
responses to SCs. We found that 9 -repeat carriers had greater brain responses to SCs (vs. nonSCs) than 10 -
repeats bilaterally in the inter -connected ventral striatum ( VS) and medial orbitofrontal cortex (m OFC ) (32). Further, 
subjective craving scores were increased in 9 -repeat c arriers and decreased in 10/[ADDRESS_1279582] 
confirmed the se brain finding in a new cohort of smokers  (33). However, power was insufficient to link the brain 
findings to behavioral correlates that will aid in i dentify ing a SC -reactive endophenotype . This link is  necessary  to 
assign mechanism to function  and could aid in identifying a SC -reactive endophenotype .  Aim [ADDRESS_1279583] system as a final common brain substrate  (34-36). GABA -ergic agents indirectly quiet 
accumbens afferents  (37-41), thereby [CONTACT_910827]-administration (SA)  of psychoactive drugs  (42, 43). GABA 
B antagonists reverse these effects (44, 45). The mechanisms  underlying the GABA B antagonistic effects  are still 
under investigation , but one hypothesis is that activation of GABA B receptors located somato -dendritically on 
ventral tegmental area ( VTA) neurons inhibit  the release of DA in interconnected regions , such as the VS and 
prefrontal cortex  (44, 46, 47).  
 Baclofen has b een studied quite extensively in animals with consistent results.  Baclofen dose -dependently 
prevented SA  of several drugs of abuse (48-50), including nicotine (51-54), and inhibited DA release in nicotine, 
cocaine and morphine -dependent rats  (55). Nicotine self administration  was substantially reduced when baclofen 
was micro -infused into the VTA (45) or into the pedunculopontine nucleus (56), a strong GABAergic VTA afferent . 
Most recently, Fattore and colleagues reported that baclofen dose -dependently blocked nicotine -induced 
reinstatement of SA in rats and dose -dependently abolished nicotine conditioned place preference in mice (57). 
Baclofen reduces  drug-reinfo rced behavior at doses that do not affect responding for food, water, or locomotor 
activity ; this suggests  that it is not sedating and does not disturb normal activities (48, 50, 57, 58). 
 Clinically , baclofen has shown potential for reducing drug -motivated behaviors , including craving and 
relapse in opi[INVESTIGATOR_2573] (59), cocaine (60-62) and amphet amine (63) addictions. However, baclofen was ineffective in a 
recent NIDA multi -site trial for cocaine treat ment (64). The con trast of this result to earlier  preclinical and human  
studies may reflect 1) the trial's focus on abstinence initiation rather than relapse , 2) the need for a higher ba clofen 
dose, 3) and/or genetic make up of the study population.  Baclofen has been studied more extensively in alcohol 
trials  and has shown  promise in increasing treatment retention, decreasing WD symptoms, and reducing craving 
and relapse (65-69). In three case studies of alcoholics using high-dose baclofen,  subjects reporte d complete 
remission , as indexed by [CONTACT_910828] (67, 70, 71). With respect to smokers,  we observed 
reductions in the number of cigarettes smoked per day in a Baclofen for Smoking Reduction clinical trial using a 
higher dose (80mg/day) than used in previous clinical trials of drug addiction (72). To our knowledge, there are no 
published treatment trials of baclo fen for smoking cessation.   
 With respect to imaging,  our studies  are the only published studies examining  the effects of baclofen on 
drug cues. Using PET, and O15 H20, we demonstrated that baclofen  reduced cocaine cue -induced craving and brain 
activity in the amygdala and orbitofrontal and anterior cingulate cortices  (73). Recently, we showed that baclofen 
dampened activity in the brain ‘at rest’  in the  VS, amygdala and OFC (33). 
Because of its indirect actions on t he DA system, the human and animal data presented above , and the clinical and 
imaging data from our lab , we hypothesize that baclofen may be an effective tool to delineate a subgroup of smokers 
whose relapse vulnerability is more strongly influenced by [CONTACT_283784] . 
 
Neuroimaging  and Cue Reactivity     Neuroimaging techniques provide the opportunity to examine the DA-ergic  
system in humans  and demonstrate that drug -related cues elicit DA release in the striatum  in humans  (74, 75). 
Also, as aforementioned , we observed that genetic variability in the DAT produces a profound effect on SC reactivity 
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279584], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 5 of 31 (76).  A consistent neural substrate for cu e-reactivity has been observed in  cocaine -, heroin -, cigarette - and sexual -
cues  using  a variety of  imaging modalities (5, 77-80). In studi es of SC reactivity,  we characterized  and replicated  a 
neuroanatomical brain signature [CONTACT_910874], independent of WD , that included activation in the 
reward -related  VS and medial OFC (and other reward -related structures) . In accordance with  the substantial 
preclinical literature  (81, 82), the most profound effects were found in the interconnected medial OFC/VS (76, 83, 
84) Based on consistent findings within our laboratory of a role for the medial ventral aspects of the mesolimbi c 
system in drug cue re activity  and baclofen’s actions on these DA-ergic substrates, we hypothesize that baclofen will 
diminish SC reactivity in the VS/mOFC . We also expect baclofen to enhance  activity in lateral prefrontal regions that 
are involved in suppressing previously -rewarding behavior and behavioral inhibition (85, 86). We predict that baclofen 
will manifest its effects on CNS responses in both the resting baseline state and during cue exposure  and that resting 
brain responses will predict cue responses .  
 
Baclofen is FDA -approved and safe    Baclofen has been FDA -approved for the treatment of spasticity since the early 
1970s  (87-89) and does not carry a significant abuse liability (65, 90, 91). A common crit icism of the use of baclofen 
for the treatment of smoking cessation or other addictions is its reputation for possessing undesirable side effects.  
The most common adverse reaction during treatment with baclofen is transient drowsiness  (10-63%, depending on  
the drug)  (RxList The Internet Drug Index, Kemstro, Side Effects and Drug Interactions, 2008). Other adverse events 
that have been reported with long -term use include: dizziness (5 -15%), weakness (5 -15%), fatigue (2 -4%), 
confusion (1 -11%), headache (4-8%), insomnia (2 -7%), hypotension (0 -9%), nausea (4 -12%), constipation (2 -6%), 
and an increase in urinary frequency (2 -6%). However,  in our Baclofen for Smoking Reduction Trial , we observed 
no differences in sedation or any other side effects between placebo - and baclofen -treated subjects.  We attribute the 
absence of adverse events to our innovative dosing schedule which includes 1) an induction period, during which 
baclofen is t itrated to full dose over a period of four days, and 2) a 7 -day taper at study end (72). Further, in a large 
multi -site trial of baclofen for cocaine dependence  using the dosing schedule developed in our lab, no differences in 
side effects were observed  (72). The practice of slowly introducing a psychiatric medication for smoking cessation 
or other illness is gaining acceptance,  as it eases the occurrence and intensity of side effects (24).   
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_910782] -relapse/anti -craving 
agent  and its clinical  safety profile and clinical tolerability of this readily available FDA -approved medication (66-68, 
89-93), ours is the first published clinical treatment trial of baclofen’s  effects on smoking behavior an d indicate the 
impo rtance of further investigation. Minimizing relapse rates and maximizing abstinence is crucial to the health of 
our nation and may be hastened by [CONTACT_910829] (and safe) medications, such as baclofen, that are potentially 
benefici al for smoking cessation.  
 
The perfusion fMRI/SC paradigm  One factor that may have slowed development of medicinal therapi[INVESTIGATOR_910783]. An assay that rapi[INVESTIGATOR_910784] a clinical trial is crucial to  hasten our efforts to conquer this chronic relapsing disorder.  The innovation  
of the proposed studies is based upon our unique approach that may link a characteristic brain response  and 
underlying mechanism  of promising candidate agents to relapse prevention.  Theoretically, the brain’s response to 
novel compounds 1) may predict tre atment response , 2) aid in selecting optimal doses , and 3) aid in  the develop ment 
of new candidate therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. Thus, these studies can accelerate  progress towards the identification and availability 
of pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_910785].  
 Our approach capi[INVESTIGATOR_910786] -continuous arterial spin labeled (PCASL) 
perfusion fMRI . Perfusion fMRI is a non -invasive, non -radioactive technique that is used to meas ure 
neurophysiological activity .  It uses magnetic field to induce a radio -frequency signal to reflect the brain anatomy 
and the changes in CBF in near real -time.  Changes in CBF result in changes in tissue contrast, measured reliably 
with MRI scanners. Pe rfusion refers to the delivery of oxygen and nutrients to tissue by [CONTACT_910830]. Perfusion fMRI is distinguished from BOLD contrast, which is acquired via 
oxygenated vs. deoxygenated hemoglobin. Perfusi on fMRI is quantitative (94) and stable acro ss time (95), which 
facilitates the measurement of brain responses at various time points, both in response to cognitive and emotional 
tasks, such as cue exposure  (76, 83), and also in the brain in the resting condition (without provocation) (96, 97). As 
such , perfusion fMRI  is ideal for longitudinal studies examining brain modifications induced by [CONTACT_910831]. BOLD fMRI is a relative measure, which can only accurately examine changes that occur within a scanning 
session , during a task , or other provocation  and cannot reveal changes induced by a chronic (or otherwise) treatment . 
Another feature of perfusion fMRI is that noise characteristics are stable over the entire frequency spectrum , which 
makes it suitable for studying low -frequency events in brain function , such as craving and other emotional states that 
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279585], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 6 of 31 accrue over time (83, 94, 98, 99). Consequently, in our paradigm, this stable and quantitative technique has distinct 
advantages over BOLD imaging for rev ealing the neurobiological mechanisms underlying task performance (i.e., cue 
exposure) and its modulation by [CONTACT_351973].  
 
Other factors involved in smoking behavior:  
 
Besides smoking cue exposure and withdrawal other factors are involved in smoking behaviors such as continued 
smoking, craving and relapse. These include attention problems – nicotine enhances attention and some smokers 
smoke to improve attention  (100); menstrual cycle phase – because of the enhanced discomfort of pre -menstrual 
cycle symptoms and decreased self -efficacy, menstrual cycle phase  at start of treatment  can affect treatment 
outcome  (6); ability to label feelings – we hypothesize that the inability to label the craving state could be a relapse 
vulnerability  (32); drinking alcohol – drinking alcohol reduces inhibition and often leads to relapse to cigarette 
smoking  (9). Thus, additional measures will be acquired in this protocol that will provide data  towards these potential 
mitigating factors.  
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE STUDY POPULATION  
 
1. Target Population : 
Patients will be [ADDRESS_1279586] population of previous smoking 
studies in our lab was 54% female, 62% Caucasian and averaged [ADDRESS_1279587] groups are included in the protocol.  
 
2.  Accrual: 100 randomized  (we expect [ADDRESS_1279588] to attrition)  
3. Inclusion Criteria : 
1) Physically healthy , as determined by a comprehensive physical exami nation and approval of the 
study physician  male s or female s who smoke cigarettes,  ages 18 -60. 
2) Smoke ≥ [ADDRESS_1279589] 6 months prior to study start date.   
3) Females must be non -pregnant, non -lactating and either be of non -childbearin g potential (i.e. 
sterilized via hysterectomy or bilateral tubal ligation or at least [ADDRESS_1279590] -menopausal) or of child 
bearing potential but practicing a medically acc eptable method of birth control. Examples of medically 
acceptable methods for this pro tocol include barrier (diaphragm or condom) with spermicide, an 
intrauterine  device  (IUD), the Nuvaring, oral contraceptives, levonorgestrel implant, hormonal 
injection or complete abstinence .  
4) Provide voluntary informed consent.  
5) Must  be able to read . [Subjects are required to be able to read because there are several self -
administered measures that they must read, understand and provide written answers .] 
6) Intelligence quotient of ≥ 80.  
 
4. Exclusion Criteria : 
1)      Current DSM -IV Axis I diagnose s other than nicotine , alcohol,  and marijuana  dependence  and ADHD  
2) Presence of magnetically active  irremovable  prosthetics, plates, pi[INVESTIGATOR_2115], permanent retainer, bullets, 
etc. (unless a radiologist confirms that it’s presence is unproblematic).  An x -ray may  be obtained to 
determine eligibility given the possibility of a foreign body.  
3) History of psychosis .  
4) Claustrophobia or other medical condition preventing subject from lying in the MRI for approximately 
one (1) hour.  
5) Positive urine toxicology report, except for marijuana, at the physical evaluation visit.  
6)  Current or past 3 month treatment for alcohol dependence.  
7)  Current use of any smoking  cessation  treatment s such as Zyban, Chantix, Wellbutrin, patch, gum, 
inhaler, electronic cigarettes, herbal preparations . 
8)  Vision problems that cannot be corrected with glasses.   
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279591], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 7 of 31  9)  Weight exceeding 300 pounds , body girth > 52 inches and a head girth > 25 inches.  
  [Imaging data acquisition is impaired with high weight individuals] . 
10) Individuals suffering from  stroke  and/or stroke related spasticity.  
 
 
5. Eligibility Determined Case by [CONTACT_910832] [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or Study Physician :  
1)  HIV positive on medication for symptoms. This will be determined on an individual basis by [CONTACT_910833] ; all results from the physical 
within normal range for study inclusion.  
2)  Use of medications or natural herbs that  cause sedation or affect the brain systems that are being  
studied. Medication use will be evaluated by [CONTACT_910834] a case -by-case basis. For  
example, if the subject takes Benadryl but can safely refrain from use 24 hours prior to scanning  
sessions , they will not be excluded.  
3)  History of seizures. This will be determined on an individual basis by [CONTACT_910835]. For example, if seizure history is resolved 
and all results fro m the physical evaluation (blood/urine labs) are within normal range , s/he  will not 
be excluded.  Additionally, subjects should be seizure -free for a period of one year.  
4) History of stroke  more than 10 years ago .  
5) History of head or neck injury  causin g loss of consciousness, lasting more than ten (10) minutes  with 
post-concussive symptoms (e.g., headaches, loss of memory for the injury, sleep disturbances)  or 
associated with skull fracture or inter -cranial bleeding or abnormal MRI.  
 
6.  Vulnerable Populations :  None  
 
7.  Populations vulnerable to undue influence or coercion : None  
 
8.  Subject Recruitment :  
Subjects  will be recruited from those who respond to our advertisements. Advertisements will be in the form of IRB -
approved radio ads, flyers, bi llboards, e -lists, Facebook page, and word of mouth. An initial telephone interview 
covering recent medical status, substance use, treatment history, medication, and general psychiatric history will 
be conducted.  The potential  subject will be provided wit h an overview of the study and will be informed that all 
information obtained will be used to determine his/her eligibility for study participation. If the individual satisfies 
preliminary criteria and shows continued interest in participating in the study , an appointment will be made for further 
screening at the Center for Studies on Addiction ( CSA).  The CSA initial screening process will be described , and 
the individual will also be informed that s/he must be available for at least two separate appointme nts during the 
screening week  (unless the two appointments are combined) .  If the individual does not qualify for the study, s/he 
will be provided with appropriate community smoking cessation referrals.   
 
STUDY DESIGN  
 
1.  Phase II  
This is a low risk, single -site, Phase II study , involving a medication that has been  FDA-approved  for other 
indications for over forty years, is well -tolerated and has been used extensively in our hands both in neuroimaging 
and also  in a Smoking Reduction Clinical  Trial.  Currently we hold an IRB -approved protocol to examine baclofen’s 
effects on brain and behavior in marijuana dependence (CURE, IRB # 813953, CoPI, Franklin).  
 
2. Design   
Non-abstinent  subjects will be randomized by [CONTACT_910836]. We will use our perfus ion fMRI/cue paradigm 
to acquire resting baseline  (RB) and SC data to confirm and extend our finding of a DAT -mediated SC -vulnerable 
endophenotype; 9 -repeat carriers will exhibit enhanced brain activity in the interconnected VS/mOFC (regions 
involved in co nditioned drug reward) compared to 10/10 -repeats. Behavioral responses, including craving and 
cigarette consumption , will be significantly greater in 9 -repeat carriers compared to 10/[ADDRESS_1279592], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 8 of 31 Within the 2 x 2 design (9 -repeat carriers vs 10/10 -repeats) X ( baclofen  vs placebo), treatment -seeking  subjects 
will participate in a n 8-week medication regimen. Baclofen  or placebo will be prescribed to non -abstinent subjects  
at the same doses that have been demonstra ted to be clinically effective in our Smoking Reduction Trial. The 
importance of  subjects  being non -abstinent is twofold . First, our goal is to determine if and how baclofen  affects SC 
reactivity independent of WD to disentangle these two major motivators underlying relapse. Second, differences in 
smoking behavior modulate brain activity, so it is important that baclofen - and placebo -treated groups have similar 
smoking characteristics.  
 
3. Study Duration  
This study  requires  a one -week screening phase and 8 weeks of monitoring and medication . All subjects will 
complete 2 MRI sessions (one before starting medication, one following 3 weeks of medication ) and [ADDRESS_1279593] will be enrolled in the  study for approximately 10 weeks.  
 
The entire study will commence 12/01/2012  and will run until 08/31/201 7, approximately . 20 to 25  subjects will be 
randomized each year . 
 
DRUGS OR DEVICES  
 
Baclofen  and matching placebo  
 
STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
General Procedures  
 
*Interested potential subjects wil l be screened  with a structured interview .  Individuals who may qualify are 
scheduled for the consenting visit. If the consent is successful , individuals will be scheduled to come in for physical 
and psychological examinations and to provide a genetics sample.    
*After the results of the examinations are reviewed, the subject will be contact[CONTACT_910837] . If the examinations reveal any health problems that require medical attention , the subject will be 
referred to  their family physician.   
*Subjects will then participate in the 1st fMRI session  and will complete a Cognitive Bias session described in 
detail below. At this appointment, s ubjects will be asked to set a Quit Date to occur one week after the  second 
scann ing session.  
*Subjects will be randomized as described in detail below and participate in several study procedures over the 
course of the study.   
*After 3  weeks , subjects will participate in the 2nd fMRI session  (on treatment condition ).  
*Subjects will be called and reminded of their Quit Date  prior to their next weekly appointment . At this 
appointment  they will receive a “You  can quit smoking booklet” and participate in a counseling session aimed at 
helpi[INVESTIGATOR_910787], find alternative behaviors to engage in and get support from friends 
and family. They will make an attempt to quit smoking at this time.  
*Subjects will continue treatment for a total treatment time of 8 weeks  (i.e., 1st fMRI session followed by 3 weeks 
of medication treatment; 2nd fMRI session and 5 additional weeks of medication treatment) .   
 
 
 
 
Specific Procedures  (Overview Table provided below description)  
 
1. Initial Telephone Screening Procedures (approximately 30 min )  Subjects will be recruited from the Center for 
the Studies of Addiction  (CSA; UPenn), at [ADDRESS_1279594]., through local advertisement , social media (Facebook),  
and “word of mouth”. Subjects  who express interest by [CONTACT_910838]  a telephone screening interview. The  nature of the study , including the number of visits to the center, 
an fMRI description, subject protections and confidentiality , are described. If the caller is still interested , questions 
on general health are asked. If the applicant is determined to be eligible based on this screening , s/he is asked 
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279595], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 9 of 31 whether they accept or decline to participate.  If the caller is still interested , they will be scheduled for an initial 
consenting appointment.   
 
2. Informed Consent Procedures  Visit  (approximately 1 to 1.5 hr)  
Subjects fill out a subject information sheet, which provides contact [CONTACT_3031]. Subjects  are then escorted into a 
private room  in which st udy staff us e a structured confirmatory screen that verifies information acquired during the 
phone screening and elicits study -specific informat ion. Subjects are provided a standard HIPAA form that contains 
privacy laws.  P otential subject s are provided  a 1-paragraph study description  that they read out loud . This reminds 
them of general study procedures and provides an opportunity for us to observe their reading ability. The subject is 
then provided with a copy of the consent form. The  technician reads the study consent aloud  as the prospective 
subjects  read along  silently  and is given the opportunity to ask questions  at any time during this process . If the 
subject  decides to participate, s/he signs the consent in the presence of the research technician.   After signing, 
subjects  are given a study -specific quiz  to ensure study comprehension and must score 100% on the quiz to 
participate in the study.  Incorrect answers are reviewed until the 100% criterion is met.  S/he is also reminded that 
the consent expresses willingness to participate but that t he subsequent screening process will determine final 
eligibility.  Further, s/he is reminded that participation is voluntary , and at any time , s/he may withdraw from the 
study. The subject then watches an fMRI video that simulates the experience of undergo ing an MRI. During this 
visit, the study technician will administer  the Addiction Severity Index measure , obtain a breath sample to measure 
the subject’s carbon monoxide level , and acquire a urine sample to be immediately tested for the presence of illicit  
substances.  
 
Demographics : After a subject consents, they will be asking to fill out  the Treatment Research Center Participant 
Information Form containing subject contact [CONTACT_3031], general information and  demographics, including sexual 
orientation and  gender identity.  
 
Addiction Severity Index (ASI): The ASI is a 35 -minute structured interview yielding composite scores reflecting 
the patient's functioning in seven areas: drug use, alcohol use, medical, employment, psychiatric, legal, and 
family -social problems. Composite scores are computed in each of the areas to provide an indication of recent 
problem severity (0.00 -1.00).  This instrument has been shown to have good reliability and its concurrent and 
predictive validity have been demonstrated.  A res earch technician trained and certified to administer this 
instrument conducts the interview.  
 
Carbon Monoxide (CO) :  A meter will be used that  measure CO, which provides information on recent smoking . 
 
Urinalysis: The research technician will ask the subject to provide a urine sample which will be tested 
immediately for the presence of psychoactive  substances.  If a urine sample tests positive for psychoactive  
substance, other than marijuana,  the subject will be given the opportunity to provide a drug free urine sample 
before being eligible to proceed with the physical and psychological examinations.  We offer this ‘second chance’ 
because sometimes a subject might test positive for a drug that t hey take infrequently and that they did not know 
would come up on a drug screen (sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_910788], anti -anxiety medication). If a subject returns to provide a second 
urine sample more that 30 days after their consent, they will need to be re -consented.  
3. Physical Examination  Visit  (approximately 1 to 1.5 hr) A complete physical examination and laboratory 
evaluation are conducted by a certified nurse practitioner. Baseline laboratory measures include: 1) Blood count 2) 
Blood chemistries 3) EKG 4) Urine Toxicol ogy (presence of psychoactive drugs) and 5) Urine p regnancy test for 
females ; any contraindications will be reviewed by [CONTACT_5989]. A total of approximately 2 tablespoons of 
blood will be taken. A portion (approximately 1 tablespoon) of this blood  sample will also be used to acquire DNA 
samples from each subject . This portion will be stored for later extraction and analyses.  
LABCORP Standard Blood work tests include:  
LP+13AC+CBC/Plt  
 Chemistries:  Glucose, Serum  
  Uric Acid, Serum  
BUN  
 Creatinine,  Serum  
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279596], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 10 of 31 eGFR If NonAfricn Am     OR      eGFR If Africn Am  
BUN/Creatinine Ratio  
Sodium, Serum  
Potassium, Serum  
Albumin, Serum  
Bilirubin, Total  
Alkaline Phosphatase, S  
LDH 
AST (SGOT)  
ALT (SGPT)  
GGT  
 
Lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805]:  
 Cholesterol, Total  
 Triglycerides  
 HDL Cholesterol   
 
CBC and Platelet Ct:  
 WBC  
 RBC  
 Hemoglobin  
 Hematocrit  
 MCV  
 MCH  
 MCHC  
 RDW  
 Platelets  
     
Measures acquired at  the Physical Examination Visit  
Smoking History Assessment  Demographics, family history, smoking topography and  severity of nicotine 
dependence is determined from a laboratory -developed Smoking History Questionnaire (SHQ) that includes  the 
Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence  (FTND).  The FTND is a 6 item, self -report measure of nicotine 
dependence derived from the Fagerstrom Toleranc e Questionnaire.  Internal consistency of the FTND scale is 
satisfactory (Cronbach’s alpha - .64), and it has a high test-retest reliability (re = .88).  Demographics and smoking 
history assessments are necessary for characterizing the population and public ation. (administration time: 
approximately 5 min) 
 
Reasons for Smoking Questionnaire  (RSQ) , is a 34 item, 4 -point likert -scale, self -report measure probing the 
underlying motivations for  smoking . Individual reasons underlying smoking behavior (e.g., to reduce WD symptoms , 
SC exposure , stress)  will be used in conjunction with brain and genetic data to learn more about individual smoking 
behavior that will eventually be helpful in planning personali zed smoking cessation strategies.  (administration time: 
approximately 4 min s) 
 
Toronto Alexithymia Scale  (TAS -20) is a widely used and psychometrically valid instrument to measure 
alexithymia. It is a self -report questionnaire containing 20 items (e.g., I  am often confused about what emotion I am 
feeling) rated on  a 5-point scale from strongly agree (1) to strongly disagree  (5). A high score (>62) indicates a high 
degree of alexithymia. Scoring on this questionnaire is interpreted using a three -factor solution: factor [ADDRESS_1279597] this hypothesis. (administration time: approximately 3 min)  
 
Menstrual Cycle Questionnairre  (MCQ)  This questionnaire will be adminis tered by [CONTACT_910839].  It elicits information on menses status, menstrual cycle length, 
and premenstrual symptoms (PMS). This measure is acquired because we have found that menstruatin g females 
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279598], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/[ADDRESS_1279599] more during smoking cue exposure (101), do poorly in treatment (6, 
102), and have greater brain responses to smoking cues (103) compared to follicular phase females . Further, it is 
acquired because symptoms of PMS and wit hdrawal are poorly distinguished  (104). The questionnaire is designed 
to distinguish symptoms that are clearly PMS from those that are clearly withdrawal. In this way, we wil l have 
information that will help us determine whether potential symptoms are related to withdrawal or PMS. Further, we 
have observed that the brain responses of females who are post -menopausal differ during smoking cue exposure 
compared to menstruating fe males, perhaps revealing different underlying relapse vulnerabilities. This 
questionnaire (and progesterone/estrogen levels) will help us determine if females are pre -, peri - or post -
menopausal [administration time: 1 -3 min (this varies depending on whethe r subject menstruates )]. 
  
4. Psychological Evaluation  Visit   (1 to 1.5 hours)    
The following evaluations  will be completed by a trained clinician:   
MINI  International Neuropsychiatric Interview  (MINI) :  This is a short and accurate structured diagnostic 
psychiatric interview . It will be used to determine current DSM -IV diagnosis of any psychoactive substance 
dependence other than nicotine. Nicotine dependence is often accompanied by [CONTACT_910840]. It will 
also be used to diagnose current severe psychiatric symptoms, e.g., psychosis, dementia, acute suicidal ideation, 
mania or depression requiring antidepressant therapy, or which would make it unsafe for the subject to participate 
in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_910789]. The MINI has excellent inter -rater reliability and very good test -retest 
reliability.  Prior to completion of the MINI, the administering clinician will review the subject’s reported history, in 
addition to any prohibited medications. Since the MINI does not evaluate for acute homicidal ideation, we have 
referenced such a question from anoth er study within our center and have included it in our procedures. 
(administration time is approximately 30 minutes) . 
 
Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI)  is a brief and reliable measure of intelligence that provides 
an estimate of an individ ual’s IQ scores. We will use the two subtest form (vocabulary and matrix reasoning) that 
offers an estimate of an individual’s cognitive functioning.  Individuals with an intelligence quotient of ≤ [ADDRESS_1279600] the cognitive skil ls necessary to participate in several of the study components. 
(administration time: approximately 15 min s). 
 
Following these procedures, [CONTACT_457909] will meet with the assessing clinician to discuss any subject reservations. 
For subjects who we feel may  need additional eligibility verification, we would like to have the option to view their 
medical records.  In these instances, we will first check EPIC to see if the subject has an EMR. If they do not, we 
will work with the subject and their PCP to obtain  the appropriate medical releases to obtain information on their 
recent medication use and diagnoses, when available.  
 
Prospective subjects will be notified  of their eligibility  by [CONTACT_71923] [ADDRESS_1279601] meets eligibility requirements  (i.e., if all values and scores fall within normal 
limits) .   
  
1st MRI session  Visit  (approximately 3 hours)  
Stimuli used will be audio -visual video clips consisting of either smoking -related cues: individuals differing in race, 
age and sex who are smoking and using explicit language designed to induce appetitive desire for a cigarette; o r 
non-smoking -related cues that are similar in content, but individuals relate interesting short stories that do not 
portray cigarette smoking or smoking reminders. Two similarly -valenced cue sets will be employed 
(counterbalanced) to control for habituati on that may occur at Time 2. In prior studies, our SCs elicited robust 
reward -related neuroactivity and subjective craving responses, in conjunction with strong brain/behavioral 
correlates.  
 
MRI scanning will be conducted on a Siemens 3.0 Tesla Trio whole -body scanner (Siemens AG, Erlangen, 
[LOCATION_013]), using a standard Transmit/Receive head coil. A [ADDRESS_1279602] localizer scan (sagittal, axial and coronal) is acquired with FOV = 280 mm, TR/TE 
= 20/5ms, 192x144 matrix, and slice  thickness 5mm. Acquisition parameters for the 3D High -Resolution MPRAGE 
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279603], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/[ADDRESS_1279604] are: FOV = 250 mm, TR/TE = 1620/3ms, 192x256 matrix, slice thickness 1 mm. The 
CASL technique will be used to acquire images during functional MRI (RB an d SC exposure).  Interleaved images 
with and without labeling will be acquired using a gradient echo echo -planar imaging sequence. A delay of [ADDRESS_1279605]. A cquisition 
parameters are: FOV=22cm, matrix=64x64, TR/TE = 3000/17ms, flip angle=90°. Fourteen slices (8mm thickness 
with 1.5mm gap) will be acquired from inferior to superior in a sequential order. Each cue CASL scan with 200 
acquisitions will be 10 minut es in length. The RB CASL scan will be 5 minutes with 100 acquisitions.   
 
Cognitive Bias Computer Tasks:  It is documented that individuals with emotional or dependence disorders exhibit 
biased attention toward stimuli associated with their disorder . This bias appears to diminish following successful 
treatment. Several  tasks  will be administered: the dot -probe attention task, the primed attention task, the implicit 
association task , a go/nogo inhibition task, and a Balloon Analog Risk Taking (BART) task . Generally, subjects  will 
be told that the purpose of the task is to see how quickly and accurately they can detect targets presented on a 
display t erminal.  During the tasks, the subject  will be seated in front of an eye level computer screen. Smoking , 
nonsm oking , pleasant and unpleasant pi[INVESTIGATOR_237645]. Subjects will be given specific 
instructions for each task and will be asked to respond appropriately by [CONTACT_7326] a button. (administration time  is 
approximately 60 minutes ) 
 
The Hami lton Depression Scale (HAM -D) and Hamilton Anxiety Scale (HAM -A): Fourteen -item standardized 
Clinician -administered scales that have been the benchmarks for clinical studies worldwide for almost 30 years. 
Baclofen is an anxiolytic. It’s properties to reduce anxiety may be a mechanism underlying it’s potential effectiveness  
in smoking cessation . Here we will collect data to test that hypothesis. These measures  provide total scores and a 
psychic and somatic c luster of depression and anxiety, respectively.   (administration time: approximately 10 - 20 
minutes for both measures)  
 
ADHD Battery: Brown Attention Deficit Disorder Scale for Adults  [BADDS ], a 40 -item self -report 
questionnaire/interview conducted orally by a clinician , and the self -report measures  Patient Behavior Checklist 
[PBC] , the Wender Utah Rating Scale [WURS] . (administration time approximately 10 - 20 minutes)  
 
A pulse oximeter  probe (attached to finger) and blood pressure cuff will be used to measure blood oxygen level, 
HR/pulse, galvanic skin response, and blood pressure during imaging. Subjects with high or erratic HR are 
suspected of experiencing anxiety/claustrophobia will be esco rted out of the scanner to meet with a clinician.  
 
Craving and WD Questionnaire (CWQ) : A brief, easy to use, self -report measure used in our nicotin e studies. 
The CWQ consists of  items that are designed to measure WD and craving. The CWQ is administered immediately 
prior to and following each SC and non -SC exposure  to examine subjective measures of craving induced by [CONTACT_74657] . 
(administration time: approximately 1 min)  
 
Shiffman -Jarvi k Smoking WD questionnaire  (SJ):  A widely used  standardized  self-report 17-item questionnaire 
developed to assess WD symptomatology. This will be administered pre -and post cue exposure (s) to determine 
whether WD has accrued over the time in the scanner. (administration time: approximately 3 min s) 
  
Modified Cigarette Evaluation Questionnaire (mCEQ) : Assesses the degree to which subjects experience the 
reinforcing effects of smoking. It is a standardized, validated and reliable measure with multi -item domain s on 
smoking satisfaction, psychological reward and aversion and craving reduction. Confirmatory factor analysis 
exceeds 0.90. Baclofen has been shown to modify  how one assesses smoking (105). This might be one mechanism 
underlying its potential efficacy. T he mCEQ will be administered to assess the effects of baclofen  on the evaluation 
of subject’s last cigarette . (administration time: approximately 3 min s) 
 
Blood:  On scan days, all females will provide a blood sample  (approx.. 2 tablespoons)  for biochemical verification 
of cycle  phase . Bloods will be tested for levels of progesterone and estradiol.  
 
Urine Pregnancy Test: All females of childbearing  potential will be assessed for pregnancy  with a urine test  prior 
to being allowed to participate in the MRI.  
 
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279606], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 13 of 31 Urinalysis : Urines are analyzed for cotinine , the primary metabolite of nicotine , at this visit , Scan Day [ADDRESS_1279607] from further 
study participation .   
  
Cigarette filters for solanesol testing : Cigarette filters will be collected and analyzed for solanesol, a  
naturally occurring substance present in tobacco that provides a precise mea surement of smoke  exposure.  
 
Alcohol Craving Measures –. It has been shown (see Background and Significance section above) that baclofen 
reduces craving and relapse in alcohol dependence. Subjects in this study are not alcohol dependent, but they have 
varying amounts of use. Since drinking alcohol and smoking often go hand in hand, we have added the following 
two measures to examine whether baclofen reduces alcohol urges and/or drinking.   
 
The Alcohol Urge Questionnaire (AUQ)  (Bohn et al., 1995) is an 8 -item, self -administered state measure 
assessing the urge for an alcoholic drink at the time the questionnaire is completed and provides an index of acute 
craving. The AUQ contains four items pertaining to the desire for a drink : two items regarding expectations of 
positive effects from drinking, and two items relating to the inability to avoid drinking if alcohol were present. This 
measure has strong correlations with measures of alcohol dependence and severity.  
 
Timeline Follow  Back (TLFB):  The TLFB will be used to measure subjects’ alcohol use. Baseline 30 -day 
TLFB is administered at the pre -treatment scan (week 1). At the on -treatment scan TLFB is acquired to measure 
use between baseline and present. Finally, at the follow -up visit the TLFB will cover the last month.   
 
Randomization : Subjects will be unequally randomized  at a rate of [ADDRESS_1279608], the titration schedule, taper  and potential dose reductions 
can be managed. Placebo -treated subjects will follow the identical schedule. This dose was chosen based on the 
results from our Baclofen for Smoking Reduction Study  wherein we found this dose to be effective at reducing the 
number of cigarettes smoked per day (72).  
 
As with any study in which sub jects are asked to take a medication, compliance is an issue. Once a week , the 
number of pi[INVESTIGATOR_910790] a measure 
of the amount of medication consumed by [CONTACT_423] t hroug hout the week. To improve tolerance and thereby 
[CONTACT_910841], baclofen will be introduced slowly to minimize the possibility of undesirable side effects , such as 
sedation. The study physician or the nurse s under the physician’s supervision  will monitor admin istration of study 
medication . See Dispensation Schedule ( below ). The key describes how the medication will be administered.  P = 
placebo, O = 10 mg baclofen, X = 20 mg baclofen.  There are two pi[INVESTIGATOR_910791].  These are packaged by [CONTACT_910842] e the titration and taper.  Once the full dose is reached (Day 4) and i f a subject experiences 
discomfort or adverse events that may be related to the medication the dose will be decreased until symptoms 
remit. This will be accomplished by [CONTACT_910843] (Study Physician and Nurse s), 
who will determine if the adverse events might be medication -related . The subject will then be instructed to only 
take one of the two pi[INVESTIGATOR_910792] . This lower dose may be maintained 
throughout the study if the subject so desires. In our ten years experience with this medication and our ongoing 
protocol (CURE Protocol # 813953 ) we have had a  few subject s request a reduction in dose  so we are prepared 
for this possibility.  
 
Baclofen Dosing Schedule  
Study Day  [ADDRESS_1279609], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 14 of 31  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2nd MRI session Vi sit (approximately 2 hours)  
The 2nd MRI session takes place after a subject has been on the medication for [ADDRESS_1279610] will be asked to take their medication in the presence of Study Staff [Baclofen has a short life with maximum 
effects at 2 hours and wanin g thereafter. Thus ingesting the medication in front of study staff will ensure that the 
medication was ingested and that its effects will be observable during the MRI as well as standardize time since 
dose]. Otherwise, t his visit will be exactly the same as the first MRI session described above except cognitive bias 
testing will not be conducted.  
 
At the weekly appointment f ollowing the second scan the subject will make a quit smoking attempt. To assist the 
subject in meeting this goal, study staff will m eet with the subject to go through the “You can quit smoking’ pamphlet  
during this appointment  which is an interactive tool designed to help people recognize relapse triggers, provide 
alternative strategies when craving occurs, and how to acquire support from friends and family. Explicit instructions 
for how to conduct this session are included wit h the uploaded IRB documents (Titled: Smoking Booklet Script).  
Monitoring of smoking behavior is accomplished with subject Daily Diaries, weekly phone calls with study staff, 
weekly meetings with study staff, CO measurements and urine cotinines.  
 
Measure s collected at Weekly Study  Visits  
− Adverse Events Questionnaire  is used to monitor adverse events during the administration of study 
medication and is administered and maintained by [CONTACT_910844] .  Information about the 
onset, severity, and possible relationship to study medication, and outcome of action taken is recorded at 
each study visit.  All locally relevant Internal Review Board (IRB) regulations and practices concerning 
adverse event reporting are followed.  Serious adverse events wil l be reported to the UPenn SOM IRB within 
24 hours.  
− Daily Diary :  Subjects are provided a Daily Diary in which they record medication adherence and smoking 
behavior ( e.g., cigarettes per day , craving , pleasure received from smoking ). These forms are filled  out daily 
and collected at each visit.  
− Carbon Monoxide (CO) :  A meter will be used that  measure CO, which provides information on recent 
smoking . 
− Modified Cigarette Evaluation Questionnaire (mCEQ) : Assesses the degree to which subjects 
experience the reinforcing effects of smoking. It is a standardized, validated and reliable measure with multi -
item domains on smoking satisfaction, psychological reward and aversion and craving reduction. 
Confirmatory factor analysis exceeds 0.90. Baclofen has been shown to modify how one assesses smoking 
(105). This might be one mechanism underlying its potential efficacy. T he mCEQ will be administered to 
assess the effects of baclofen  on the evaluation  of subject’s last cigarette . (administration time: 
approximately 3 mins)  
 
Measure collected at Follow -up Visit  
− Subject Treatment Opi[INVESTIGATOR_910793] (TOS):  During their Follow -up Visit with the Nurse, the subject will be 
asked to fill out a [ADDRESS_1279611], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/[ADDRESS_1279612]’s thoughts on the medications level of 
effectiveness and in what specific areas the subject saw improvement.  
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279613], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 16 of 31  
Table of Measures  
  Consen t 
Visit  Eval  
Visit  Scan  
Visit 1  Scan  
Visit 2  Quit  
Wk Sub-Study 
Scan+ Wkly  
Visits  Wk 8  
Visit  FU  
 
Patient Information Sheet  X         
Confirmatory Screen  X         
Consenting Process  X         
    ASI X         
MRI video  X         
Breath sample (CO)  X X X X X X X X  
Record handedness  X         
Daily Diary    X X X X X X  
mCEQ    X X X X X X  
SHQ   X        
RSQ   X        
TAS  X        
Smoke and collect filter    X***       
MRI safety sheet    X X  X    
Pulse Oximeter    X X      
HAM -A and HAM -D   X X      
Physical Evaluation   X        
    Blood sample (2 Tbsp)   X Females  Females       
    Urine sample  X X X X  X  X  
    Pregnancy        
    Test (Females)   X X X  X    
    MCQ   X        
    EKG   X        
Psychological Eval 
 (Clinician)   X  X 
      
Computer Tasks    X       
Medication Monitoring  
(Nurse)   X X X  X X X X 
   Return Medication Card and Daily Diary      
   Receive and discuss medication issues  
   AEs recorded  
Attempt to Quit      X     
   Receive Quit Counseling     X      
S-J   XX***  XX***       
CWQ    XX***  XX***    
   
WSRS -Alcohol       XX***     
AUQ    X X  X  X  
TLFB    X X  X  X  
TOS         X 
Completer certificate, 
resource packet          X 
  Between weekly visit phone call to discuss medication issues and smoking behavior (between appointments)  
                    *Part of the physical  ** Part of the Psych Eval  *** Collected pre - and post scan   + Occurs the same day as the Quit Wk appt
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279614], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 17 of 31  
2. Analys es 
Imaging Data Processing : Prior to performing analyses, brain data are examined for gross movement and full 
image acquisition. An SPM -based ASL data processing toolbox is used for data analyses. ASL image pairs are 
realigned to the mean of all control image s and spatially smoothed with a 3D isotropic Gaussian kernel with FWHM 
of 10mm. CBF image series are generated using a simplified two -compartment model with the sinc interpolation 
method for CBF calculations. The mean control image of each subject ’s data i s co-registered to a HR 3D T1 
structural image using the mutual information based co -registration algorithm provided by [CONTACT_237777] 8. The same co -
registration parameters are used to co -register the CBF maps to the structural image. The structural image is then 
spatially normalized to the MNI standard brain. The same parameters are used to normalize the CBF images to the 
MNI standard space. Each subject ’s normalized mean control images are segmented using SPM 8. The segmented 
gray matter masks are averaged and the ov erlap of subject ’s gray matter is extracted. This final mask is used for 
calculating global CBF for each session.  
 
Imaging Data Analyses:  Voxel -wise analyses of the CBF data are conducted on each subject using a general 
linear model (GLM). Global CBF time course is included in the model as a covariate to examine the effects of 
baclofen . Analyses are conducted on absolute (RB) and relative (d uring SC exposure) CBF. No temporal smoothing 
is applied. Contrasts between conditions (Time 1 versus Time 2) are defined in the GLM model to assess the voxel 
by [CONTACT_237778]. Using the corresponding parametric maps of t his contrast ( maps), random effects analysis 
is employed to test for a significant main effect of condition with a SPM map of the T statistic at each voxel for 
population inference for each session for the placebo and baclofen  groups (second -level analysis).  A 2x2 factorial 
design m atrix is used to assess the effects of the pharmacological manipulation by [CONTACT_237779] ( baclofen  vs 
placebo) and condition (Time 1 vs Time 2) as the two factors. This two -stage analysis is theoretically equivalent to 
a [ADDRESS_1279615] (e.g. , the VS/mOFC). In this approach, the time course of all voxels 
within this region of interest will be extracted, and the averaged time course will be used as the regressor to check 
the correlation between the seed region and the rest of brain. As an alter native, we can repeat the same correlation 
analysis but using the principal component of all time courses extracted from the ROI as the reference function. For 
each subject, the ß map of the voxel wise connectivity analysis (correlation analysis) will be c ollected, and group 
analysis through random effects using one -sample t -tests will be performed to assess the across -subject effects of 
the brain connectivity to the seed region of interest. Neuropsychological and behavioral scores can be used as 
simple reg ressors to examine their relationship to connectivity for a brain target. Though our focus for the project is 
VS/mOFC connectivity due to its role in emotional arousal, the same analyses can be performed for other regions 
of interest (e.g., lateral OFC).  
 
Behavioral Analyses : Statistical significance tests use an alpha of .05 unless otherwise noted.  Continuous 
demographic variables (e.g., age, education, FTND, CPD, pack years, TAS, RSQ , SJ, mCEQ and the CWQ 
composite scores, latency to smoke, and cigarette  consumption) are checked for normality, transformed if 
necessary, and summarized by [CONTACT_237781], standard deviations and ranges. Scores on each factor will be 
included as covariates of interest with respect to perfusion fMRI SC data and genetic vari ance in DA -ergic 
components. Analysis of variance will be used to assess demographic differences across groups. Nominal 
demographic variables (e.g., race, sex, genotype) are summarized by [CONTACT_910845].  Demographic (age, years education, monthly income) and clinical (depression, 
anxiety and psychiatric symptom scores) will also be summarized and compared across the treatment groups.   
 
Genetics Analysis : Genomic DNA will be extracted from antico agulated venous blood samples using a standard 
salting out method. Genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_457754]4 and DAT VNTR will be performed using standard methods as 
described previously. DRD2 and COMT genotypes will be determined using the Applied Biosystems Inc. (ABI) 
Assa ys-on-demand (ABI, Foster City, CA, [LOCATION_003]) SNP genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_457755]. Genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_910794] -Weinberg equilibrium determination and genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_31081] 20% 
duplicates for each marker.  
 
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279616], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 18 of 31 Solaneso l Assay : Cigarette filters from cigarettes smoked at specific study time points will be collected and stored 
for future analysis . 
 
Sample Size Determination and Power : Using our published findings examining the effects of the DAT 
polymorphism on SC reactiv ity, we calculated an effect size of 0.[ADDRESS_1279617] of COMT and 5 -HTT polymorphisms (N=48), 
accounting for 40% of the inter -individual variance in the averaged BOLD response of amygdala, hippocampal and 
limbic cortical regions elicited by [CONTACT_910846]. We will examine the interaction between COMT and DAT 
genotypes first as we have preliminary data suggesting a gene -gene intera ction on cue reactivity (not presented 
here). We expect that we will have 15 -20 subjects per group (9 -repeat carriers / Val carriers, 9 -repeat carriers / Met 
homozygotes, 10/10 -repeats Val carriers, 10/10 -repeats / Val carriers . Groups will not be large en ough to examine 
the contribution of more than one gene on medication response.  
 
3.  Confidentiality  
There is the risk of breach of confidentiality of subject  information.   
Protection:   All medical and research records are accessed only by [CONTACT_910847] s, or by [CONTACT_910848], the FDA, or other government agencies as required and permitted 
by [CONTACT_2371].  S ubjects  are identified by a code , not by [CONTACT_2300], on the computerized database.  As part of consent 
procedures, subjects  are advised of the precautions taken to preserve confidentiality.  
 
How will confidentiality of data be maintained?  Check all that apply.  
 
 Paper -based records will be kept in a secure location and only be accessible to personnel involved in 
the study.  
 Computer -based files w ill only be made available to personnel involved in the study through the use of 
access privileges and passwords.  
 Prior to access to any study -related information, personnel will be re quired to sign statements agreeing 
to protect the security and confidentiality of identifiable information.  
 Whenever feasible, identifiers will be removed from study -related information.  
 A Certificate of Confidentiality will be obtained, because the research could place the subject at risk of 
criminal or civil liability or cause damage to the subject’s financial standing, employability, or liability.  
  A waiver of documentation of consent is being requested, becau se the only link between the subject    
 and the study would be the consent document and the primary risk is a breach of confidentiality.  (This is  
 not an option for FDA -regulated research.)  
  Precautions are in place to ensure the data is secure by [CONTACT_71994], because the  
 research involves web -based surveys.   
  Audio and/or video recordings wi ll be transcribed and then destroyed to eliminate audible identification  
 of subjects.  
      Other (specify):     
 
4. Subject Privacy/Protected Health Information  
Please see above.  
 
5.  Tissue Specimens  
Blood and urine will be collected at the initial physical evaluation to assess general health. On scanning 
days , an additional blood  sample  will be collected from females to assess menstrual cycle phase  and/or stage .  
 
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279618], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 19 of 31 Genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_007] : DNA for genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_910795] ,, which will be d one by [CONTACT_910849]. Subjects who decide to participate  in the study  
will provide a genetics sample. Samples will be stored in a lab located within The Center for Neurobiology  at the 
University of Pennsylvania.  
 Only study staff will have access to the sample. The genetic testing laboratory will not have access 
identifiers and information will be stored in restricted locked rooms within locked cabinets. Stored DNA will be 
used only with the permission of the princ ipal investigator for studies relating to the identification and treatment of 
subjects with substance abuse disorders.  
 
RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT  
 
1. Risks and Protections  
Risks associated with Magnetic Fields and the MRI environment: There are no known neg ative health effects 
of the magnetic field on the body. However, the magnetic field may move or cause dysfunction of magnetic objects 
in or on the body such as surgically placed steel clips, cardiac pacemakers, pumps, prostheses or bullets.  
Protection:  Subjects having metal in their bodies are excluded from participation in the study. Pregnant women or 
those not using an acceptable form of birth control will be excluded from the study. Subjects who have been 
metalworkers will not be eligible to participate  in the study (unless a radiologist confirms that there is no danger), 
because they may have small metallic particles in their eyes.  Patients are told that to communicate any discomfort 
with any of the stimuli or with the MR environment immediately. All m etal must be removed from subject’s clothing 
and pockets.  No metal is allowed in the magnet room at any time. The study will be discontinued at any time and 
immediately at the subject’s request.  They will be told not to attempt to exit by [CONTACT_910850].  
 All the software used to run the fMRI sessions conforms to Specific Absorption Rate and Gradient Slew 
Rate limits defined by [CONTACT_1622] (8 watts/kg). All of the hardware used for these studies has been approved by  [CONTACT_910851] (CAMRIS). Some of the imaging sequences 
and/or radio frequency coils are experimental and are not FDA approved but are considered non -significant risk 
investigational devices.  
 Regard less of whether or not the subject has requested an MRI report, if study personnel determine a 
subject’s MRI images are unusual, those images will be forwarded to the Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_910796] a certified neuroradiologist. T he neuroradiologist will inform study personnel of any potential 
problems.  The P.I. and/or other appropriate study staff will meet with the subject to discuss his/her MRI and the 
neuroradiologist’s recommendations, if any.  If necessary, the subject will be strongly encouraged to follow up with 
his/her primary care physician.   
  
Risks associated with Baclofen Administration: Baclofen has been used safely as an anti -spastic for many 
years, but it can be associated with some sedation or drowsiness (particularly in the early dosing). Its effects are 
often transient and can be alleviated or eliminated by [CONTACT_910852].  Effects are seldom severe enough 
to warrant withdrawal of the medication. Baclofen should not be stopped abruptly after chron ic use (the body adjusts 
to the muscle relaxant effects and abrupt cessation can result in muscle  spasm ). The most common adverse 
reactions associated with baclofen are transient drowsiness, daytime sedation, dizziness, weakness, and fatigue.  
Less common side effects include skin rash and itching, shortness of breath, problems in urinating, constipation or 
diarrhea, dizziness, headache, nausea, irregular heartbeat or chest pain.  Ovarian cysts have been found in about 
4% of patients with  multiple sclerosis that were treated with b aclofen for up to one year. In most cases , these cysts 
disappeared spontaneously while patients continued to receive the drug. Ovarian cysts are estimated to occur 
spontaneously in approximately 1% to 5% of the normal female populat ion.   
Protection:  Good clinical practice will be followed in terms of regularly monitoring patients for any side effects of 
the medication. Pregnant women or those not using an acceptable form of birth control will be excluded from the 
study. A physician will meet with the subject to prescribe baclofen and discuss its possible side effects. Subjects 
will be cautioned not to drive or operate machinery during the first few days, and will be instructed not to combine 
the use of baclofen with alcohol or other sedating drugs or medications.  Subjects will be carefully monitored by [CONTACT_910853].  
Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_163062]:  If the patient is experiencing discomfort due to side effects, reducing the dose and/or early 
termination will be recommended.   Significant side effects (chest pain, irregular heartbeat) would occasion breaking 
of the blind, removal from the protocol, and provision of appropriate clinical care as indicated.  Baclofen will be 
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279619], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 20 of 31 tapered according to a pre -determined, conservative schedule following the cue/fMRI session.  Subjects will 
continue to be monitored by [CONTACT_653944] s/he is weaned off of the medication and is not experiencing any 
discomfort.  
 
Risks associated with Blood Drawing:  There is a slight risk associated with the drawing of blood. Bleeding, 
bruising  (only 1 -2% significant enough to last more than 24 hrs) or infection (has not been observed due to 
appropriate sterilization and proficie nt phlebotomy techniques of staff) may occur at the site of venipuncture.   
Protection:    Only experienced medical staff will draw bloods under sterile conditions, minimizing any risk.  The 
amount of blood drawn (55 cc) will not pose a risk.  Standard poli cies for safe handling of blood samples will be 
followed to protect subjects and staff.  All individuals who will be handling blood are required to participate in 
specialized Biohazard training through the University of Pennsylvania.  
 
Risks associated wit h Confidentiality: Every attempt will be made by [CONTACT_910854] a subject says he/she intends to harm himself or another or that 
he/she has abused a child or an elderly per son. However, authorized representatives of the Sponsor(s) (if any), the 
University of Pennsylvania, as well as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), will have access to and may copy, 
both medical records and records from participation in this study. Thi s access is necessary to insure the accuracy 
of the findings and subject safety and welfare. If any publication or presentations result from this research, subjects 
will not be identified by [CONTACT_2300]. The data are kept in secure, locked areas and access to the se areas is possible only 
through the investigator or research technician.  
Protection:  All possible measures will be taken to ensure the protection of subject privacy. Study procedures will 
be conducted in environments that are only accessible by [CONTACT_910855] (e.g. private offices or interview rooms). 
Subjects will only be asked questions that directly relate to study participation. Subjects will be reminded that they 
do not have to answer any questions that make them feel uncomfortable, although not ans wering certain questions 
may disqualify them if their safety cannot be ensured. Please refer to the HIPPA section for more information . All 
of the study staff who will have access to collected data are listed in the study delegation log. If a new technicia n is 
hired for this study , they will be trained and have access to the data. In addition, the following individuals and 
University of Pennsylvania organizations may use or disclose subjects personal health information for this research 
project: - The Princ ipal Investigator and the Investigators study team (other University staff associated with the 
study) - The University of Pennsylvania Institutional Review Boards (the committees charged with overseeing 
research on human subjects) and University of Pennsyl vania Office of Regulatory Affairs - The University of 
Pennsylvania Office of Human Research (the office which monitors research studies) - Authorized members of the 
University of Pennsylvania and the University of Pennsylvania Health System and School of Medicine workforce 
who may need to access subjects information in the performance of their duties ( e.g., to provide treatment, to ensure 
integrity of the research, accounting or billing matters).  
 
Specific to Genetics protections:  No one other than study staff will have access to the blood. Blood samples will 
be coded with no subject identifiers according to the procedures of the Center for the Studies of Addiction. The 
genetic testing laboratory will not have access to your name, and all information will be stored in restricted areas 
and locked cabinets. Subjects will be identified by [CONTACT_910856].  As part of consent 
procedures, subjects will be advised of the precautions taken to preserve confidentiality. DNA samples will be s tored 
in a laboratory at The Center for Neurobiology at the University of Pennsylvania.  Access to stored samples will be 
limited to approval by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Franklin (215 -222-3200) or her designee.  Future studies involving stored DNA samples 
must receive Universi ty of Pennsylvania approval and will be limited to studies related to addictions.  DNA samples 
will not become part of the clinical record and will not be made available for commercial use.  
 
2.  Potential Study Benefits  
Subjects may benefit from the close medical monitoring, which may assist in quitting smoking In comparison, 
the benefits to society in gaining knowledge about the brain substrates involved in tobacco dependence are great.  
The studies are well grounded in pre -clinical research literature, hy pothesis -driven, and employ state -of-the-art 
instruments and expertise. Important and significant contributions to drug addiction research are substantial and 
outweigh the few (well -managed) risks in the study.  
 
3.  Alternatives to Participation  
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279620], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 21 of 31 Regardless  of the reason, if an individual interested in smoking reduction/cessation help does not participate 
in this study, he or she may be informed of non -research smoking reduction/cessation programs available within 
the Penn Health System or around Philadelphi a. These individuals may also be informed of other available smoking 
help options (e.g. NRT, American Cancer Society programs, etc.).  
 
4. Management of Information for Multi -center Research where a Penn Investigator is the Lead Investigator 
of a multi - center study, or Penn is the lead site in a multi -site study.   
N/A 
 
5.  Risk/Benefit Assessment  
Risks associated with this project are minimal because of the described protections that will be implemented . 
Subjects may benefit from the close medical monito ring, which may assist in quitting smoking  In comparison, the 
benefits to society in gaining knowledge about the brain substrates involved in tobacco dependence are great.  The 
studies are well grounded in pre -clinical research literature, hypothesis -drive n, and employ state -of-the-art 
instruments and expertise. Important and significant contributions to drug addiction research are substantial and 
outweigh the few (well -managed) risks in the study.  
 
6. SUBJECT COMPENSATION  
⚫ $6 for travel for each schedule d appointment (all visits, even if subject does  not pass the consent/screening  ⚫$25 
for the consenting  appointment  (Consent Visit)  
⚫ $25 for a DNA sample ( Physical Visit )  
⚫ $25 if the physical and psychological evaluations are completed on different . 
⚫ $[ADDRESS_1279621] scanning session ( Scan Day 1 Visit)  
⚫ $[ADDRESS_1279622] is double -booked and not scanned .  A participant is only eligible to be double -booked once.  
⚫ $100 for second scanning session ( Scan Day 2 Visit ) 
⚫ $[ADDRESS_1279623] scanning session (Optiona l Sub -study Scan Day 3 Visit)  
⚫ $[ADDRESS_1279624]  
⚫ $30 additional compensation of treatment subjects for study completion (Follow up Visit).  
 
Payments will be made with either cash or GreenPhire Clincards. Clincards  are reloadable prepaid cards that may 
be used for in -store purchases (by [CONTACT_237770] “credit” or “debit” option), online purchases, ATM, and cash 
advances at a bank. Funds added to the card should be available immediately, however, in some cases it may take 
[ADDRESS_1279625] it, to be determined by [CONTACT_910857]’s Office  at the 
University of Pennsylvania  whom is monitoring Clincard registration/subject activity.  
 
7. Subject Monitoring  
 
 Overview:  Subjects will be examined and monitored by [CONTACT_910858].  Psychological testing will be administered by [CONTACT_910859][INVESTIGATOR_11437]. Subjects will be consented and monitored 
by [CONTACT_910860]. The study will be overseen by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_910797].  
All study personn el are required to be familiar with the study protocol.  Meetings will be held weekly with the 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_910798] -approved protocol and HIPAA regulat ions. Research technicians are trained by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_910799].  Research technicians are 
required to initial and date each study procedure as it is carried out. 
 
Technician  Monitoring of Subject :  Subjects will meet with the Research technician at each visit to discuss 
issues, monitor study progress, collect Daily Diaries,  answer any questions the subjects may have , and  schedule 
appointments.  Subjects will be called in between weekly appointments by [CONTACT_910861] . 
 
Medical Staff  Monitoring of Subject :  The study medical doctor reviews all physical examination results to 
determine whether the subject m eets general good he alth requirements. The nurse  will meet with the subjects at 
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279626], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/[ADDRESS_1279627] previous 
weeks’ pi[INVESTIGATOR_910800] h regard to the medication.  The 
nurse will measu re vital signs and go over the  Adverse Events sheet with the subject.  
 
8. Data and Safety Monitoring  
 
Who will monitor this study?  Check all that apply.  
 
This is a low risk, single -site, Phase II study, involving a medication already FDA approved and marketed for the 
treatment of other illnesses.  The study design is straightforward and familiar to the research staff at the CSA.  
Therefore, one monitor should be sufficient to complete the monitoring proce ss. 
 
√ Principal Investigator  
   [INVESTIGATOR_910801] (if mandated by [CONTACT_71995])  
   Medical monitor  
   Safety monitoring committee  
 √Center for the Studies of Addiction Coordinator:  A study monitor who is knowledgeable in the protocol,      
  regulations, and university approved procedures for conducting and monitoring clinical investigations will be    
  assigned to monitor the study. The monitor will be selected from one of the Stu dy Coordinators working at the  
  University of Pennsylvania Center for the Studies of Addictions.  
 
Written monitoring procedures for monitoring clinical investigations, proposed by [CONTACT_910862] e the quality of the study and to assure that each person 
involved in the monitoring process carries out his or her duties.  
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_17459] a record of the findings, conclusions, and action taken to correct errors noted 
by [CONTACT_910863].  
Monitoring Responsibilities  (conducted by [CONTACT_408]) . The monitor , in accordance with local and NIH 
requirements, should ensure that the study is conducted and documented properly by [CONTACT_237763]:  
a. Verifying that the investigator has adequate qualification and resources and these remain adequate 
throughout the study period, and that the staff and facilities, including laboratories and equipment, are 
adequate to safely and properly conduct the stu dy and these remain adequate throughout the study period.  
b. Verifying that the investigator follows the approved protocol and all approved amendment(s), if any.  
c. Verifying that written informed consent was obtained before each subject's participation in the study.  
d. Verifying that the investigator is enrolling only eligible subjects.  
e. Reporting the subject recruitment rate.  
f. Verifying that source data/documents and other study records are accurate, complete, kept up to date, 
and maintained.  
g. Verifying that the investigator provides all the required reports, notifications, applications, and 
submissions, and that these documents are accurate, complete, timely, legible, dated and identify the study.  
h. Checking the accuracy and completeness of  the CRF entries, source data/documents, and other study 
related records against each other.  
i. Informing the investigator of any CRF entry error, omission, or illegibility. The monitor should ensure that 
appropriate corrections, additions, or deletions a re made, dated, explained, and initialed by [CONTACT_77760] a member of the study staff who is authorized to initial CRF changes for the investigator. This 
authorization should be documented.  
j. Determining whether all adverse events (AE's) are app ropriately reported within the time periods required 
by [CONTACT_27727], the protocol, the IRB/IEC , the applicable regulatory requirement(s).  
k. Determining whether the investigator is maintaining the essential documents.  
l. Communicating deviations from the protoco l, SOP's, GCP, and the applicable regulatory requirements to 
the investigator and taking appropriate action designed to prevent recurrence of the detected deviations.  
m. Follow the University SOP's, GCP, and the applicable regulatory requirements.  
 
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279628], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/[ADDRESS_1279629] form (CRF) that is designed to reduce 
coding errors and promote data quality. Each page of the CRF will contain a header that includes the title of the 
protocol, th e protocol number, the subject randomization number, subject  screening number, and visit number. The 
technicians are responsible for data entry. The research charts will be maintained separately from the CRF and will 
contain subject  information that is not  entered in the study CRF database.  
Regulatory Binder:  A detailed Regulatory Binder will be assembled by [CONTACT_5051].  Any changes to 
procedures are documented in this section. This binder is the backbone of quality assurance.  We use this binder 
to train any new study personnel and for reference so that our policies and procedures are standard throughout all 
phases of the protocol. The ‘Measures’ section of the binder addresses, specifically all forms and instruments that 
comprise the CRF. A Table of Contents has been prepared that contains all the forms used in the study.  
The study manual will include  
· study protocol research team names, titles, roles and responsibilities, work and home phone numbers  
· purpose of study , study intent and rational e 
· all study procedures for each team member (PIs, technicians, study coordinator, pharmacists, nurses,  
physicians, etc.)  
· recruitment and S screening procedures  
· intake procedures  
· study phase procedures  
· completion/discontinuation procedures  
 
Data Collection Training  
The CSA provides comprehensive data collection training for all research technicians (RTs).  RTs receive training 
on how to proceed with problematic S ubjects .  RTs are extensively trained on all MRI procedures. RTs are trained 
to follow the general data collection guidelines listed below.   
· RTs should be present when subject  is completing instruments.  
· Research interviews and evaluations should be administered in a private, quiet office or area.  
· Instruments are introduced and explained the same way each time to each subject . 
· Order of research assessments should be maintained, as much as possible.  
· Order of specimens obtained should be maintained as much as possible.  
· RTs should show an interested, polite, appropriate, and h elpful demeanor.  
 
Quality assurance (QA) procedures  
Changes to the CRF and the study database are strictly monitored.  After a single line is drawn through the corrected 
data point, the RT documents the change by [CONTACT_910864] o f the change adjacent to the 
correction. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_237620]:  
· Checking all data during or immediately after study visits.  
· Checking charts at predetermined points during the study (initials and date of checker are required on e ach 
form checked).  
· Performing the initial data check after a few charts have been entered.  
· Performing a 10% data check when all data have been entered.  
 
Typi[INVESTIGATOR_237621]:  
· Monitoring and reporting on RT interviewing and data collection proficiency at subject  study visits.  
· Checking charts at predetermined points during the study (initials and date of PI [INVESTIGATOR_910802]).  
· Supervising study database checks.  
· When databases, in Filemaker Pro or other applica tions, are developed by [CONTACT_16133], only the data 
checked by [CONTACT_237767].  Data sets are double checked in pairs by [CONTACT_237768].  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_910803].  
· The PI [INVESTIGATOR_910804].  
· PI [INVESTIGATOR_910805] (inclusion/exclusion checklist) for potential subjects.   
· PI [INVESTIGATOR_237626] a weekly basis  
  
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279630], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/[ADDRESS_1279631] s’ initials, 
study number, CRF number, date of birth, race, medication start dates, subject  status (active, drop -out, completer, 
follow -up) and relevant dates and comments.  
 
Data Storage on Site   
The CRFs and research charts a re stored in file rooms specifically designed for data storage.  All study data are 
housed in locked file cabinets.  Only designated members of the research team have access to the file cabinets 
containing research data.  Data are kept on site for not less  than three years after the subject  has completed the 
final assessment.  Data are then eligible for archiving.  
 
9. APPENDIX 1: (Sub -study) Baclofen effects on brain and behavior in treatment -seeking cigarette 
smokers who drink heavily  
 
9.[ADDRESS_1279632] suggested a strong correlation between smoking and alcohol use  (106). 
Specifically, it has been estimated that 20 –25% of smokers are also heavy alcohol users (107), and this co -
occurrence has been associated with poorer outcomes in terms of physical health and smoking cessation quit 
rates  (107, 108). In the context of a quit attempt, alcohol use has been associated with increased risk for a 
smoking lapse, such that heavy drinking smokers are 4 times more likely  to experience a smoking lapse in the 
context of a drinking epi[INVESTIGATOR_36192] 8 times more likely to lapse in the context of a heavy drinking epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865]  (108). 
 
Several theories have been proposed to explain the strong co -occurrence of alcohol and cigarette use. For 
example, participants with a past history of alcohol dependence have reported greater reinforcement from nicotine 
administration as compared to those who were never alcohol dependent  (109). Given that baclofen is a 
GABAergic agent that has been shown to reduce cue -induced craving and brain activity in reward -related regions, 
baclofen may have a similar effect on alcohol cue -induced craving. To date, however, there are no studies 
examining th e effects of baclofen on brain and behavioral responses to both smoking and alcohol cue reminders 
in cigarette smokers seeking smoking cessation treatment who drink heavily. As such, this sub -study will yield 
novel findings on baclofen’s effects on brain a nd behavioral responses associated with co -occurring alcohol and 
tobacco use.  
 
9.2 Risk/Benefits  
Potential Risks  
This sub -study is part of a larger, ongoing study described above. As such, the potential risks are the same as the 
larger study.  
 
Potential Be nefits  
In addition to the benefits described in the larger, ongoing study, this sub -study benefits society by [CONTACT_910865] a potential improvement in the effectiveness of treatment for problem drinking in cigarette 
smokers, which may reduce th e personal and societal costs associated with these problems.  
Risk Benefit Ratio  
The potential benefits of this study far outweigh the potential risks. Co -occurring alcohol and tobacco use is a 
serious concern with only mildly effective pharmacotherapy. Ev en in the best programs, relapse rates are high. 
Individuals accepted into this study will receive close medical and psychiatric monitoring. Subjects will be 
screened prior to admission into the study and those at risk for adverse reactions will be exclude d.  
 
10. Sub -Study Objectives  
Objective 1:  Examine the effects of baclofen on brain responses to alcohol cues (compared to non -alcohol cues) 
and drinking behavior compared to placebo following [ADDRESS_1279633], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 25 of 31   Hypothesis 1:   Baclofen will modulate resting brain activity —specifically, activity in the lateral orbitofrontal cortex. 
Baclofen will also modulate alcohol cue reactivity: activity in reward -related regions will be blunted in subjects 
receiving ba clofen, while those receiving placebo will display the original signature [CONTACT_910875]. Baclofen will correct 
vulnerabilities by [CONTACT_910812], regions known to respond to 
reward and in the insula, which is c onsidered an autonomic signaling relay station and plays a role in drug craving.  
  
11. Sub -study Design  
11.1 General Design  
This optional sub -study involves adding one additional MRI scanning session to the larger, ongoing main study 
(described above). Twenty (20) individuals who are seeking smoking cessation treatment and drink heavily 
(drinking five or more alcoholic drinks o n the same occasion on five or more days in the past 30 days). The 
additional scan will occur after [ADDRESS_1279634] of the same procedures as the 
previous two scan sessions; however, instead of viewing smoking cues, subj ects will view alcohol cues.  
 
11.2 Primary Study Endpoints  
The primary endpoints to be measured include:  
• Self-report ratings of cues, subjective ratings of craving during/following cue exposure, and neuroimaging 
data on cerebral blood flow when the brain is at rest and when exposed to alcohol cues.  
 
12. Sub -study Subject Selection  
12.1 Inclusion Criteria  
1) Subjects have consented to main study protocol and are eligible to randomize to study drug.  
2) Provide voluntary informed consent.  
3) Consume five or more alcoholic drinks on the same occasion on five or more days in the past 30 days.  
 
12.2 Exclusion Criteria  
1) See exclusion criteria for main study  
 
12.[ADDRESS_1279635] Recruitment and Screening  
Subjects will be recruited from those who respond to our advertis ements for the main study. Following the 
consent of the main study , potential subjects will provide information on recent substance use  through 
administration of the Addiction Severity Index (ASI) . If the potential subject reports consuming five or more 
alcoholic drinks on the same occasion on five or more days in the past 30 days, s/he will be flagged as a potential 
participant for the sub -study . If the individual shows continued interest in participating in the study, an 
appointment will be made for furth er screening at the Center for Studies on Addiction (CSA).  The CSA initial 
screening process will be described, and the individual will also be informed that s/he must be available for at 
least two separate appointments during the screening week (unless t he two appointments are combined)  (see the 
Physical Examination Visit and Psychological Evaluation Visit  sections  pg 10 -11 for more information) .  Potential 
subjects will be informed that all information obtained will be used to determine his/her final eli gibility for main and 
sub-study participation. If the individual does not qualify for the study, s/he will be provided with appropriate 
community smoking cessation referrals.  
 
12.[ADDRESS_1279636].  S/he is also reminded that participation is voluntary, and at any time, s/he may withdraw 
from the main study or sub -study. Measures and procedures described for the MRI sessions o f the main 
study will be mostly the same for the sub -study ’s 3rd MRI session visit.  The major differences will be the 
use of alcohol imaging cues, a different craving scale measure pre/post scan (Within -Session Rating 
Scale -Alcohol (WSRS -Alcohol)  and no c otinine testing.  
 
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279637], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/[ADDRESS_1279638] MRI session visit (2 hours)  
The 3rd MRI session takes place after a subject has been on the medication for [ADDRESS_1279639] will be asked to take their medication in the presence of Study Staff [Baclofen has a short life with maximum 
effects at 2 hours and waning thereafter. Thus, ingesting the medication in front of study staff will ensure that the 
medication was ingested and that its effects will be observable during the MRI as well as standardize time since  
dose]. Stimuli for the 3rd scan will be audio -visual video clips consisting of either alcohol -related or non -alcohol -
related cues instead of smoking -related and non -smoking -related cues presented during scans [ADDRESS_1279640] to go through the “You can quit smoking ” pamphlet during this appointment which is 
an interactive tool designed to help people recognize relapse triggers, provide alternative strategies w hen craving 
occurs, and how to acquire support from friends and family. Explicit instructions for how to conduct this session are 
included with the uploaded IRB documents (Titled: Smoking Booklet Script).  Monitoring of smoking behavior is 
accomplished wit h completion and collection of subject Daily Diaries, weekly phone calls with study staff, weekly 
meetings with study staff, and CO measurements . 
 
[ADDRESS_1279641] Stipends or Payments  
In addition to the payments received as part of the main study, sub -study subjects will receive $6 for travel expenses 
and will be paid $[ADDRESS_1279642] scan session visit.  
 
* ALL REMAINING ASPECTS OF THE SUB -STUDY ARE DESCRIBED ABOVE IN SECTIONS 1 -8. 
 
 
REFERENCES  
 
1. Baillie AJ, Mattick RP, H all W. Quitting smoking: estimation by [CONTACT_63700] -analysis of the rate of unaided 
smoking cessation. Aust J Public Health. 1995;19(2):129 -31.  
2. Hughes JR, Shiffman S, Callas P, Zhang J. A meta -analysis of the efficacy of over -the-counter nicotine 
replacement. Tob Control. 2003;12(1):21 -7.  
3. Perkins KA. Smoking cessation in women. Special considerations. CNS Drugs. 2001;15(5):391 -411. 
4. Sinha R, Li CS. Imaging stress - and cue -induced drug and alcohol craving: association with relapse and 
clinical implications . Drug Alcohol Rev. 2007;26(1):25 -31.  
5. Dagher A, Tannenbaum B, Hayashi T, Pruessner JC, McBride D. An acute psychosocial stress enhances 
the neural response to smoking cues. Brain Res. 2009;1293:40 -8.  
10.1016/j.brainres.2009.07.048. PubMed PMID: 196322 11; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2754394.  
6. Franklin TR, Ehrman R, Lynch KG, Harper D, Sciortino N, O'Brien CP, Childress AR. Menstrual cycle 
phase at quit date predicts smoking status in an NRT treatment trial: a retrospective analysis. J Womens Health 
(Larchmt). 2008;17(2):287 -92.  
7. Perkins KA, Marcus MD, Levine MD, D'Amico D, Miller A, Broge M, Ashcom J, Shiffman S. Cognitive -
behavioral therapy to reduce weight concerns improves smoking cessation outcome in weight -concerned women. 
J Consult Clin Psychol. 2001;69(4):604 -13. 
8. Caggiula AR, Donny EC, White AR, Chaudhri N, Booth S, Gharib MA, Hoffman A, Perkins KA, Sved AF. 
Cue dependency of nicotine self -administration and smoking. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2001;70(4):515 -30.  
9. Baker TB, Morse E, Sherman JE. The motivation to use drugs: a psychobi ological analysis of urges. Nebr 
Symp Motiv. 1986;34:257 -323.  
10. Killen JD, Fortmann SP. Craving is associated with smoking relapse: findings from three prospective 
studies. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 1997;5(2):137 -42. 
11. Rose JE. Nicotine addiction and treatment. Annu Rev Med. 1996;47:493 -507.  
12. Payne TJ, Schare ML, Levis DJ, Colletti G. Exposure to smoking -relevant cues: effects on desire to smoke 
and topographical components of smoking behavior. Addict Behav. 1991;16( 6):467 -79.  
13. Childress AR. Classically conditioned factors in drug dependence. In: Lowinson, editor. Comprehesive 
Textbook of Substance Abuse. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins; 1993. p. [ADDRESS_1279643], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 27 of 31 14. Hatsukami D, Hughes JR, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_148016] R. Characterization of to bacco withdrawal: physiological and subjective 
effects. NIDA Res Monogr. 1985;53:56 -67.  
15. Hughes JR. Effects of abstinence from tobacco: valid symptoms and time course. Nicotine Tob Res. 
2007;9(3):315 -27.  
16. Janes AC, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_96095], Richardt S, de BFB , Chuzi S, Pachas G, Culhane MA, Holmes AJ, Fava M, 
Evins AE, Kaufman MJ. Brain reactivity to smoking cues prior to smoking cessation predicts ability to maintain 
tobacco abstinence. Biol Psychiatry. 2010;67(8):[ADDRESS_1279644] to offer clinical research? Addiction. 2000;[ADDRESS_1279645] 
2:S129 -44.  
18. Coe JW, Brooks PR, Vetelino MG, Wirtz MC, Arnold EP, Huang J, Sands SB, Davis TI, Lebel LA, Fox CB, 
Shrikhande A, Heym JH, Schaeffer E, Rollema H, Lu Y, Mansbach RS, Chambers LK , Rovetti CC, Schulz DW, 
Tingley FD, 3rd, O'Neill BT. Varenicline: an alpha4beta2 nicotinic receptor partial agonist for smoking cessation. J 
Med Chem. 2005;48(10):3474 -7.  
19. Benowitz NL. Pharmacology of nicotine: addiction, smoking -induced disease, and therapeutics. Annu Rev 
Pharmacol Toxicol. 2009;49:[ADDRESS_1279646] RS, Stahl SM, Williams KE. Rationale, pharmacology and 
clinical efficacy of partial agonists of alpha4beta2 nACh receptors for smoking cessation. Trends Pha rmacol Sci. 
2007;28(7):316 -25. 
21. Bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_910806]. Drug Ther Bull. 2000;38(10):73 -5. 
22. Lancaster T, Stead LF. Mecamylamine (a nicotine antagonist) for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2000(2):CD001009.  
23. Biberman R, Ne umann R, Katzir I, Gerber Y. A randomized controlled trial of oral selegiline plus nicotine 
skin patch compared with placebo plus nicotine skin patch for smoking cessation. Addiction. 2003;98(10):[ADDRESS_1279647], vs placebo or sustained -
release bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_60117]: a randomized controlled trial. J AMA  2006;296(1):5 6-63.  
10.1001/jama.296.1.56. PubMed PMID: 16820547.  
25. Wu P, Wilson K, Dimoulas P, Mills EJ. Effectiveness of smoking cessation therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]: a systematic review 
and meta -analysis. BMC Public Health. 2006;6:300.  
26. Bowirrat A, Oscar -Berman M. Relationship  between dopaminergic neurotransmission, alcoholism, and 
Reward Deficiency syndrome. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2005;132(1):[ADDRESS_1279648] process through polymorphisms of the D2 dopamine receptor gene: a 
review.  Eur Psychiatry. 2000;15(2):79 -89.  
28. Vandenbergh DJ, Persico AM, Hawkins AL, Griffin CA, Li X, Jabs EW, Uhl GR. Human dopamine 
transporter gene (DAT1) maps to chromosome 5p15.3 and displays a VNTR. Genomics. 1992;14(4):[ADDRESS_1279649]. 
Genotype influences in vivo dopamine transporter availability in human striatum. Neuropsychopharmacology. 
2000;22(2):133 -9.  
30. Fuke S, Suo S, Takahashi N, Koike H, Sasagawa N, Ish iura S. The VNTR polymorphism of the human 
dopamine transporter (DAT1) gene affects gene expression. Pharmacogenomics J. 2001;1(2):152 -6.  
31. Mill J, Asherson P, Browes C, D'Souza U, Craig I. Expression of the dopamine transporter gene is 
regulated by [CONTACT_941]  3' UTR VNTR: Evidence from brain and lymphocytes using quantitative RT -PCR. Am J Med 
Genet. 2002;114(8):975 -9.  
32. Franklin TR, Lohoff FW, Wang Z, Sciortino N, Harper D, Li Y, Jens W, Cruz J, Kampman K, Ehrman R, 
Berrettini W, Detre JA, O'Brien CP, Child ress AR. DAT genotype modulates brain and behavioral responses 
elicited by [CONTACT_910866]. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2009;34(3):717 -28.  
33. Franklin TR, Wang Z, Sciortino N, Harper D, Li Y, Hakun J, Kildea S, Kampman K, Ehrman R, Detre JA, 
O'Brien CP, Childress AR. Modulation of resting brain cerebral blood flow by [CONTACT_910867] B agonist, baclofen: A 
longitudinal perfusion fMRI study. Drug Alcohol  Depend. 2011;117(2 -3):176 -83.  
34. Franklin TR, Druhan JP. Involvement of the nucleus accumbens and medial prefrontal cortex in the 
expression of conditioned hyperactivity to a cocaine -associated environment in rats. Neuropsychopharmacology. 
2000;23(6):63 3-44.  
35. Corrigall WA, Franklin KB, Coen KM, Clarke PB. The mesolimbic dopaminergic system is implicated in the 
reinforcing effects of nicotine. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1992;107(2 -3):[ADDRESS_1279650], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 28 of 31 36. Di Chiara G. Role of dopamine in the behavioural actions  of nicotine related to addiction. Eur J Pharmacol. 
2000;393(1 -3):295 -314.  
37. Morgan AE, Dewey SL. Effects of pharmacologic increases in brain GABA levels on cocaine -induced 
changes in extracellular dopamine. Synapse. 1998;28(1):60 -5.  
38. Dewey SL, Morg an AE, Ashby [CONTACT_240316], Jr., Horan B, Kushner SA, Logan J, Volkow ND, Fowler JS, Gardner 
EL, Brodie JD. A novel strategy for the treatment of cocaine addiction. Synapse. 1998;30(2):119 -29.  
39. Dewey SL, Chaurasia CS, Chen CE, Volkow ND, Clarkson FA, Porter SP, S traughter -Moore RM, Alexoff 
DL, Tedeschi D, Russo NB, Fowler JS, Brodie JD. GABAergic attenuation of cocaine -induced dopamine release 
and locomotor activity. Synapse. 1997;25(4):393 -8.  
40. Ashby [CONTACT_240316], Jr., Rohatgi R, Ngosuwan J, Borda T, Gerasimov MR, Morga n AE, Kushner S, Brodie JD, 
Dewey SL. Implication of the GABA(B) receptor in gamma vinyl -GABA's inhibition of cocaine -induced increases in 
nucleus accumbens dopamine. Synapse. 1999;31(2):151 -3.  
41. Gerasimov MR, Schiffer WK, Gardner EL, Marsteller DA, Len non IC, Taylor SJ, Brodie JD, Ashby [CONTACT_240316], Jr., 
Dewey SL. GABAergic blockade of cocaine -associated cue -induced increases in nucleus accumbens dopamine. 
Eur J Pharmacol. 2001;414(2 -3):205 -9.  
42. Roberts DC, Brebner K. GABA modulation of cocaine self -administr ation. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 
2000;909:145 -58.  
43. Dewey SL, Brodie JD, Gerasimov M, Horan B, Gardner EL, Ashby [CONTACT_240316], Jr. A pharmacologic strategy for 
the treatment of nicotine addiction. Synapse. 1999;31(1):76 -86.  
44. Xi ZX, Stein EA. Nucleus accumbens dopamin e release modulation by [CONTACT_910868] -an 
in vivo electrochemical study. Brain Research. 1998;798(1 -2):156 -65. 
45. Xi ZX, Stein EA. Baclofen inhibits heroin self -administration behavior and mesolimbic dopamine release. J 
Pharmacol Exp Ther. 199 9;290(3):1369 -74.  
46. Koob GF. Neural mechanisms of drug reinforcement. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1992;654:171 -91.  
47. Mueller AL, Brodie MS. Intracellular recording from putative dopamine -containing neurons in the ventral 
tegmental area of Tsai in a brain slice  preparation. Journal of Neuroscience Methods. 1989;28(1 -2):15 -22. 
48. Roberts DC, Andrews MM. Baclofen suppression of cocaine self -administration: demonstration using a 
discrete trials procedure. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1997;131(3):[ADDRESS_1279651] baclofen modifies 
cocaine self -administration in rats. Behav Pharmacol. 1998;9(3):[ADDRESS_1279652] baclofen prevents heroin -induced 
reinstatement of heroin -seeking behavior in rats. Neuropharmacology. 2007;52(7):1555 -62.  
51. Corrigall WA, Coen KM, Adamson KL, Chow BL, Zhang J. Response of nicotine self -administration in the 
rat to manipulations of mu -opi[INVESTIGATOR_181686] -aminobut yric acid receptors in the ventral tegmental area. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2000;149(2):107 -14.  
52. Markou A, Paterson NE, Semenova S. Role of gamma -aminobutyric acid (GABA) and metabotropic 
glutamate receptors in nicotine reinforcement: potential pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_277652]. Ann N Y Acad 
Sci. 2004;1025:491 -503.  
53. Paterson NE, Froestl W, M arkou A. The GABAB receptor agonists baclofen and CGP44532 decreased 
nicotine self -administration in the rat. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2004;172(2):179 -86.  
54. Fattore L, Cossu G, Martellotta MC, Fratta W. Baclofen antagonizes intravenous self -administra tion of 
nicotine in mice and rats. Alcohol 2002;37(5):495 -8.  
55. Fadda P, Scherma M, Fresu A, Collu M, Fratta W. Baclofen antagonizes nicotine -, cocaine -, and 
morphine -induced dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens of rat. Synapse. 2003;50(1):1 -6.  
56. Corrigall WA, Coen KM, Zhang J, Adamson KL. GABA mechanisms in the pedunculopontine tegmental 
nucleus influence particular aspects of nicotine self -administration selectively in the rat. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl). 2001;158(2):[ADDRESS_1279653] preference in rodents. Eur 
Neuropsychopharmacol. 2009;19(7):487 -98.  
58. Roberts DC, Andrews MM, Vickers G J. Baclofen attenuates the reinforcing effects of cocaine in rats. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 1996;15(4):417 -23.  
59. Assadi SM, Radgoodarzi R, Ahmadi -Abhari SA. Baclofen for maintenance treatment of opi[INVESTIGATOR_2560]: a randomized double -blind placebo -contr olled clinical trial [ISRCTN32121581]. BMC Psychiatry. 
2003;3:16.  
University of Pennsylvania , Office of Regulatory Affairs  [ADDRESS_1279654], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 29 of 31 60. Gudeman D, Shoptaw S, Majewska D, Scherf S, Yeats D, Ling W, editors. Preliminary report of baclofen 
as a cocaine craving medication. Problems of Drug Dependence 1996; 1997; San Juan, P uerto Rico: NIH.  
61. Ling W, Shoptaw S, Majewska D. Baclofen as a cocaine anti -craving medication: a preliminary clinical 
study. Neuropsychopharmacology. 1998;18(5):403 -4. 
62. Shoptaw S, Yang X, Rotheram -Fuller EJ, Hsieh YC, Kintaudi PC, Charuvastra VC, Ling W. Randomized 
placebo -controlled trial of baclofen for cocaine dependence: preliminary effects for individuals with chronic 
patterns of cocaine use. J Clin Psychiatry. 2003; 64(12):1440 -8.  
63. Heinzerling KG, Shoptaw S, Peck JA, Yang X, Liu J, Roll J, Ling W. Randomized, placebo -controlled trial 
of baclofen and gabapentin for the treatment of methamphetamine dependence. Drug Alcohol Depend. 
2006;85(3):[ADDRESS_1279655] T, Stock C, Wallace C, Gruber V, Elkashef A. Multi -
center trial of baclofen for abstinence initiation in seve re cocaine -dependent individuals. Drug Alcohol Depend. 
2009;103(1 -2):59 -64.  
65. Addolorato G, Caputo F, Capristo E, Colombo G, Gessa GL, Gasbarrini G. Ability of baclofen in reducing 
alcohol craving and intake: II --Preliminary clinical evidence. Alcohol C lin Exp Res. 2000;24(1):67 -71.  
66. Colombo G, Agabio R, Carai MA, Lobina C, Pani M, Reali R, Addolorato G, Gessa GL. Ability of baclofen 
in reducing alcohol intake and withdrawal severity: I --Preclinical evidence. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2000;24(1):58 -
66.  
67. Agabio R, Marras P, Addolorato G, Carpi[INVESTIGATOR_313121] B, Gessa GL. Baclofen suppresses alcohol intake and 
craving for alcohol in a schizophrenic alcohol -dependent patient: a case report. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 
2007;27(3):319 -20.  
68. Johnson BA, Swift RM, Add olorato G, Ciraulo DA, Myrick H. Safety and efficacy of GABAergic 
medications for treating alcoholism. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2005;29(2):248 -54.  
69. Malcolm RJ. GABA systems, benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], and substance dependence. J Clin Psychiatry. 2003;[ADDRESS_1279656] 3:36 -40.  
70. Ameisen O. Complete and prolonged suppression of symptoms and consequences of alcohol -
dependence using high -dose baclofen: a self -case report of a physician. Alcohol Alcohol. 2005;40(2):147 -50.  
71. Bucknam W. Suppression of symptoms of alcohol de pendence and craving using high -dose baclofen. 
Alcohol Alcohol. 2007;42(2):158 -60.  
72. Franklin TR, Harper D, Kampman K, Kildea -McCrea S, Jens W, Lynch KG, O'Brien CP, Childress AR. The 
GABA B agonist baclofen reduces cigarette consumption in a preliminar y double -blind placebo -controlled 
smoking reduction study. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2009;103(1 -2):30 -6.  
73. Brebner K, Childress AR, Roberts DC. A potential role for GABA(B) agonists in the treatment of 
psychostimulant addiction. Alcohol Alcohol. 2002;37(5):4 78-84.  
74. Boileau I, Dagher A, Leyton M, Welfeld K, Booij L, Diksic M, Benkelfat C. Conditioned dopamine release in 
humans: a positron emission tomography [11C]raclopride study with amphetamine. J Neurosci. 
2007;27(15):3998 -4003.  
75. Volkow ND, Wang GJ,  Telang F, Fowler JS, Logan J, Childress AR, Jayne M, Ma Y, Wong C. Cocaine 
cues and dopamine in dorsal striatum: mechanism of craving in cocaine addiction. J Neurosci. 2006;26(24):[ADDRESS_1279657] D, Goldman M, O'Brien CP, 
Childress AR, editors. The use of perfusion fMRI to examine where and how varenicline modulates activity in the 
brain to aid in smoking cessation. American College of Neuropsychopharmacology; 2009; Hollywood, FL.  
77. Brody AL, Mandelkern MA, London ED, Childress AR, Lee GS, Bota RG, Ho ML, Saxena S, Baxter LR, 
Jr., Madsen D, Jarvik ME. Brain metabolic changes during cigarette craving. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 
2002;59(12):1162 -72.  
78. Childress AR, Ehrman RN, Wang Z, Li Y,  Sciortino N, Hakun J, Jens W, Suh J, Listerud J, Marquez K, 
Franklin T, Langleben D, Detre J, O'Brien CP. Prelude to passion: limbic activation by "unseen" drug and sexual 
cues. PLoS ONE. 2008;3(1):e1506.  
79. McClernon FJ, Kozink RV, Rose JE. Individual differences in nicotine dependence, withdrawal symptoms, 
and sex predict transient fMRI -BOLD responses to smoking cues. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2008;33(9):[ADDRESS_1279658], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 30 of 31 80. Langleben DD, Ruparel K, Elman I, Busch -Winokur S, Pratiwadi R, Loughead J, O'Brien CP , Childress 
AR. Acute effect of methadone maintenance dose on brain FMRI response to heroin -related cues. Am J 
Psychiatry. 2008;165(3):[ADDRESS_1279659] expectation on behavior -related neuronal 
activity in  primate striatum. J Neurophysiol. 1998;80(2):[ADDRESS_1279660] processing in primate orbitofrontal cortex and basal 
ganglia. Cereb Cortex. 2000;10(3):272 -84.  
83. Franklin TR, Wang Z, Wang J, Sciortino N, Harper D, L i Y, Ehrman R, Kampman K, O'Brien CP, Detre JA, 
Childress AR. Limbic activation to cigarette smoking cues independent of nicotine withdrawal: a perfusion fMRI 
study. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2007;32(11):2301 -9.  
84. Franklin TR, Wang Z, Li Y, Suh JJ, Goldm an M, Lohoff FW, Cruz J, Hazan R, Jens W, Detre JA, Berrettini 
W, O'Brien CP, Childress AR. Dopamine transporter genotype modulation of neural responses to smoking cues: 
confirmation in a new cohort. Addiction Biology. 2011;16(2):308 -22.  
85. Kringelbach M L. The human orbitofrontal cortex: linking reward to hedonic experience. Nat Rev Neurosci. 
2005;6(9):691 -702.  
86. Rolls ET. The functions of the orbitofrontal cortex. Brain Cogn. 2004;55(1):11 -29. PubMed PMID: 
15134840.  
87. From A, Heltberg A. A double -blind trial with baclofen (Lioresal) and diazepam in spasticity due to multiple 
sclerosis. Acta Neurol Scand. 1975;51(2):158 -66. 
88. Basmajian JV. Lioresal (baclofen) treatment of spasticity in multiple sclerosis. Am J Phys Med. 
1975;54(4):[ADDRESS_1279661] Rev. 2000(2):CD001131.  
90. Griffiths RR, Lamb RJ, Sannerud CA, Ator NA, Brady JV. Self -injection of barbiturates, benzodia zepi[INVESTIGATOR_910807] -anxiolytics in baboons. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1991;103(2):154 -61. 
91. Negus SS, Mello NK, Fivel PA. Effects of GABA agonists and GABA -A receptor modulators on cocaine 
discrimination in rhesus monkeys. Psychopharmacology (Ber l). 2000;152(4):398 -407. 
92. Aisen ML, Dietz MA, Rossi P, Cedarbaum JM, Kutt H. Clinical and pharmacokinetic aspects of high dose 
oral baclofen therapy. J Am Paraplegia Soc. 1992;15(4):211 -6.  
93. Stallings W, Schrader S. Baclofen as prophylaxis and treatm ent for alcohol withdrawal: a retrospective 
chart review. J Okla State Med Assoc. 2007;100(9):354 -60.  
94. Alsop DC, Detre JA. Reduced transit -time sensitivity in noninvasive magnetic resonance imaging of 
human cerebral blood flow. Journal of Cerebral Bloo d Flow and Metabolism. 1996;16(6):1236 -49. 
95. Hermes M, Hagemann D, Britz P, Lieser S, Rock J, Naumann E, Walter C. Reproducibility of continuous 
arterial spin labeling perfusion MRI after 7 weeks. Magma. 2007;20(2):103 -15.  
96. Wang Z, Faith M, Patterson  F, Tang K, Kerrin K, Wileyto EP, Detre JA, Lerman C. Neural substrates of 
abstinence -induced cigarette cravings in chronic smokers. J Neurosci. 2007;27(51):[ZIP_CODE] -40.  
97. Suh J, Ehrman R, Y. L, Wang Z, Jens W, Hakun J, Goldman M, O'Brien CP, Childr ess AR. Poor fronto -
limbic connectivity during both "seen" and "unseen" aversive cues in cocaine  patients . CPDD; 2008; San Juan, 
PR. 
98. Wang J, Aguirre GK, Kimberg DY, Roc AC, Li L, Detre JA. Arterial spin labeling perfusion fMRI with very 
low task freque ncy. Magn Reson Med. 2003;49(5):796 -802.  
99. Detre JA, Leigh JS, Williams DS, Koretsky AP. Perfusion imaging. Magn Reson Med. 1992;23(1):37 -45. 
100. Hahn B, Ross TJ, Yang Y, Kim I, Huestis MA, Stein EA. Nicotine enhances visuospatial attention by 
[CONTACT_910869]. J Neurosci. 2007;27(13):3477 -89.  
101. Franklin TR, Napi[INVESTIGATOR_3694] K, Ehrman R, Gariti P, O'Brien CP, Childress AR. Retrospective study: influence of 
menstrual cycle on cue -induced cigarette craving. Nicotine Tob Re s. 2004;6(1):171 -5.  
102. Franklin TR, Allen SS. Influence of menstrual cycle phase on smoking cessation treatment outcome: a 
hypothesis regarding the discordant findings in the literature. Addiction. 2009;104(11):[ADDRESS_1279662] -related brain activity during smoking cue exposure is modulated by [CONTACT_910870]; 2011; Toronto, Canada: Oral Presentation.  
104. Allen SS, Hatsukami DK, Christianson D, Nelson D. Withdrawal and pre -menst rual symptomatology during 
the menstrual cycle in short -term smoking abstinence: effects of menstrual cycle on smoking abstinence. Nicotine 
Tob Res. 1999;1(2):[ADDRESS_1279663], Mezzanine Level, Philadelphia, PA  [ZIP_CODE] -3246  
 
 Version 14   1/6/2017  IRB APPLICATION  page 31 of 31 105. Cousins MS, Stamat HM, de Wit H. Effects of a single dose of baclofen on self -repor ted subjective effects 
and tobacco smoking. Nicotine Tob Res. 2001;3(2):123 -9.  
106. Anthony JC, Echeagaray -Wagner F. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_910808]. Alcohol research 
& health : the journal of the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. 2000;24(4):201 -8.  
107. Toll BA, Cummings KM, O'Malley SS, Carlin -Menter S, McKee SA, Hyland A, Wu R, Hopkins J, Celestino 
P. Tobacco quitlines need to assess and intervene with callers' hazardous drinking. Alcoholism, clinical and 
experimental  research. 2012;36(9):[ADDRESS_1279664] NS, Metrik J. Alcohol use and initial smoking lapses among heavy drinkers in 
smoking cessation treatment. Nicotine & tobacco research : official journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine 
and Tob acco. 2010;12(7):[ADDRESS_1279665] history of alcoholism 
than in smokers without this history. Alcoholism, clinical and experimental research. 2000;24(11):[ADDRESS_1279666] 
that one medication will be helpful in every 
individua l, which is why one goal of our GABA B 
R01 grant was  to identify a cue -vulnerable 
baclofen -responsive endophenotype. In spi[INVESTIGATOR_910809] -individual differences that 
can provide protection or confer vulnerabi lity to 
smoking reminders, we were able to show an 
overall reduction in smoking cue reactivity in 
baclofen -treated subjects that was not observed 
in placebo -treated subjects  (N = 22 per group) . 
The figure (right) shows reduced brain activity 
during smoking  cue versus nonsmoking cue 
exposure in individuals receiving 20 mg baclofen, 
q.i.d.  Similar to our study in cocaine patients  
during cocaine cue exposure  (Young et al, J. 
Neuroscience , 2014), baclofen blunted smoking 
cue responses in the medial orbitofronta l cortex, ventral medial prefrontal cortex and bilateral 
anterior ventral insula (i.e., mesolimbic circuitry). This study adds to the literature by [CONTACT_910871], and by [CONTACT_910872]’s effects in nicotine use 
disorder ( NUD ). There were no differences in smoking cue neural reactivity between pre - and 
during treatment comparisons in the placebo group. This data is currently being prepared for 
dissemination to the scientific community.  
 
