PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page 1 of 18 
  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  
Improving Hypertension Using a Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control Program: The Smart 
Hypertension Control Study  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
[CONTACT_27429] D. Persell, MD, MPH  
Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of General Internal Medicine & Geriatrics  
Director, Center for Primary Care Innovation  
Telephone Number : (312) 503 -6464  
Email Address : [EMAIL_7812]  
 
CO-INVESTIGATORS:  
 Kuna l N. Karmali, MD, MS  
 Instructor of Medicine, Division of Cardiology  
 Kunal -[EMAIL_10580]  
   
Jody D. Ciolino, PhD  
Assistant [CONTACT_557619] of Preventive Medicine  
[EMAIL_7814]  
 
 
 
VERSION DATE:  
 25 January 2019  
 
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page 2 of 18 
  
1.0  Purpose of the Study:  
Purpose  
Investigators at Northwestern University will partner with Omron  Healthcare Co., Ltd. (hereinafter 
referred to as “Omron”)  to conduct a randomized controlled trial of a hypertension personal control 
program (HPCP), known as Lark HTN Pro  with a home blood pressure monitoring device  (HBMD)  
compared to a HBMD  alone. The o verarching goal of this study is to investigate the effects of the 
HPCP on blood pressure control , blood pressure self -management, and health y lifestyle  behaviors  
among adults with hypertension.  
 
Specific Aims and Hypotheses  
Our primary aims and hypotheses  (H) are to:  
 Aim 1 : To determine the effects of the HPCP+HBMD compared with HBMD alone on blood 
pressure control in adults with hypertension.  
o H1: HPCP+HBMD will lower systolic blood pressure at 6 months compared with HBMD alone.  
o H2: HPCP+HBMD will improve hypertension control  rates  at 6 months compared with HBMD 
alone.  
o H3: HPCP+HBMD will lower diastolic blood pressure at 6 months compared with HBMD alone.  
 
 Aim 2: To determine the effects of the HPCP+HBMD compared with HBMD alone on 
antihypertensive medication use in adults with hypertension.  
o H4: HPCP+HBMD will increase number of antihypertensive medication classes used at  6 
months compared with HBMD alone.  
o H5: HPCP+HBMD will increase medication adherence at 6 months compared with HBMD 
alone.  
 
 Aim 3: To determine the effects of the HPCP+HBMD compared to HBMD alone on hypertension 
self-management  among adults with hypertension.  
o H6: HPCP+HBMD will increase the proportion of months where a home blood pressure 
reading is obtained compared with HBMD alone in adults with hypertension   
o H7: HPCP+HBMD will increase the number of home blood pressure readings per month 
compared with HBMD alone in adults with hypertension . 
o H8: HPCP+HBMD will increase self -efficacy to monitor and control blood pressure at 6 months 
compared with HBMD alone.   
 
 Aim 4: To determine the effects of the HPCP+HBMD compared to HBMD alone on healthy 
lifestyle behaviors among adults with hypertension.  
o H9: HPCP+HBMD will lower weight at 6 month s compared with HBMD alone .  
o H10: HPCP+HBMD will improve diet quality score compared with HBMD alone.  
o H11: HPCP+HBMD will increase physical activity compared with HBMD alone.   
o H12: HPCP+HBMD will increase sleep duration compared with HBMD alone.   
 
 
2.0  Background  / Literature Review / Rationale for the study : 
Hypertension, defined by [CONTACT_557590], is a major contributor to death and disability from 
heart and vascular diseases.[ADDRESS_732237] consistently shown that 
antihypertensive medications can reduce important health outcomes like stroke by 30 -40%, heart 
attacks by 20 -25%, and heart failure by [CONTACT_45848] 50 %.2 Therefore, reduction of raised blood 
pressure with healthy lifestyle modifications (diet, exercise, weight loss, alcohol moderation) and 
antihypertensive medications are a cornerstone of cardiovascular diseas e prevention strategies.3-6 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page 3 of 18 
 Despi[INVESTIGATOR_557586], hypertension 
treatment and control rates remain suboptimal in the [LOCATION_002]. According to data from the 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 2009 -2010, high blood pressure co ntrol 
rates among all individuals was 47% and among treated hypertensives was 64%.[ADDRESS_732238] been shown to reduce blood pressure and 
improve hypertension control r ates.8-10 However, many self -monitoring interventions require significant 
resources for face -to-face counseling  and patient activation, which can be costly over time.  
 
Mobile health technologies such as smartphone apps provide a unique opportunity to augment self -
monitoring interventions with health behavior coaching to promote behavior change for risk 
reduction.11-13 However, there is limited high quality evidence to guide the optimal implementation of 
this intervention.11 We seek t o address this evidence gap with the proposed study.  
 
3.0  Inclusion and exclusion c riteria:  
Screening for eligibility :  
We will use structured language queries of electronic health record data from the Northwestern 
Medicine Enterprise Data Warehouse (NMEDW) to identify potentially -eligible participants with 
elevated blood pressure and exclude patients with clinical exclusion criteria from Northwestern 
Medical Group outpatient practices. We will provide primary care clinicians with lists of potential 
candidates and allow them two weeks to indicate which patients should not be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]. We will then 
attempt to recruit from this remaining population.  Potentially -eligible participants will be contact[CONTACT_557591]. Volunteers who remain candidates for 
participation as a result of the phone screening questions will be asked to schedule an on -site visit. 
During the o n-site visit individuals will be asked to provide written informed consent  and have blood 
pressure m easured in a standardized fashion (described in section #4) to see if this inclusion criteria 
is met . 
 
Inclusion and exclusion criteria:  
We will use these criteria to determine who will be included or excluded in the final study sample.  
 
Inclusion criteria:  
 Adults aged 18 years to <85 years at the time of screening  
 Standardized mean blood pressure measurement ≥135 to <180  mmHg systolic or ≥85 to <110  
mmHg d iastolic  
 Have and use an iOS device(s) (iPhone generation 5s or newer)  
 Able to provide written  informed consent prior to participation in the study  
 Receive their primary care from a Northwestern Medicine clinic site  
Exclusion criteria:  
 Current user of the HCPC (Lark HTN Pro)  
 Standardized mean blood pressure measurement ≥180 mmHg systolic or ≥110 m mHg 
diastolic  
 Persistent atrial fibrillation as indicated in the electronic health record  (EHR)  
 Pregnant or planning to become pregnant during the study period  
 Severe kidney disease, defined as estimated glomerular filtration rate <30 per 1.73 m2 or 
currently on renal replacement therapy (i.e. hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis)  
 Hearing impaired and unable to respond to phone calls  
 Lack of fluency in English  
 History of a c ardiovascular event  (stroke, transient ischemic attack , myocardial infarcti on, 
coronary artery by[CONTACT_15806] ) in the past 3 months  
 Diagnosis of dementia  as indicated  in the electronic health record  
 Diagnosis of psychosis  as indicated in the electronic health record  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page 4 of 18 
  Terminal cancer diagnosis or NYHA III or IV heart failure  
 Deemed unsuitable  for study  by [CONTACT_459465]  
 Individuals requiring BP monitor cuff size larger than 17 incles or 42cm  
 
We will not recruit, enroll, or study special populations: adults who are unable to consent, individuals 
who are not yet adults ( minors), pregnant women, or prisoners or other detained individuals.  
 
4.0  Procedures Involved : 
1. Describe the setting of the study, including all locations where research procedures will be 
performed.  
 
This study will take place in Northwestern Medicine  Group outpatient clinic settings. Northwestern 
Medical Group (NMG) is a multi -specialty group practice, with more than 1,[ADDRESS_732239] Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, and in more than 25 outpatient care locations spread across 
Chicago and the northern suburbs, offering primary, specialty and immediate c are within and 
surrounding the communities where people live and work.  Before contact[CONTACT_557592] a practice, we will obtain permission from the clinical practice director  to do so  and will seek 
opportunities to introduce the study to t he practice ’s clinicians at practice meetings and through email.  
We will initially recruit from the Galter [ADDRESS_732240] a non-blinded  randomized controlled trial among hypertensive adults in NMG 
outpatient clinics. We will randomize participants in a 1:1 fashion to the intervention group (HPCP + 
HBMD) o r the comparator group  (HBMD alone ). We will recruit adults with elevated blood pressure as 
assessed by [INVESTIGATOR_2993] -person standardized examination at baseline . We will measure change in blood 
pressure by  [INVESTIGATOR_2993]-person examination at [ADDRESS_732241] 300 participants with analyzable data at the time of study completion. 
If changes are deemed necessary, a revision to the study protocol will be submitted to the IRB for 
review  and approval prior to implementing these changes.  Based on higher than predicted retention at 
6 months, in discussion with our funder we will stop recruitment ac tivities once 333 participants are 
enrolled.  
 
3. Provide a description of all research procedures and activities.  
 
Randomization  
We will perform randomization with the use of a  centralized computer -generated assignment 
sequence uploaded a priori to Northwestern University’s REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) 
application. Randomization will be stratified by: [CONTACT_654] (<65 or ≥65 years of age) and baseline systolic 
blood pressure (<1 45 or ≥145 mmHg) to optimize the likelihood of obtaining similar pop ulations in 
each treatment group.  
 
Study assignments  
Control group : Control group participants w ill be provided with a home blood pressure monitoring  
device  (HBMD)  (Omron BP761 N Bluetooth Smart Automatic Upper Arm Blood Pressure Monitor )  and 
will be instructed in its use  at the baseline  study visit . Participants will also receive an information 
sheet  describing home blood pressure monitoring that gives advice for how to respond to different 
home readings  (see attached form) . At the baseline visit , participants will be instructed to install an 
Omron application to their smart phone  device  (to monitor use of the HBMD ). Participants will 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page 5 of 18 
 continue to  receive all routine care, including anti -hypertensive medications  as prescribed by [CONTACT_557593].   
 
Intervention Group : The intervention group will receive all the interventions provided to the control 
group. Participants randomized into the intervention group will not be asked to download the Omron 
application to their smart phone device.  In addition, intervention group participants will be sent a 
hyperlink to install the hypertension personal control program (HPCP)  (“Lark HTN Pro”), which is a 
smartphone app lication . The intervention group will have the HPCP installed on their iOS device 
during their initial office visit (screening/baseline) and will successfully take a reading from their 
HBMD . The HPCP  has blood pressure , medication, and weight monitoring, including periodic 
reminders for the user to measure blood pressure , measure weight , and take their medication(s). The 
HPCP  provides real -time feedback based on user input, such as out -of-range measurements  and has 
additional features designed to encourage behavior change in areas such as dietary intake , physical 
activity , sleep, and str ess reduction . Users can set goals and receive guidance and feedback through 
the app.  
 
Endpoints  
 Primary:  
o Systolic blood pressure (mmHg) at 6 months  (adjusted for baseline systolic blood 
pressure)  
 Secondary:  
Blood Pressure  
o Diastolic blood pressure (mmHg)  at 6 months  (adjusted for baseline diastolic blood 
pressure)  
o Proportion with controlled blood pressure at 6 months (defined as BP <140/<90 mmHg)  
Medication use  
o Medication adherence, measured as 4 -day recall of antihypertensive medications  
o Number  of ant ihypertensive agents used at 6 months  
o Number of antihypertensive medication changes (increases or substitution)  at 6 
months  
o Number of health system contacts (telephone, office, or mychart encounters)  at 6 
months  – derived from electronic health record (EHR)  
Self-management  
o Frequency of home blood pressure measurements per month  – derived from HBMD 
device  
o Proportion of months where a home blo od pressure reading is obtained – derived from 
HBMD device  
o Self-efficacy  to monitor  and control high  blood pressure.  
Lifestyle behaviors  
o Weight at 6 months  (lbs) 
o Diet quality  score  (as assessed by [CONTACT_557594] , DASH -Q)14  
o Self-reported physical activity  
o Self-reported sleep duration  
 
4. Include when they are performed, and any procedures being used to monitor participants 
for safety or minimize risks.  
 
Before initial visit  
All potential participants will go through a telephone screening. The following information will be 
obtained during the telephone screening:  
 Age 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page 6 of 18 
  Confirmation of hypertension diagnosis, use of antihypertensive medications, or being told by 
a healthcare professional of elevated blood  pressure  
 Smoking status  
 Presence of any exclusion criteria  
If participants express study interest and qualify based on the telephone screening, they will attend a 
screenin g visit at a study clinic site.   
 
Screening/Baseline study visit  
Participants will b e given  a hard copy  of both privacy  and use documents for b oth Omron 
and Lark mobile applications to be reviewed before they will receive informed consent.  
After providing informed written consent, the following information will be obtained during the 
screening/baseline study visit.  
 Height and weight  
 Measurement of blood pressure using  standard ized procedures.15 Research assistants will 
perform standardized measurements of blood pressures and pulse using an automated device 
(Omron HEM -907XL Pro Blood Pressure Monitor ). Participants will be asked to be seated 
quietly with their feet and back supported for [ADDRESS_732242] readings will 
be used to indicate the blood pr essure . For participants meeting eligibility, this mean blood 
pressure value will also serve as the baseline systolic and diastolic blood pressures . 
 
If participants meet eligibility criteria for the study, we will also obtain:  
 Detailed review of  chronic daily  antihypertensive medication and other cardiovascular  
(including cholesterol lowering  medications ) the patient is taking at the start of the trial.  
Adherence to antihypertensive  medications will be measured for each prescription medication 
using  a 4-day assessment of pi[INVESTIGATOR_38947]/pi[INVESTIGATOR_557587] -report . 
Missing any doses will be considered non -adherent for that m edication.  
 Questionnaire data to measure:  
o General s elf-efficacy16 as well as self -efficacy to monitor and control high blood 
pressure  
o Diet quality as assessed by [CONTACT_557595] -Q14 
o Physical activity  
o Sleep duration  
 
After screening, all participan ts will be provided with a n Omron  Bluetooth -enabled  HBMD  (Omron BP 
761N)  and taught how to use it for home blood pressure monitoring. Participants randomized to the 
HPCP group, will install the HPCP application to their iOS device. Study staff will instruct participants 
how to collect  and transmit data from the HBMD to their p hone and assist participants in their initial 
conversation with the HPCP coach , including an initial conversation about blood pressure  reading 
from their HBMD . Participants in the HPCP group will be prompted to enter the Lark HTN Pro 
application frequently  (as much as every day) via notification on their iOS device.  
 
Participants’ physicians will continue to manage blood pressure for both groups according to standard 
of care.  
 
6-month study visit  
Study participants will be required to return for a 6-month  study visit (within 2 weeks before to 8 weeks 
after) . During the [ADDRESS_732243] their height/weight and blood pressure measured 
again. Participants will also repeat questionnaires related to their current cardiovascular medications . 
They will also complete questionnaires measuring: medication adherence, sel f-efficacy , diet, physical 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page [ADDRESS_732244] EHR data using the Nort hwestern EDW to measure  
during the study period : the frequency of office visits, telephone and patient po rtal (email contacts), 
and antihypertensive medications prescribed, changed, or discontinued . 
 
Procedures to monitor participants for safety or minimize risks  
Individuals involved in any aspect of this study will be subject to minimal risk through their 
participation. This study collects personal health information and information that identifies study 
participants. While we work to keep this information confidential, there is a risk of loss of 
confidentiality. There is a risk that personal identifying information could be released.  
 
Participants will be informed in all cases about their rights as research participants. They may 
withdraw at any  time during the study without penalty or loss of any healthcare benefit or service to 
which they are entitled. Participants will be assigned a unique identification number; the research 
database will be password protected and accessible only to the resear ch team and the Institutional 
Review Board. Information linking participants’ names and contact [CONTACT_557596] a separate password protected file on  a password and firewa ll protected FSM 
network server  as well as 3  encrypted study laptops.  The laptops are whole disk encrypted utilizing 
Symantec Endpoint Encryption. Whole Disk Encryption (WDE) provides protection for computers by 
[CONTACT_557597]. It is imp ortant that 
Northwestern University personnel storing sensitive information such as  Protected Health Information 
(PHI), Personally Identifiable Information (PII) or research data,  protect their machines and data with 
whole disk encryption software.  We bel ieve that in using these methods we will be compliant with the 
“Standards for Privacy of Individual Identifiable Health Information” under the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy Rule.  Information obtained during th e 
delivery of clinical care at the Northwestern Medicine clinic sites (such as documentation of clinical 
encounters with the nurse) may be recorded in patients’ medical records and will be subject to the 
confidentiality protections for medical records unde r HIPAA.  
 
5. Describe the study timelines including: the duration of an individual participant ’s 
participation in the study and the overall anticipated duration of the project.   
The duration of an individual participant’s participation in this stu dy is approximately [ADDRESS_732245] data about 
participant s. (All surveys, interview scripts, and data collection forms  will be attached 
elsewhere in the application. Do not add other documents to the protocol .)  Describe w hat data 
will be collecte d and how it will be collected at all measurement/data collection time -points . 
 
Source records used to collect data about participants  
We will administer a baseline survey at enrol lment consisting of demographics, past medical 
information , medications  and other questions as detailed in the survey instruments (attached).   
 
During the c ourse of study,  blood pressure  and pulse will be measured by [CONTACT_557598]’s iPhone via Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) 
communication. An iPhone application will then send the transmitted data to an Omron  server.  Data 
collected from the Lark HTN Pro  app will be stored on a Lark server. Lark will make available a 
research file with the participants’ unique identifier consisting of a ll data  collected by [CONTACT_557599] : 
physical activity ti mes and duration, foods logged, sleep duration , and patient -entered messages (see 
attached list) .   
PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page [ADDRESS_732246], including any local scientific and 
ethical review structure.  
Not applicable. This research will not be conducted outside of Northwestern University  
 
9. Describe any approvals that will be obtained prior to commencing the research. (e.g., 
school, external site. funding agency.)  
Not applicable. This research will be commenced after obtaining IRB approval from Northwestern 
University.  
 
10. If the research involves individuals who are vulnerable or susceptible to coercion or undue 
influence1, describe additional safeguards included to protect their rights and w elfare.  
Not applicable. This research will not involve individuals who are vulnerable or susceptible to coercion 
or undue influence.  
 
5.0 Multiple sites:  
Not applicable. This is not a multi -site study.  
 
6.0  Incomplete Disclosure or Deception:  
Not applicable. This study will not use incomplete disclosure or deception.  
 
7.0  Recruitment : 
1. Describe when, where, and how potential participant s will be recruited.  
2. Describe the types of strategies and materials that will be used to recruit participant s.  
Note:  Do not attach recruitment documents to the protocol  but for additional guidance on 
the recruitment process and documents see: http://irb.northwestern.edu/process/new -
study/requirements/recruitment -materials -guidelines .  
Participant recruitment  
We will apply structured language query to data within the NMEDW to screen for  participants who are 
likely to meet study eligibility crite ria. In phase [ADDRESS_732247] recent  in-office blood pressures are ≥145 mmHg systolic or ≥ 95 mmHg 
diastolic. If we are not meeting recruitment targets, we will expand NMEDW screening criteria to 
identify patients with in -office blood pressure ≥ 140 mmHg systolic or ≥ [ADDRESS_732248] or other overture in order to 
obtain compliance ( http://www.hhs.gov/ohrp/policy/faq/informed -consent/what -does -coercion -or-undue -influence -
mean.html ). For example, the threat of the loss of reputation, good standing in class or of a bad grade if a student does 
not participate in a study would be an examp le of coercion. The offer of excessive money or special treatment or rewards 
for participation could be an example of undue influence.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page [ADDRESS_732249] a voicemail/message if they choose not 
to be contact[CONTACT_158866]. We have attached the opt -out letter within  eIRB+ applicat ion. 
Potential participants will not receive more than one letter per year about the trial. In order to avoid an 
individual receiving multiple letters, the list will be reviewed for duplicate names first by a computer 
analyst and re -examined by [CONTACT_464] . Individuals may request to not receive future recruitment 
letters. Five days later, a research assistant  will begin telephone recruitment. We will contact [CONTACT_557600]. Up to [ADDRESS_732250] information so t hey may refer patients with uncontrolled hypertension directly to the 
study.  
 
During the telephone recrui tment, patients interested in possibly participating in study will be asked a 
series of questions to screen for eligibility  (attached in eIRB). Patien ts who  screen positive for study 
participation will be asked to schedule  a study visit.  
 
8.0  Consent Process  (see also the Process of Obtaining Consent  guidance on the web 
site. 
 
Consent location  
Consent will occur at NMG outpatient clinic or Northwestern University sites on the day of the 
screening/baseline study visit.  
 
Ongoing consent process  
Not applicable to this study. There will be no reconsenting over time.  
 
Details of consent process  
I. Role of investigators . The investigator is responsible for ensuring that the participant 
understands the potential risks and benefits of participating in th e study, including answering 
any questions the participant may have throughout the study and sharing in a timely manner 
any new information that may be relevant to the participant’s willingness to continue his or her 
participation in the trial.  
The investigator is ultimately responsible for ensuring that informed consent is given by [CONTACT_557601]. This includes obtaining the appropriate signatures and 
dates on the informed consent form prior to the performance of an y protocol procedures.   
II. Amount of time devoted to the consent discussion . We will devote approximately 5  
minutes to the consent discussion and use standardized language per an informed consent 
document to structure the consent discussion.  
III. Steps to minimi ze the possibility of coercion  or undue influence . Trial recruitment will be 
performed by [CONTACT_557602] (attached). 
Research staff will receive training that includes didactic review of these materials and ro le 
play practice. Participants will also be informed that they withdraw from the study at any time.  
IV. Steps to ensure participants’ understanding . The informed consent process will be used to 
explain the potential risks and benefits of study participation to  the participant in simple terms 
before he or she is entered into the study, and to document that satisfaction and 
understanding of the potential risks and benefits of participating in the study. The research 
assistant will make sure the participant  unders tands what procedures and clinical data will be 
collected.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page 10 of 18 
  
We will not include:  
 Non-English speaking participants  
 Participants who are not yet adults (infants, children teenagers)  
 Cognitively impaired adults  
 Adults unable to provide consent.  
 
9.0  Process to Document Consent :  
The research assistant will review the informed consent document with the participant and answer 
any questions. Participants will provide written informed consent. We have attached consent script 
within eIRB+ application.  
 
10.0  Risks to Participant s: 
 
1. List the reasonably foreseeable risks, discomforts, hazards, or inconveniences related the 
participants’ participation in the research. Describe the probability, magnitude, duration, and 
reversibility of the risks.  
2. Consid er physical, psychological, social, legal, and economic risks as well as community or 
group harms.  
 
Participant risks in this study are minimal. Any potential risks that might exist fall into four categories: 
(a) risks associated with the Intervention. The main intervention risk is that patients may try to access 
the mobile phone or participate in assess ments while driving. Risks associated with cell phone use 
and driving will be managed by [CONTACT_557603]; (b) risks associated with research assessments, consisting of questions about 
hypertension management; (c) risks associated with potential loss of confidentiality; and (d) risks of 
worsening mental or emotional state.  
 
Participants will be told that they are not permitted to use the phones while driving. If study staff 
become aware o f mobile phone use while driving, they will do what is necessary to eliminate the risk 
(e.g. let the person know they should not use the phone while driving). Data for all participants will be 
kept strictly confidential except as mandated by [CONTACT_2371]. All resea rch files are kept on secure, password 
protected departmental and medical school servers. All data collected via the Lark HPCP and the 
Omron application s will be transmitted using  a secure file transfer  protocol (FTP) All electronic data 
will be stored on secure servers behind firewalls. Any paper documentation will be kept  in locked file 
cabinets or a locked file room. All data presentation will be of aggregate -level data; participants are 
never individually named.  
 
Any risks associated with antihypertens ive medication s are beyond the scope of this study because  
we are examining hypertension self-management , not medications. Participants will be  prescribed 
antihypertensive medications by [CONTACT_557604]. 
Participants can add, change or discontinue the ir medications at any time as they would do if they 
were not in the study. S tudy staff will encourage reg ular contact [CONTACT_557605] s to facilitate 
optimal treatment decision -making.  
 
3. If applicable, describe risks to others who are not participants.  
There are no risks to others who are not participants.  
 
4. Withdrawal of Participants  
There are no specific criteria for removal of a patient from the study or termination of the trial. A 
patient will be removed if continued participation is determined to constitute a danger to the patient’s 
health or well -being by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_557588] m the evaluators. Clinical evaluators are required to 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page [ADDRESS_732251] 
be removed from the study immediately, the patient will be removed and all appropriate referrals will 
be made. The IRB will be informed.  
 
Participants may discontinue their antihypertensive medication at any time and still continue in the 
study by c ompleting assessments. Participants may withdraw from the study at any time.  
 
11.0  Potential Benefits to Participant s:  
1. Describe the potential benefits that individual participant s may experience from taking part 
in the research.  Describe  also the probability, magnitude, and duration of the potential 
benefits.  
Participants may directly benefit from their participation. Use of the HPCP  application  (Lark HTN Pro)  
during the study may  improve blood pressure level, hypertension control, adherence to 
antihypertensive medications , build better medication -taking behavior,  and improve lifestyle behaviors 
(i.e. diet, physical activity , sleep  duration, and weight maintenance ), all of which are associated with 
improved health outcomes. The c ontrol group will  receive a HBMD (commercially available without a 
prescription) that may assist them in the self -management of their hypertension.  
 
2. Indicate if there is no direct benefit to participants. Do not include benefits to society 
or others.  
Not applicable.  
 
 
12.0  Financial Compensation:  
1. Describe any financial compensation that will be provided to participants. Include how much 
money or what gifts will be provided and for what activities.  
Participants attending a screening visit who are not eligible or who  choose not to participate will 
receive $10.  Participants who are enroll ed in the study will be given $25 and a commercially -available 
HBMD  manufactured by [CONTACT_557606] .  Participants who complete the follow up visit will receive $50.  
 
2. Include whether compens ation will be prorated if there are multiple research activities or if a 
participant withdraws from the study before finishing.  
See above  
 
3. Describe any costs that participants may be responsible for because of participation in the 
research.  
Participants will not be provided with i Phones or phone service. Participants who lose their iPhone or 
phone service during the course of the study will not be excluded. Participants will be compensated  
for public transit, taxi (up to $25) or be provided w ith a parking voucher for study visits.  
 
13.[ADDRESS_732252] the Privacy Interests of Participant s: 
1. Describe the steps that will be taken to protect participant s’ privacy interests  throughout  the 
research activities . 
 
Participants will be assigned a unique identification number; the research database will be password 
protected and accessible only to the research team and the Institutional Review Board. Information 
linking patients with their unique identifier will be kept on a password and firewall protected FSM 
network server. Once the study is complete, the linking file containing identifiers will be permanently 
deleted. Northwestern will retain a completely de -identified data file for analysis. These methods are 
compliant with the “Standa rds for Privacy of Individual Identifiable Health Information” under the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy Rule.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page 12 of 18 
  
Data collected from participants using the Lark app or the Omron app will be collected by [CONTACT_557607]  (see 
attached privacy document s, available at these websites: https://omronhealthcare.com/privacy/  AND 
http://lark.com/hipaa -privacy -policy/ ). Data collected by [CONTACT_557608], 
respectively, along with personal identifiers that are used by [CONTACT_557609] . 
However, when this data is used for research purposes or transmitted between research partners 
(namely between Northwestern, Omron, and/or Lark) these files will not contain personal identifiers 
other than an anonymous  study code. Northwestern investigat ors will provide these code s to 
participants  at the time of enrollment and have them enter these codes into the applications . 
Northwestern study staff will use these study codes to merge  data collected from the Lark and Omron  
applications  with data collect ed at Northwestern. Merged data will only be stored with the participant’s 
unique Subject ID  (different from the study code  used in the app ) and not with any other personal 
identifiers. Omron and Lark agree to make no attempt to re -identify individuals fro m these research 
data sets.  
 
2. Indicate who on the research team and how  the research team is permitted to access any 
sources of information about the participant s. 
 
At Northwestern , only authorized r esearch staff who are included on the IRB approved protocol will 
have access to participant data. Data collected by [CONTACT_557610].  
 
14.0  Confidentiality and Data Management:  
1. Describe how data (and if applicable, biological specimens) will be handled study -wide  
including : 
a. What info rmation will be included  as data (or associated with the specimens)?  “Data” 
includes all information collected in the conduct of the research, such as but not limited 
to: c onsents, surveys, interview notes, audio or video recordings, photographs, notes of 
observations, field notes, etc. 
b. Where and how will data (or specimens ) be stored?   How will data be transported  from the 
point of colle ction to where they will be stored ? Note: electronic storage of data in both 
domestic and international research must be secured using adequate protections .  
c. How long will the data or specimens be stored? (Note: IRB policy is [ADDRESS_732253] cumstance when other time frames may 
apply. ) 
d. Who will have access to the stored data or specimens?  
e. Who is responsible for receipt or transmission of the data or specimens?  
Data handling study -wide 
Information furnished to the investigator shall be maintain ed in confidence, and such information will 
be divulged to the institutional review board, ethics committee (IRB/EC) or similar committee; affiliated 
institution and employees, under appropriate understanding of confidentiality with such committee, 
affilia ted institution and employees.  Data generated by [CONTACT_557611], except to the extent that it is included in a publication as provided in the Publications 
section of this protocol.  
 
The Research data collected by [CONTACT_557612] (Omron, and Lark) will not include identifying data other than. Specifically, anonymized 
data include only a unique Subject ID as identifier of an individual subject. Study  staff and doctors will 
connect the identity of the individual patient with the Subject ID through maintenance of a Subject ID 
Log. The Subject ID Log and other documents containing identifying information are required to be 
kept in locked storage.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page 13 of 18 
 The as sociates (or associates representative), IRB/EC, or regulatory authority representatives may 
consult and/or copy trial documents in order to verify source document/case report form data.  In this 
way, these individuals will have access to a patient’s ident ifying information.  By [CONTACT_398856], patients agree to this process.  If trial documents will be photocopi[INVESTIGATOR_557589]/case report form information, the patient will be identified by [CONTACT_557613]; full names will be masked prior to transmission to the associates.  
 
2. Describe the steps that will be taken secure the data (e.g., training, authorization of access, 
password protection, encryption, physical controls, certificates of confidentiality, and 
separation of identifiers and data) during storage, use, and transmission.  
 Training: All personnel involved in study will complete human subjects protections training and 
register within eIRB+, and be added to authorized personnel list . [CONTACT_557620]  and or [CONTACT_557621] will 
regularly evaluate the workflows and procedures of project coordinators and IT personnel 
interacting with participants and their data.  
 Authorization of access: All Northwestern staff on the study will be on the author ized personnel 
list. We will work with the ‘minimum necessary’ framework to grant access to secure study folders 
on secure division drives based on an individual’s need to see data. Analysts and investigators 
working on data analysis will have a restricted  access folder. Project coordinators will only have 
access to what they need to do their job and will not interact with patient data unless as required 
by [CONTACT_557614].  
 Password protection and Encryption: All study files with identified data will be kept pa ssword 
protected. This includes recruitment tracking files, survey files, and chart abstraction data. The 
laptops study staff use will be encrypted and will require log -in and password.  
 Separation of Identifiers: All subjects will be assigned a unique ide ntification number  (Subject ID) . 
Information linking participants’  names and contact [CONTACT_557615] a separate password protected file on FSM servers.  Similarly, we will generate  study codes 
to provide to participa nts that are distinct from the Subject ID that we will have participants enter 
into Omron and Lark apps. These codes will allow Omron and Lark to securely send us files that 
do not contain other personal identifiers.  
  These methods are compliant with the “ Standards for Privacy of Individual Identifiable Health 
Information” under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) 
Privacy Rule.  
 Once study enrollment and data analysis are complete, the file linking patients with their uniq ue 
identifier will be permanently deleted.  
 
3. Describe any procedures that will be used for quality control of collected data.  If conducting 
online research, specify if you will be using any attention check measures. If yes, you need to 
indicate  what you will be doing and what happens if a participant fails the attention checks.  
Quality control of collected data  
The HBMD  provided by [CONTACT_557606]  (Omron BP761N) is an FDA approved model. The integrity of 
collected blood pressure  data is secured with auto mated data transfer from device to server.  The 
study will be conducted and data will be generated, documented, and reported in compliance with the 
protocol, accepted standards of Good Clinical Practice, and all applicable local regulations. [CONTACT_557621] 
and or [CONTACT_557620] will work with data programmer  and other study staff members  to ensure validity of 
collected data.  
 
4. Describe the data analysis plan, including any statistical procedures  is applicable . 
Data analysis plan, including any statistical procedures  
We will perform analysis to address each primary and secondary aim using SAS v9.4 (SAS Institute, 
Carey, NC). We will use a  5% level to signify statistical significance and calculate 95% confidence 
intervals. All analyses will assume intention -to-treat principles.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page 14 of 18 
 The proposed study is a simple randomized controlled trial where the unit of randomization is the 
participant . Anticipatin g a follow -up rate of 85% at 6 months, we aim to  recruit  350 participants  in total 
who will be allocated in a 1:1 fashion to the HPCP+HBMD group or the HBMD alone group . This will 
provide at least 300 total participants who will contribute to the primary data analysis at follow -up. If 
time and resources permit, we may expand recruitment efforts to 400 participants  in total in case 
follow -up rates are  lower  (i.e. 75%). 
  
Statistical analyses  
Before conducting formal analys es, we will perform descriptive statistics to compare the two treatment 
groups to ensure adequate balance of potential confounders. These characteristics include: socio -
demographic characteristics, comorbidities, baseline blood pressure values, and number of 
antihypertensive medications used.  
 
For the primary analysis plan, we will compare the differences in systolic blood pressure at [ADDRESS_732254] ing for baseline 
age (years),  sex (male or female), and baseline systolic blood pressure (mmHg).  We will perform 
similar analyses for the secondary outcomes of continuous variables ( diastolic blood pressure , weight,  
diet score, and physical activity),  adjusting for age, sex, and base line variable . We will assess model 
assumptions and explore residual diagnostics. As appropriate, transformations of variables and/or 
nonparametrics may be employed.   
 
For the binary outcome of blood pressure control (systolic blood pressure <140 mmHg and diastolic 
blood pressure <90 mmHg), we will use a logistic regress ion model adjusting for age, sex, and 
baseline systolic blood pressure level . For the secondary outcomes that are not measured at 
baseline, we will adjust only for age and sex in regression models.  
 
We will also compare the effects of treatment group in stratified analyses by [CONTACT_8497] (BMI >=25 and 
BMI <25) and SBP >=150 or <150.  
 
Power Calculation  
Without much prior knowledge regarding the overall variance in outcome that may be accounted for  
by [CONTACT_557616], we can conservatively estimate power based on the independent two -
sample t -test. With the planned analytic sample size of 300 (150 per arm), we have 80% power to 
detect a small to moderate (0.[ADDRESS_732255] deviations) effect size a cross the two arms at the 5% level of 
significance. Thus, if the observed standard deviation is 15mmHg, we have adequate power to detect 
a 5mmHg difference in mean six -month SBP across the two arms. Since we have pre -specified 
adjustment for baseline SBP, sex, and age, we anticipate increased precision in analysis of primary 
outcome, allowing for more than 80% power to detect the same effect size via our planned primary 
outcome analyses. If we estimate between 0% - 25% of the variation (R -squared) to be exp lained by 
[CONTACT_557616], the analytic approach will allow for 80% power to detect a 5mmHg mean 
difference in six -month SBP across the two arms if the standard deviation is no larger than 17mmHg 
(i.e., a slightly smaller [0.29] effect size).  
 
 
15.0  Data Monitoring Plan to E nsure the Safety of Participant s: 
 
1. Describe t he plan to periodically evaluate the information  collected regarding risks or  harms 
to determine whether participant s remain safe . For example, if you are collecting depression 
or suicidality data, what is your plan for monitoring severity? Note: the plan might include 
establishing a data monitoring committee and a plan for reporting their  findings to the IRB and 
the sponsor . It also could include referral to an appropriate resource. Include  the following : 
a. What information / data are reviewed, including safety data, untoward events, and  efficacy 
data.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page 15 of 18 
 b. How the safety information will be collected (e.g., with case report  forms, at study visits, 
by [CONTACT_10774]).  
c. The frequency of data collection, including when safety data collection starts.  
d. Who will review the data.  
e. The frequency or periodicity of review of cumulative data.  
f. The statistical tests for analyzing the safe ty data to determine whether harm is occurring.  
g. Describe any conditions where the research team may intervene and what the plan is for 
intervening. (For example, if a participant identifies harm to self or others.)  
h. Describe an y conditions that might trigger an immediate suspension of the research . 
This is a minimal risk study because participants are only subject to an app that promotes the 
standard of care for individuals with hypertension and the use of a commercially available home blood 
pressure m onitor (currently available without a prescription for self-monitoring  of blood pressure).  We 
will convene a data and safety monitoring committee for this study consisting of 4 clinical researchers 
(of which one is a statistician) for data and safety moni toring. Meetings will be organized every 6 
months. At these meetings, the study protocol, procedures, and any issues of concern related to 
research integrity will be discussed. Email correspondence, or teleconference meetings may be 
arranged for issues tha t require immediate attention.  
 
We will set thresholds for blood pressure readings taken as part of the study visit  that require a clinical 
response . All study participants will receive a notification of their average blood pressure taken on the 
study vis it day.  Lower threshold: If the average systolic blood pressure is < 80 mmHg or the average 
diastolic blood pressure is <50 mmHg, study staff will alert the patient to speak with their clinician that 
day. Upper threshold: If the average systolic blood pre ssure is >180 mmHg or the average diastolic 
blood pressure is >110 mmHg, study staff will alert the patient to speak with their clinician that day.  
 
 
16.0  Data and if applicable, Specimen Banking:  
Not applicable for this study.  
 
17.[ADDRESS_732256] Research and Resources Available : 
1. For international research or research with vulnerable populations, d escribe the 
qualifications (e.g., training, experience, oversight) of you  and your staff as required to 
conduct the research . When applicable describe  the knowledge of the local study sites, 
culture, and society. Provide  enough information so the IRB knows that you have qualified 
staff for  the proposed research.  
Note: If you specify a person by [CONTACT_2300], a change to that person will require prior  approval by 
[CONTACT_1201]. If you specify people by [CONTACT_10757] (e.g., coordinator,  research assistant, co -investigator, or 
pharmacist), a change to that  person will not require prior approval by [CONTACT_1201], provided that 
person  meets the qualifications described above to fulfill their roles.  
 
Not applicable. Not conducting international research or research with vulnerable populations.  
 
2. Describe other resources available to conduct the research: For example,  as appropriate:  
a. Describe your facilities  or other physical re sources needed for the conduct of the 
research.  
This study will take place in General Internal Medicine (GIM) outpatient clinics - The GIM clinic of 
Northwestern Medical Group has [ADDRESS_732257] (Epic; Epic Systems Corporation; Verona , Wisconsin) for all clinical encounters (in -
person and telephone). The GIM clinic has t hree private room s in the clinic dedicated for research. 
The Division also has a Clinical Research Center with 4 examination rooms in the same building as 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page [ADDRESS_732258] that participation will result in significant 
changes in the needs for social, emotional or psychological resources. Physician investigators (who 
are practicing physicians  at Northwestern ) will be available by [CONTACT_557617].  
 
 
c. Describe your process to ensure that all persons assisting with the research are 
adequately informed about the protocol, the research  procedures, and their duties and 
functions.  
Research staff will have adequate time devoted to this study in order to conduct recruitment activities 
and answer any questions that particip ants have about using the HPCP application. A project 
coordinator and data analyst are familiar with this protocol and have estimated the time needed to 
successfully meet objectives. Within the division of General Internal Medicine & Geriatrics, our study 
team work together frequently on studies similar to this protocol. We have adequate computer (both 
hardware and statistical software) resources and server storage capacity. The study team will meet 
quarterly to ensure all authorized personnel are informed about protocol. Drs. Persell and Karmali will 
be working closely with study staff to ensure the study protocol is followed and all duties are being 
appropriately carried out.  
 
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page 17 of 18 
  
References  
 
1. Benjamin EJ, Blaha MJ, Chiuve SE, et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics -2017 Update: A 
Report From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017;135(10):e146 -e603.  
2. Neal B, MacMahon S, Chapman N. Effects of ACE inhibitors, calcium antagonists, a nd other 
blood -pressure -lowering drugs: results of prospectively designed overviews of randomised 
trials. Blood Pressure Lowering Treatment Trialists' Collaboration. Lancet. 
2000;356(9246):1955 -1964.  
3. Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR, et al. The Seventh  Report of the Joint National 
Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure: the 
JNC 7 report. JAMA. 2003;289(19):2560 -2572.  
4. Perk J, De Backer G, Gohlke H, et al. European Guidelines on cardiovascular disease 
preve ntion in clinical practice (version 2012). The Fifth Joint Task Force of the European 
Society of Cardiology and Other Societies on Cardiovascular Disease Prevention in Clinical 
Practice (constituted by [CONTACT_557618]). Eur Heart J. 
2012;33(13):1635 -1701.  
5. James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, et al. 2014 evidence -based guideline for the management of 
high blood pressure in adults: report from the panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint 
National Committee (JNC 8). JAMA. 2014;311(5):507 -520. 
6. Weber MA, Schiffrin EL, White WB, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the management of 
hypertension in the community: a statement by [CONTACT_424889]. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2014;16(1):14 -26. 
7. Gu Q, Burt VL, Dillon CF, Yoon S. Trends in antihypertensive medication use and blood 
pressure control among [LOCATION_002] adults with hypertension: the National Health And 
Nutrition Examination Survey, 2001 to 2 010. Circulation. 2012;126(17):2105 -2114.  
8. Glynn LG, Murphy AW, Smith SM, Schroeder K, Fahey T. Interventions used to improve 
control of blood pressure in patients with hypertension. The Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews. 2010(3):CD 005182.  
9. Fletc her BR, Hartmann -Boyce J, Hinton L, McManus RJ. The Effect of Self -Monitoring of 
Blood Pressure on Medication Adherence and Lifestyle Factors: A Systematic Review and 
Meta -Analysis. Am J Hypertens. 2015;28(10):1209 -1221.  
10. Uhlig K, Patel K, Ip S, Kitsios  GD, Balk EM. Self -measured blood pressure monitoring in the 
management of hypertension: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Ann Intern Med. 
2013;159(3):185 -194. 
11. Burke LE, Ma J, Azar KM, et al. Current Science on Consumer Use of Mobile Health for 
Cardiovascular Disease Prevention: A Scientific Statement From the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2015;132(12):1157 -1213.  
12. Laing BY, Mangione CM, Tseng CH, et al. Effectiveness of a smartphone application for 
weight loss compared with usual care  in overweight primary care patients: a randomized, 
controlled trial. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161([ADDRESS_732259]):S5 -12. 
13. Dayer L, Heldenbrand S, Anderson P, Gubbins PO, Martin BC. Smartphone medication 
adherence apps: potential benefits to patients and providers. Journal of the A merican 
Pharmacists Association : JAPhA. 2013;53(2):172 -181. 
14. Warren -Findlow J, Reeve CL, Racin e EF. Psychometric Validation of a Brief Self -report 
Measure of Diet Quality: The DASH -Q. J Nutr Educ Behav. 2017;49(2):92 -99.e91.  
15. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_65528], Hall JE, Appel LJ, et al. Recommendations for blood pressure measurement in 
humans and experimental animals : Part 1: blood pressure measurement in humans: a 
statement for professionals from the Subcommittee of Professional and Public Education of 
the American Heart Association Council on High Blood Pressure Research. Hypertension. 
2005;45(1):142 -161. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Improving Hypertension Using a  Smartphone -Enabled Personal Control 
Program: The SMART  Hypertension Control Study  
 
Page 18 of 18 
 16. Schwar zer R, Jerusalem M. Generalized self -efficacy scale. In: Weinman J, Wright S, 
Johnston M, eds. Measures in health psychology: a user's portfolio. Causal and control beliefs . 
Windsor, [LOCATION_006]: NFER -NELSON; 1995.  
 