 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vale+Tú Salud: Corner -Based Randomized Trial to Test a Latino Day  
Laborer  Program Adapted to Prevent COVID -19 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 05/01/2023  
  
Protocol  Title:  Vale+Tú Salud: Corner -Based Randomized Trial to Test a Latino Day Laborer 
Program Adapted to Prevent  COVID -19 
 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_738727] -Esquer  
 
Co-Investigators:  Casey Durand , Andrew  Springer  
 
Study  Coordinator:  Ana Llamas Yesmel King  
 
Population:  Latino day laborers, N= 600, males, ages 18 and older, ordinary health  status 
living in the Houston metropolitan area  location  
Number  of Sites:  Single  site 
 
Study  Duration:  Five years  
 
Subject  Duration:  From baseline to post -test is one month  approximately.  
 
 
General Information  
 
Our project,  Vale+Tú  Salud  (Your  Health  is Worth  More)  is a five- year  intervention  study  that extends  our 
previous work addressing injury prevention among Latino Day Laborers (LDL). Our project’s goal is to 
promote group problem solving and a commitment to implement COVID -[ADDRESS_1009342] 
been successfully tested among LDL in our previous study (Vale+Tú ). We hope to address the following 
question: Can an adapted Latino Day Laborer program increase adherence to COVID -19 mitigation 
practices, including vaccination, which reduce the risk of  COVID -19? 
Background Information  
 
Latinos  across  the US, particularly  those  born  outside  the US, are disproportionally  affected  by [CONTACT_25963] 
19 pandemic. In [LOCATION_007], although Latinos compose 40% of the State’s population, they account for the 
majority  of COVID  [ADDRESS_1009343] housing and share living quarters in crowded 
conditions. Many LDL are engaged in occupations such as construction and cannot work from home.  LDL 
perceive  their  well-being  (bien  estar)  in terms  of their  ability  to provide  for their  families,  but experiences 
of wage  theft  and other  forms  of abuse  lead  to feelings  of isolation  and despair  (desesperación ) as well as 
depression and anxiety. On the other hand, LDL possess resources which promote resiliency. These 
include  social  support  networks  composed  of other  LDL,  family,  friends,  employers,  church  members,  and 
sports  teams.  
Adherence  to COVID  [ADDRESS_1009344]  access  to 
restrooms  or are given  time  by [CONTACT_738744].  Social  distancing  at locations  where 
LDL gather to seek employment (corners) may be problematic as LDL want to socialize with their 
coworkers and approach potential employers in groups. Our recent observations of Houston corners 
found low levels of mask use and social distancing among L DL. In addition, less than 50% of Hispanics 
received the influenza vaccine during the 2018 -2019 flu season in  [LOCATION_007].  
 
 
UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPR OPagVe 1AofL21  DATE : 05/01/[ADDRESS_1009345] not been studied  locally.  
Program content . Vale+ Tu Salud is designed as a small group, corner -based participatory learning and 
action intervention that is intended to be easily adopted by [CONTACT_738745] -based organizations 
working with the LDL community for dissemination across geographic si tes in the U.S. and corners where 
LDLs gather for work. Three core components comprise the intervention:  
Group Problem Solving Component : This component incorporates popular education activities aimed 
at: developi[INVESTIGATOR_738728]; building awa reness about COVID -19 risks and protective 
behaviors; and developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a plan of action to reduce their and their peers’ risk for COVID -19 
transmission.  Action  plans  to be developed  by [CONTACT_738746] a personal 
and group  commitme nt to keep  each  other  safe via COVID -19 prevention  practices;  increasing  PPE use 
(masks),  handwashing,  and observing  social  distancing  practices  (e.g.,  new  ways  for greeting  other  than 
handshaking) at worksites; and dissemination of information regarding social service resources to 
buffer the effects of COVID -19. As part of this component, LDL participants will be presented with 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_738729] -[ADDRESS_1009346] scenarios, and then 
problem  solve  together  to gauge  COVID -19 knowledge  and develop  risk reduction  strategies,  resulting 
in a plan of action to promote individual and LDL coworker protection from COVID -19. The dialogue  
will be guided by a script developed by [CONTACT_138299].  
 
Navigation Component : This component will consist of providing information and linking LDLs with 
social service providers that can help buffer some of the social and economic effects of the COVID -19 
pandem ic, which may include resources for increasing food security, access to healthcare, and other 
social service support. As cited above, we will also aim to link LDL participants with COVID -19 testing 
and vaccination sites.  
“Multiplicador de salud”/Health Mul tiplier Component . The health multiplier component builds from 
the theoretical and practice -based method of mobilizing social networks and social support, defined 
as encouraging social networks to provide informational, emotional, appraisal, and instrument al 
support as cited in the Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods. LDL participants will be invited to be 
key partners with Vale+ Tú Salud and to participate in our diffusion efforts by [CONTACT_738747], 
co-workers, and families to take action to protec t themselves and others from COVID -19. In doing so, 
participants will be provided with COVID -19 prevention flyers and social resource lists to distribute 
within their immediate social circles.  
Study Design  
 
Being mindful of the need to address the current pandemic emergency, we propose to implement our 
COVID prevention program using an adaptive, pragmatic approach for pandemic trials recently 
recommended  by [CONTACT_738748] -Elliman  et al., (2020)  that will allow  us to deliver  our intervention  promptly.  We 
will test the effectiveness  of our program  in three  phases  that progressively  build  on each  other  and target 
evolving  prevention  priorities -including  those  that are emerging  (e.g.  vaccination)  and those  that are more 
established (e.g. face mask use), using prevention strategies previously tested in our Vales+Tu injury risk 
reduction intervention and adapted for our current  purposes.  
Implementation of the trial will occur using a phased approach, including a rapid initial phase that will 
adapt our current resources so that we may start the intervention program faster. The three phases will 
proceed as follows:  
Rapid adaptation – AIM 1 & AIM 2 (Phase 1).  
 
We will combine AIM 1 and AIM 2 (Phase 1) into a rapid adaptat ion phase by [CONTACT_738749]+Tu 
(injury risk reduction) manuals of study procedures describing enrollment, intervention, and evaluation 
procedures applicable to this new trial; this will save valuable time in getting the study up and running.  IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389  
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 05/01/2023  
UT Houston  Protocol  Template  Page 2 of 21 
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   Using intervention mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007], the program content will be adapted from COVID data on mitigation 
practices (PPE, mask, and hand sanitizer use) and barriers collected in the current injury trial, and from a 
review of the literature identifying antecedent facto rs to implementing COVID -related mitigation 
practices  among  day laborers  and other  Latino  immigrants.  We will combine  the process  described  above 
to expedite  the implementation  of the trial,  to develop  a baseline  survey  instrument  to collect  information 
about the determinants of COVID 19 mitigation practices among Latino Day  Laborers.  
The information collected during this rapid phase will serve as the foundation to answer our AIM 1 
research  question  and as the initial  phase  1 of our clinical  trial (AIM  2) from  which  subsequent  phases  will 
be adapted.  
AIM 2 (Phase 2 & 3).  
 
These phases will build on lessons learned in the rapid adaptation/Phase 1, including the structural 
equation  modeling  of psychosocial  determinants  (AIM1)  that will improve  our ability  to more  solidly  target 
determinants of COVID prevention practices unique among our target population in the second iteration 
of the program. We will conduct two additional clinical trial phases, each consisting of [ADDRESS_1009347] aim (AIM 3) that is focused on disseminating the results from phases [ADDRESS_1009348] -corner  level,  while  and the intervention s will be delivered  at the individual 
(LDL)  level.  The treatment  arm will consist  of a small  group,  corner -based  participatory  learning  and action 
intervention.  The standard  of care  arm will consist  of COVID -19 informational  and OSHA  safety  brochures. 
This will be a five -year study. An individual’s participation would consist of a baseline and a one -month 
follow -up survey , with future additional follow -ups to be considered by [CONTACT_138299] . 
We will develop  a survey  tool to gather  information  relat ed to workers’  current  personal  and psychosocial 
characteristics,  work  conditions,  attitudes  and beliefs  regarding  COVID -[ADDRESS_1009349] phase 1 indicates a need to make substantia l changes to our tool before conducting phases 2 
and 3. If changes are made to the instrument after phase 1, we will re -submit our materials for CPHS 
approval.  
Objectives  
 
There are three specific aims of this study.  
 
Rapid Adaptation phase includes AIM 1 and AIM 2 (PHASE 1)  
 
AIM 1: Determine the cultural, socioeconomic, inter/personal and work -related factors that 
influence COVID [ADDRESS_1009350] that COVID 19 is having on 
Latino Immigrant workers, we are doing a rapid adaptation phase to accomplish aim 1. The goal of  
the rapid assessment include:  IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 05/01/[ADDRESS_1009351] COVID 19 needs assessment survey with 200 LDL at randomly selected  corners.  
b. Establish the influence of multilevel determinants on mitigation practices using a structural 
equation  model.  
Research question : What multilevel determinants influence LDL adherence to COVID 
19 mitigation practices?  
AIM 2: Adapt, implement, and test Vale+T ú Salud in a cluster randomized trial to assess the extent 
to which LDL report increased adherence with COVID [ADDRESS_1009352] 
intervention.  
a. Use Intervention Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_738730] (NIH Stage I) for COVID [ADDRESS_1009353] Vale+Tú Salud efficacy in a CRT with 600 LDL (200 X Phase 1 (Rapid Adaptation) (200 x 
Phase 2) (200 x Phase 3) from 30 randomly selected  corners.  
Hypothesis:  At post -test, LDL who participate in (a) a small group problem -solving activity 
will report g reater adherence with COVID 19 mitigation practices compared to (b) LDL 
receiving COVID -related resources only.  
Aim 3: AIM 3: Promote Vale+Tú Salud just -in-time results and increase its capacity to rapi[INVESTIGATOR_738731] a nd other Latino immigrants.  
a. After CRT Phase 1, work closely with the CAB and LDL leaders to rapi[INVESTIGATOR_738732]  [ADDRESS_1009354] that the lessons learned in this COVID 19 
prevention program will transfer to other work and life domains where LDL may adopt similar 
practices to reduce other health risks.  
Clinical Trial Description  
 
Clinical Trial  
 
Selection of the study population . The study population will be Latino Day Laborers present at 
randomly selected study corners.  
Inclusion/exclusion  criteria . A screener  form  will be used  to assess  eligibility.  In order  to be eligible,  an LDL 
must  be at least  18 years  old; identify  as Hispanic  or Latino;  be at the corner  for the purpose  of looking  for 
work;  and have  been  previously  hired  at a corner.  LDL not meeting  these  requirements  will be thanked  for 
their  time  and informed  they  are not eligible  to participate.  LDL will also be asked  if they  have  experienced 
symptoms of COVID -19 in the previous 48 hours (fever, cough, sore  throat,  
 
UT Houston  Protocol  Template  Page 4 of 21 
Adapted from NIH protocol template and  ICH Guidelines   IRB NUMBER:  HSC -SPH-20-1389  
    IRB APPROVAL DATE:  05/01/2023  

 
See table 1 below for additional information about the constructs to be included in our survey.  fatigue, etc.). Those reporting symptoms will be thanked for their time and informed they are not 
eligible to participate and will be given a brochure with COVID related resources.  
Obtaining Informed Consent:  
 
Participants will be asked to provide oral informed consent to take part in the survey. Potential 
participants will be told the purpose of the assessment, that they can refuse to answer any item and 
that they can pause the assessment to talk to potential e mployers or attend a job. The interviewer 
will explain  that the study  has been  granted  a Certificate  of Confidentiality  and that all responses  will 
be protected.  If the potential  study  participant  does  not provide  informed  consent,  he will be thanked 
for h is time but will not be able to take part in the  survey.  
Recruitment Strategy . The Outreach Coordinator and the LDL interviewers will visit the selected 
corners  and approach  LDL about  participating  in our study.  After  obtaining  oral informed  consent,  the 
participant  will be asked  to complete  the baseline  survey,  which  should  take  no more  than  [ADDRESS_1009355]  a mixture 
of corners based on the number of LDL previously observed: small (less than 15 LDL), medium (15 -29 
LDL), and large (30 or more  LDL).  
Study Procedures  
 
Eligible LDL who wish to participate will be asked to provide verbal informed consent  by [CONTACT_738750] -based form . After enrollment into the study, participants will complete a 
baseline survey. The survey will be administered electronically via an iPad and each participant will 
complete the survey in private, with assistance from study personnel. The baseline survey should take 
approximately  45 minutes  to an hour  to complete.  The purpose  of the assessment  is to gather  informati on 
related to workers’ current personal and psychosocial characteristics, work conditions, attitudes and 
beliefs regarding COVID -[ADDRESS_1009356] of three core components:  
Group Problem Solving Component : This component incorporate s popular education activities aimed at: 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_738728]; building awareness about COVID -19 risks and protective 
behaviors;  and developi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  a plan  of action  to reduce  their  and their  peers’  risk for COVID -19 transmission. 
Action plans may include development of a personal and group commitment to keep each other safe via 
COVID -19 prevention  practices;  increasing  PPE (masks),  handwashing,  and social  distancing  practices  (e.g., 
new  ways  for greeting  other  than  handshaking)  at worksites;  and dissemination  of social  service  resources 
to buffer the effects of COVID -19. As part of this component, LDL participants will be presented with 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_738733] -[ADDRESS_1009357] scenarios, and then 
problem sol ve together to develop risk reduction strategies, resulting in a plan of action to promote 
individual and LDL coworker protection from  COVID -19. 
Navigation Component : This component will consist of providing information and linking LDLs with 
social  service  providers  that can help  buffer  some  of the social  and economic  effects  of the COVID -19 
pandemic, which may include resources for increasing food security, access to healthcare, and other 
social service support. As cited above, we will also aim to link LDL  participants with COVID -19 
vaccination services contingent upon vaccination  availability.  
 
IRB NUMBER:  HSC -SPH-20-1389  
    IRB APPROVAL DATE:  05/01/2023  UT Houston  Protocol  Template  Page 5 of 21 
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  

IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPR OPagVe 6AofL21  DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   
“Multiplicador  de salud”/Health  Multiplier  Component . The health  multiplier  component  builds  from 
the theoretical and practice -based method of mobilizing social networks and social support, defined 
as encouraging social networks to provide informational, emotional, appraisal, and instrumental 
support as cited in the Taxonomy of Behavior Change Methods. LDL participants will be invited to be 
key partners  with  the Vale+Tú  Salud  by [CONTACT_738751],  co-workers,  and families  to take  action 
to protect  themselves  and others  from  COVID -19. In doing  so, participants  will be helpi[INVESTIGATOR_738734] -19 prevention  flyers  and social  resource  lists to distribute 
within their immediate social  circles.  
The specific elements of the intervention will be refined based on the results of the intervention 
mappi[INVESTIGATOR_738735]+ Tu injury program. In addition, results from 
the rapid  adaptation will be used to further improve our intervention.  
The standard of care arm will receive COVID -[ADDRESS_1009358]  the 
follow -up. 
The clinical trial will be conducted in three phases  and will follow the schedule below:  
Rapid Adaptation Phase 1 (AIM 1 & AIM 2 (Phase 1)) will be conducted with 200 LDL. 
Phase 2 (AIM 2 (phase 2) will be conducted with 200 LDL.  
Phase 3 (AIM 2 (phase 3) will be conducted with 200 LDL.  
After each phase, we w ill review the implementation of the trial and baseline survey results. 
Recruitment activities, the survey, and the intervention will be revised as necessary.  
No invasive procedures will be employed, and no biological specimens will be collected.  
 
Clinical  Trial Compensation  
 
Participants in the trial will receive a $[ADDRESS_1009359] for completing the baseline survey and group 
activity and a second $[ADDRESS_1009360]  in person  at an agreed  upon 
location. Interviewers will be responsible for the distribution of the incentives. An incentives log will 
be kept to track the distribution  process.  
Table 1. Constructs and Measures for Vale+Tú Salud  
 
Construc 
ts Scale  Previous Use  Original Source  # of 
Items  α 
COVID - 
19 COVID -19 
Knowledge  Adapted  from Geldsetzer,  2020.  4  
Psychos 
ocial  
Factors  Perceived Severity  Adapted - John Hopkins University COVID -19 Community 
Response Survey  4  
Perceived  Adapted - John Hopkins University COVID -19 Community  3  
 susceptibility  Response Survey   
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPR OPagVe 7AofL21  DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   
 COVID Self -Efficacy 
and Outcome 
Expectations  Adapted - World Health Organization COVID -19 Survey Tool and 
Guidance, 2020.  5  
COVID Exposure  Adapted – [LOCATION_011] University COVID -19 Symptoms & Social  
Distancing Web Survey  6  
Health Status and  
Access to Care  Adapted – [LOCATION_011] University COVID -19 Symptoms & Social  
Distancing Web Survey & the Houston Education Research 
Consortium – Gulf Coast Coronavirus (COVID -19) Community 
Impact Survey  [ADDRESS_1009361] COVID -19 and Mental  
Well-Being & Data Foundation COVID -[ADDRESS_1009362]  Adapted – [LOCATION_011] University COVID -19 Symptoms & Social  
Distancing Web Survey  [ADDRESS_1009363] Survey  1  
Intention to adhere  
to Mitigation 
Practices  Developed by [CONTACT_5051]  11  
Barriers to Health  
Care Access  Developed by [CONTACT_5051]  3  
COVID -19 Vaccine  
attitudes  Adapted - World Health Organization COVID -19 Survey Tool and  
Guidance, 2020.  8  
Social Isolation  Social Isolation  Diaz, Ayala, Bein et al., 2001.  7 .78 
Stress  Perceived Stress Scale  Adapted from Cohen, Kamarck, &  
Mermelstein, 1983.  6 .86 
Anxiety  6-item STAI -E (STAI -E6) Perpiñá -Galvañ, et al, 2013.  [ADDRESS_1009364] (AUDIT)  Used in Fernández -Esquer, Gallardo,  
& Diamond, 2018.  [ADDRESS_1009365] – 
Revised (LOT -R) Efuni, 1994.  9 .66 
Religiosity  Religiosity  Boyas, Valera & Ruiz, 2018.  3 - 
 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPR OPagVe 8AofL21  DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   
 Copi[INVESTIGATOR_738736], 1997.  24 .50 
+ 
Perceived Social  
Support  Used in Rapid Needs  
Assessment  Barrera, Sander, & Ramsay, 1981.  10 .93 
Practice  
s COVID Mitigation  
Practices  Adapted from Park, Russell, Fendrich et al., 2020.  8 - 
 
 
 
 
Work 
conditi 
ons Wage Theft  Used in Rapid Needs  
Assessment  Adapted from Zoeckler, Lax, Gonos,  
et al., 2014.  2 - 
Safety Climate  Used in Corner Survey  Fugas, Silva, & Mejia, 2012.  6 .85 
Risks at the jobsite  Used in Corner Survey  Fernández -Esquer, Fernández - 
Espada, Atkinson et al. 2015.  6 .77 
Work Conditions  Used in Corner Survey  Fernández -Esquer, Fernández - 
Espada, Atkinson et al., 2015.  14 .89 
Risks at the corner  Used in Corner Survey  From Focus Groups  9 .77 
Working Climate  Used in Corner Survey  Fernández -Esquer, Fernández - 
Espada, Atkinson et al. 2015.  11 .82 
Socio - 
Econom 
ic 
Stressor  
s Everyday  
Discrimination  Used in Rapid Needs  
Assessment  Williams, et al., 1997;  Kessler,  
Michelson, & Williams,  1999.  5 .84 
Discrimination  
justification  Used in Rapid Needs  
Assessment  Williams, et al., 1997;  Kessler,  
Michelson, & Williams,  1999.  13 .90 
Immigration Stress  Disappointment about  
Life in US.  
Deportation -Related 
Worry  
Fear of Venturing Out as 
an Imm.  Fernández -Esquer, Gallardo, &  
Diamond, 2018.  5 
3 
7 .71 
.71 
.89 
Situational Stress  Used in SHILOS  Fernández -Esquer, Gallardo, &  
Diamond, 2018.  [ADDRESS_1009366] recommendations where applicable. This include UTHealth guidance; state -, 
county -, and city-level  rules;  Centers  for Disease  Control  and Prevention  (CDC)  recommendations; 
OSHA recommendations; and any guidance specific to the community setting (e.g., [LOCATION_007] 
Education Agency (TEA) for  schools).  
2. Prepare for community -level research with COVID -19. Preparations include: staff 
preparation/training, assessment of staff risk, modification to protocols, obtaining personal 
protective equipment  (PPE).  
3. Assess risk level in the community and for study participants. Entry into the community and 
staff/research  preparation  will depend  on the current  level  of community  trans mission,  as well as 
the setting (e.g., school, childcare center, long -term care facility, prison,  etc.).  
4. Communicate  frequently  with  research  staff,  community  partners,  and appropriate  UTHealth 
departments (e.g., Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects,  etc.).  
5. Document the  process.  
Research  staff  will adhere  to recommendations  regarding  the use of PPE and social  distancing,  both  at the 
School  and in the field.  Staff  will be trained  in the proper  use of equipment  and other  protective  measures. 
We will maintain an adequate supply of equipment for use by [CONTACT_738752]. We will maintain use of PPE and social distancing in the field. We will a ssess risks in the field by 
[CONTACT_738753]. We will 
provide  testing  information  and referrals  to staff  member  and participants  and will take  appropriate  step 
for individuals who may exhibit symptoms. We will maintain regular communication between research 
staff and our community partners. We will adjust protocols as  necessary.  
The Guidelines contain a set of Checklists for the recommended guidelines. Training in the use of these 
will be provided to research staff. The use of these and other relevant procedure will be included in a 
Manual of Procedures.  
 
We have incorporated Covid mitigation procedures into our activities below.  
Subject Characteristics.  
As outlined in the body of t he proposal, study participants will be Latino day laborers (LDL). Participants 
will be Latino immigrant men from Mexico and Central America (mostly from Honduras, El Salvador and 
Guatemala), recruited from street corners and other day labor sites located in neighborhoods 
predominantly populated by [CONTACT_738754]. Program activities will be 
conducted by [CONTACT_412847] -person.  
Sources of Materials  
Once participant consent has been requested and obtained, primary assessment data will b e collected 
through individual interviews. All the information will be stored in a password -protected computer and 
only the principal investigator ([CONTACT_70920] -Esquer) and the project director will be granted access to  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389  
UT Houston Protocol Template  IRB APPR OPagVe 9AofL21  DATE : 05/01/2023  

IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V0 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/[ADDRESS_1009367] likely risks of participation in the interviews are the follow ing: (1) 
embarrassment and anxiety, (2) lack of trust in the interviewers, (3) fear of loss of privacy, (4) missed 
opportunity  to get a job, (5) conflict  with  coworkers,  (6) conflict  with  police.  We discuss  the strategies  we 
will adopt to minimize these risks  below.  
Experiencing embarrassment and anxiety during the interview : The discussion of the impact of COVID [ADDRESS_1009368] there will be a few LDL unwilling to share this information. Given the precarious 
nature of day laborers’ living conditions (poverty,  undocumented status, unstable jobs), they may feel 
anxious about sharing information of a sensitive nature during the interviewing process. We will instruct 
interviewers  to address  participants’  concerns,  to note  their  comments  in the section  indicated  at the end 
of the interview, and to provide a list of health services and other community referrals (e.g. community 
organizations, churches, support groups) to assist LDL with COVID [ADDRESS_1009369] in the interviewing team : Strategies to reduce distrust and increase comfort with the 
interviewers will be discussed during interviewer training. Although day laborers at the corners selected 
for recruitment  may  already  be familiar  with  the UT team  through  our previous  injury  prevention  program 
activities, they might not be familiar with the LDL interviewers to be hired for this proposed study. To 
foster trust in both the face -to-face and in the phone administration of program activities, we wi ll 
emphasize  the anonymous  nature  of the activities  and procedures  to protect  data  collected  for this study. 
To foster trust in the interviewers, for surveys conducted over the phone (Aim 1), we will train the 
interviewing staff to establish rapport before  the start of the interview. If the survey is conducted on 
location, staff members familiar with the corners will introduce the interview team to the workers 
present,  explain  the purpose  of the interviews  and will stay present  (observing  social  distance)  during  the 
interview process to be of further assistance if necessary. Interviewers will also provide workers with the 
names  and telephone  numbers  of the principal  investigators  and will encourage  workers  to contact  [CONTACT_738755].  
Loss of privacy:  Interviewers will conduct phone -based activities form our office location, where we will 
be able to use cubicles designated for interviewing purposes. Each interviewer will be assigned to a 
separate cubicle to maintain social distance and  privacy of the interview. Field -based activities will be 
conducted  in a public  location,  most  likely  the corner  itself.  This means  that there  will be activity  and other 
people  present,  while  the day laborers  are completing  the interview  or intervention  and that there  will be 
a need to enforce social distancing. We will create social distance by [CONTACT_40397] “rooms” with the use of 
orange  cones  and yellow  tape  that will allow  the interviewing  team  to create  a barrier  between  onlookers 
and the interview process, while at the same time maintaining auditory privacy in a public space. Each 
interviewer  will also be trained  to be aware  of other  people  in the vicinity  of the interview  and respectfully 
request onlookers to move away f rom this location. We will position the interviewing “rooms” in an area 
that is at a distance  from  the busiest  hiring  location  to avoid  interfering  with  other  workers’  activities.  LDL 
who participate in our program activities will be required to wear a face covering while interacting with 
program  staff.  If they  do not have  a face  covering,  we will provide  them  with  a face  mask.  In addition,  we 
will provide  them  with  hand  sanitizer  at the beginning  and at the end of their  participation  in our research 
activities.  Project  staff  will also be required  to use hand  sanitizer  frequently  and to wear  gloves.  All COVID - 
[ADDRESS_1009370].  
Loss of a potential job:  We are aware that day laborers are at the corner waiting for an opportunity to get a 
job. We will be mindful of their needs and will be ready to suspend interviews when necessary. During the 
informed consent process, participants w ill be told that they can leave the interview at any time. If they are 
waiting for a boss, and he arrives, they can stop the interview and complete it on a different date.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V1 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   Balancing the need to suspend an interview with the need to minimize attrition will be monitored 
carefully,  and the workers’  needs  will take  priority.  Intervi ew times  will vary  throughout  the day,  so as not 
to have  interviewers  always  present  at the peak  of the hiring  activity.  We will design  an interview  that will 
take no more than [ADDRESS_1009371]  with  coworkers  not participating  in the interviews : We expect  that not all LDL looking  for work  at 
a selected  corner  will be interested  in participating  in our study.  In our previous  programs  at the corners, 
we have found that participants not interested in being interviewed simply ignored the presence of our 
team and kept their attention on ongoing job hiring activities. Considering that the mere presence of our 
team  at the corner  may  make  some  LDL uncomfortable,  we will inform  all LDL during  recruitment  that the 
program will emphasize documenting the experiences of LDL in dealing with COVID -19 while protecting 
conversations  and respecting  day laborers’  ability  to make  their  own  choices.  If workers  at a location  feel 
uncomfortable  with  our activities,  we will opt for a different  program  location  and will document  instances 
of resistance to our  study.  
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_738737], the safety and well -being of day laborers is 
a constant concern that will be revisited during the current study. In the previous project we instituted 
strategies  that we plan  to implement  again  to protect  the confidentiality  and safety  of study  participants. 
Interviews  at the corner  will be conducted  away  from  the area  where  job hiring  activities  are taking  place. 
This distance  may  minimize  employers’  curiosity  about  program  activities.  However,  if employers  want  to 
inquire about the presence of the project team at the corner and the ongoing activities, they will be 
informed about our study and provided with the contact [CONTACT_49162] [INVESTIGATOR_738738] . Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897], most potential employers stop at a day labor corner long enough 
to solicit workers and establish a basic working agreement. This engagement lasts no more than [ADDRESS_1009372]  with  the police : Even  when  the presence  of the Latino  day laborers  is public  and at locations  where 
there  is heavy  traffic,  they  are rarely  the direct  target  of police  intervention  or immigration  raids.  Instances 
when  a corner  group  is targeted  by [CONTACT_738756] a neighborhood  complaint,  the group  often  relocates 
to a different nearby [CONTACT_738757]. As local businesses that cater to LDL are 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_738739],  we will contact  [CONTACT_738758].  
An immigrat ion arrest  is an event  likely  to happen  to Latino  immigrants  anywhere  in Houston,  even  at day 
labor corners, without warning, and due to circumstances outside the control of our study. We believe 
that participation in our study will not bring undue attenti on from ICE or alter LDL arrest risk. We will 
request a Certificate of Confidentiality to reassure day laborers concerned about sharing personal 
information  with  our project.  If a worker  is arrested  or could  have  been  arrested  in an immigration -related 
event, we will provide assistance by [CONTACT_738759].  
Adverse events  
Should any unintended or adverse events occur, we will follow procedures for reporting adverse events 
which  is required  by [CONTACT_738760].  
The research team will utilize the foll owing response procedures for adverse events:  
1. Research team members will immediately report any breaches of data security or confidentiality  
directly to all other research team members and to members of the CAB via  email.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V2 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   2. Research team members will immediately report any perceived distress related to program activities  
as well as the response of the team member to that distress such as providing a specific referral. These 
reports  will be further  discussed  at team  meetings  and with  the CAB to insure  that our current  procedures 
are minimizing the risk and are working as  desired.  
3. Research team members will immediately report any perceived loss of a work opportunity  related to 
program activities as well as the response of the team member to that situation. These reports will be 
further  discussed  at team  meetings  and with  the CAB to insure  that our current  procedures  are minimizing 
the risk and working as  desired.  
4. For all events listed above, the PI (Drs. Fernandez -Esquer ) will complete a Problem Report Form  and 
submit the form to the Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects (CPHS) at UTSPH. The form is 
reviewed by [CONTACT_738761]/Coordinator.  
5. Upon  receipt  of the Problem  Report  Form  and appropriate  level  of review  by [CONTACT_3655],  CPHS  will make  a 
determination about whether further action may be required. Available actions may  include:  
a. Modification to the  protocol.  
b. Notification to past participants by [CONTACT_738762].  
c. Modification of the continuing review  schedule.  
d. Monitoring of the  research.  
e. Suspension or termination of the research according to IRB SOP on “Suspension  or 
Termination of IRB Approved  Research”.  
f. Referral to legal counsel, risk management or the in stitutional  official.  
g. Other appropriate action as determined by [CONTACT_36985]. 
 
Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
 
Recruitment and Informed Consent.  
All [ADDRESS_1009373] the confidentiality of the 
collected information. If an individual agrees to take part in an interview, they will be directed to one of 
our interviewing  “rooms.”  As described  above,  this will consist  of a space  delineated  by [CONTACT_738763]. The interviewer will request oral consent after reading a consent statement explaining the overall 
purpose of the study and of the interview and intervention, the right to refuse to ans wer any question, 
and the right  to terminate  the interview  at any point  without  reprisals.  The consent  process  will include  a 
balanced discussion of the potential benefits and harms associated with participation in this study. We 
will specify  in the consen t form  that any participant  can withdraw  from  the interview,  at any time  without 
fear of experiencing harm, reprisals, or incurring ill will. This will be explained in the Informed Consent 
Form and discussed with each worker prior to his participation. The consent form will also explain that 
the benefits  of participation  includ e getting  a better  understanding  of the their  ability  to adopt  actions  to 
mitigate  the transmission  of COVID -19. It will note  that potential  harms  include  anxiety,  minor  discomfort 
or concern  due to the content  of the survey,  the potential  for missing  a job opportunity  while  participating 
in the survey, and breach of confidentiality. These factors will be clearly delineated in the consent form 
and discussed individually with each potential  participant.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V3 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/[ADDRESS_1009374] with the participant’s  permission.  
We will provide  incentive  payments  that will be tracked  by [CONTACT_738764], where this proje ct will be housed. All procedures will be submitted 
for approval to the Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects at the University of [LOCATION_007] Health 
Science Center at  Houston.  
All consent instructions and procedures will be prepared in Spanish and Engl ish and will be available for 
review by [CONTACT_374372], to whom all forms will be submitted for 
approval.  
Protection against Risk  
We will also protect the confidentiality of the interview location. All data records will be coded by [CONTACT_738765].  Each  post  card  will contain  a unique  bar code  number  to deter  LDL from  sharing  their  post  cards  with 
Non LDL family  members  and friends . In addition,  postcards  will include  the corner  ID of the corner  where  they 
were distributed to accurately track corner location information. This information will be stored in password 
protected computers. Research personnel retrieving tracking informati on from this computer file will be 
instructed  to keep  it in a locked  cabinet  while  in use, and to destroy  it immediately  after  it is no longer  needed. 
Data will be coded using ID numbers; as the interviews are anonymous, and all data contained in the dataset 
will be absent of personal identifiers. All contact [CONTACT_738766], on password protected 
computers and/or locked file  cabinets.  
3. Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Subjects and  Others  
Potential  direct  benefits  to study  participants  will include  increased  understanding  of the safety  measures 
they  may  need  to take  to protect  themselves  against  COVID -19. Furth ermore,  participants  will be provided 
a resource sheet with contact [CONTACT_738767], low cost health clinics, COVID -[ADDRESS_1009375] and to local community and employer organizations interested in the safety 
of day laborers including those involved in worker s afety and health care  professionals.  
4. Importance of the Knowledge to be  Gained  
Latino Day Laborers are an especially vulnerable population within the population of Latino immigrants. 
The long -term effects of COVID -19 are yet to be determined. As such, the p otential benefit of our study 
to society is great in that a clearer understanding of the factors related to the COVID -19 mitigation  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V4 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   practices of LDL and the resulting interventions may increase adherence to mitigation practices. This, in 
turn , can help minimize hospi[INVESTIGATOR_738740]. Reducing day laborers’ 
COVID -[ADDRESS_1009376] day laborers contact[CONTACT_738768] -born immigrants mostly of Hispanic/ 
Latino  ancestry  or descent.  Recruitment  data  collected  in our previous  local  studies  indicate  that members 
of other ethnic minority groups are rarely present at day labor corners and if present, they rarely 
participate i n job hiring activities. Thus, these individuals do not meet the main inclusion criteria for this 
study: looking for work at the day labor  corner.  
Inclusion of Children  
Children under the age of [ADDRESS_1009377]  protected  and accessible  only  to study  staff 
who are engaged in data analytic activities. The survey data will be collected by [CONTACT_738769]. Data will be downloaded from the tablets on a regular basis by [CONTACT_738770] a secure serv er. These tablets will be equipped with state of the art  security,  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V5 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/2023  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines   and the data will be encrypted; the encryption is another level of security in case a tablet is lost. When 
not in use, tablets will be stored in a locked cabinet. If we need to transfer files, identifying information 
will be deleted, and the new file will be encrypted before transmission, in accordance with HIPPA and 
University policy. Survey data will not be associated with personal identifiers since each participant will 
be assigned a study number at the time of consent.  
The Institutional  Review  Board  (IRB) for the Committee  for the Protection  of Human  Subjects  at University 
of [LOCATION_007] Health Science Center at Houston will review and approve all aspects of the proposed study, 
including protecting the confidentiality of study participants and informing partic ipants of the potential 
benefits  and risks  of taking  part in the study.  The IRB requires  that the confidentiality  of study  participants 
be protected and that procedures be implemented to securely collect and process data. Principal 
investigators are required by [CONTACT_738771] a condition of conducting the 
research. The IRB also requires that principal investigators inform study participants of these 
requirements and provide them with the principal investigator’s and the IRB’s phone numbers. If 
members  of the IRB have  questions,  investigators  are required  to provide  written  responses.  The IRB must 
approv e any proposed changes to study protocols prior to  implementation.  
Study investigators will be responsible for creating the survey instrument and the guidelines for its 
administration. The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_738741] , Fe y Justicia 
Worker Center, to coordinate project activities. All personnel will be appropriately trained in all aspects 
of the study  and will complete  a Human  Subjects  certification  available  in Spanish.  They  will be introduced 
to the goals and signifi cance of the study and to the procedures for recruitment, tracking, and retention 
of participants. They will also sign a confidentiality agreement. All interviewers will be fluent in Spanish. 
Study investigators will require field personnel to inform the p roject director if any adverse events are 
reported during survey  administration.  
F. VERTEBRATE ANIMALS 
Not applicable  
DATA SHARING PLAN  
The proposed research will conduct surveys with Latino Day Laborers (LDL) in the Houston metropolitan 
area. Data from the survey will be used to assess a conceptual model describing the factors which 
influence LDLs’ adherence to COVID -[ADDRESS_1009378] 
information  (surface  mail  address,  email  address,  phone  number,  and fax number)  of a designated  project 
representative. This representative will coordinate receipt of requests, as well as review of the proposal 
and notification of the proposal status for the applicant requesting data  access.  
De-identified files will be maintained for all data collect ed during the study period, and we will operate 
under the guidance of the University of [LOCATION_007] Health Science Center at Houston Committee for the 
Protection of Human Subjects, to ensure that University Institutional Review Board requirements for 
confidentia lity of subjects will be met.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V6 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/[ADDRESS_1009379] agree to several restrictions before being allowed to use the data. 
These will include:  
 
1) Use of the data for the so le purpose of the research  described;  
 
2) Prior notification of the investigators of any publications or presentations with the  data;  
 
3) Acknowledgement of the study  investigators;  
 
4) Agreement not to contact  [CONTACT_1766];  
 
5) Compliance with informed consent  forms;  
 
6) Compliance with IRB requirements at both the University of [LOCATION_007] and the requester’s 
institution.  
The new investigator will be required to provide [ADDRESS_1009380] is registered and the results 
are submitted to ClinicalTrials.gov as outlined in the NIH Policy on the Dissemination of Clinical Trial 
Information (the Policy NOT -OD-16-149) and accord ing to specific timelines stated in the Policy.  
Registration and results reporting in ClinicalTrials.gov will be completed within the following 
timeframes:  
Registration will occur no later than [ADDRESS_1009381] results due date (no later than 12 months after 
the trial's primary completion date); however, results submission may be delayed for up to two 
additional years for trials results whose approval, or clearance is being sought. Any required results 
updates will be submitted withi n the time frames specified in the ClinicalTrials.gov regulations.  
The informed consent documents of our clinical trial will include the FDA -required statement related to 
posting of clinical trial information at ClinicalTrials.gov: “A description of this clinical trial will be 
available on http://www.ClinicalTrials.gov,  as required by U.S. Law. This Web site will not include 
information that can identify you. At most, the website will include a summary of t he results. You can 
search this website at any time.”  
Our institution (The University of [LOCATION_007] Health Science Center at Houston) has an internal policy in 
place to ensure that clinical trials registration and results reporting occur in compliance with the NIH 
Policy and HHS regulations. Processes are in place at our institution to ensure compliance include the 
following:  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V7 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/[ADDRESS_1009382] to the NIH Policy, the HHS  
regulations, and/or ICMJE recommendations.  
The PRS administrator notifies the investigator of the registration requirements, and the 
PRS administrator offers to assist with registration. The PRS administrator follows up with 
the investigator until the study is registered.  
The PRS administrator remi nds the investigator to update their study records at least annually.  
The PRS administrator contacts the investigator at least 6 months in advance of the results 
reporting due date to remind the investigator of the reporting obligation, and offers to assis t 
the investigator with results reporting. The PRS administrator follows up with the 
investigator until results are reported in ClinicalTrials.gov.  
Non -compliance will be reported to the investigator’s Department Chair. If the issue is still 
not resolved, then it will be reported to the institution’s Executive Vice President and Chief 
Academic Officer or designee.  
The PRS administrator provides resources and training on ClinicalTrials.gov reporting 
requirements to investigators and study teams.  
The PRS admi nistrator assists investigators and study teams with access to and questions 
about the PRS system.  
The PRS administrator facilitates communication between investigators and PRS staff.  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  IRB APPROVAL DATE: 05/01/2023   Statistics  
 
Corner selection and randomization  
 
A “corner”  is a) a labor hiring public location such as a street corner, bus stop, gas station or home 
improvement  stores  within  the designated  geographic  area,  b) an independent  hiring  site (independence 
as defined  by [CONTACT_2669]  [ADDRESS_1009383]  corner),  and c) a hub for day laborers 
observed seeking employment at that location. Locally, corners range in size from quite small (5 to 10 
men)  to very  large  (> 75 men),  with  the majority  supporting  12 to 30 LDL looking  for work  on a given  day.  
Our recent rapid needs assessment in October -November 2019 mapped corners in the Houston area 
(mainly bounded by [CONTACT_738772]), covering about [ADDRESS_1009384] an 
aver age of 10 LDL at each corner to enroll in the study. To account for unmeasured cluster -level factors 
that may  differ  by [CONTACT_738773],  we will randomize  corners  within  three  strata  of corner  size (small  medium 
and large), thus treating corner size as a blocking factor. Within strata, corners will be randomly assigned 
to intervention or control conditions. Since this is a cluster -randomized design, all individuals recruited 
from a given corner will receive  the same  condition.  
 
Aim 1  
 
COVID survey . Prior to formal data analysis, we will look for evidence of variability, patterns of missing data, 
and check for data accuracy and adherence to the assumptions of planned statistical procedures (basic data 
cleaning). We will look at frequency distributio ns or calculate means and standard deviations for responses to 
all questions  on the questionnaire  as well as any computed  scales.  We will evaluate  differences  in proportions 
or means by [CONTACT_738774], and we wi ll look at salient zero order 
correlations among items/scales. The primary statistical analyses for AIM 1 will be descriptive (frequencies, 
correlations, means) in order to understand how participants vary by [CONTACT_738775], age, corner type, and 
other cri tical demographic factors. Appropriate psychometric analyses (e.g. EFA, CFA) will be conducted to 
determine the reliability and validity of all multi -item scales needed for Aim [ADDRESS_1009385] been intensified by [CONTACT_47098]. We will use regres sion analysis 
to identify significant predictors of individual mitigation behaviors (PPE, hand washing, and social distancing) 
as well as the COVID Mitigation Practices Summative Index described at the end of the Measures  section.  
Proposed  Structural  Model s. We will use Structural  Equation  Modeling  (SEM)  to test several  competing  models 
looking at the influence of COVID [ADDRESS_1009386] variables. Model 1 shown below 
reflects this type of model. All predictors are seen as correlated wit h one 
 
UT Houston Protocol Template  IRB NUMPaBgeE18Rof:21HSC -SPH-20-1389  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPRPaOge 1V9 oAf 2L1    DATE : 05/01/[ADDRESS_1009387]  on mitigation  practices  but influences  them  through  its relationship  with  the 3 mediators  pi[INVESTIGATOR_5832]. 
We will develop models similar to these examples based on the focus group conversations (see 
preliminary studies), our proposed conceptual framework, and empi[INVESTIGATOR_738742]. 
Models that meet established criteria for fit will g uide the adaptation of the program to be tested in a 
controlled trial in Aim 2. Data collected in Aim [ADDRESS_1009388]. Assuming a 95% confidence interval, an 
estimated true prevalence of betwe en 0 and 30% for the factors of interest (or, equivalently, between 70 and 
100%), and a desired precision of +/ - 5% (that is, the width of the confidence interval), we require a sample 
size for Aim [ADDRESS_1009389] a value for the RMSEA (one of our primary measures of fit) beyond which we would conclude that 
the model  is inconsistent  with  the data  (e.g.  . 10); we also need  to choose  a value  below  which  we can conclude 
that the data fits adequately (e.g. .05). We can then use procedures outlined by [CONTACT_738776] (1996) 
to the sample size required to obtain adequate power to reject hypothesized models. Loehlin (2004) provides 
tabled  power  values  for several  combinations  of df (degrees  of freedom)  and sample  size.  Using  this table  and 
calculating  hypothetical  df for our Model  [ADDRESS_1009390] power of > [ADDRESS_1009391] 85% power to detect a group 
difference in PPE usage of 0.6 points or higher (a difference consistent with our pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299]), giving us 
sufficient power to conduct inferential analyses in Aim 1 as well.  
 
Aim 2  
 
Sample size . To determine sample size for Aim 2, we made the following assumptions: A cluster - 
randomized  design  (with  corners  as the clusters),  two assessment  points  (one  pre-test and one post -test), 
20 corners randomized to tw o conditions (intervention and control), an intraclass correlation coefficient 
(ICC)  of 0.025,  an across  time  correlation  in the outcome  of 0.60,  a minimum  detectable  difference  in the 
previously described COVID -[ADDRESS_1009392] 0.80, and nominal alpha of 0.05. 
Based on these assumptions, we require an averag e of 10 workers per corner, and 10 corners per 
condition (20 total corners), for a total of [ADDRESS_1009393]  error 
regression models. Si nce our design includes two time points (a pre -test and post -test) and [ADDRESS_1009394] value of the 
dependent variable is modeled as a function of both intervention group membership (intervention v 
control) and the baseline value of the dependent variable. To correct for clustering of individual workers 
within corners (the cluste rs), the standard errors are inflated using the sandwich estimator. While not 
explicitly part of our aims, it is possible to incorporate exploratory moderators into this model, whereby 
[CONTACT_738777]. T his will help us understand the 
conditions under which the intervention does or does not achieve an effect. Examples of possible 
moderators include demographic variables, anxiety, alcohol use, country of origin,  etc. 
Missing  data . To counteract  the possibi lity that we will have  missing  data  due to loss to follow  up, we will 
implement a multiple imputation strategy. [CONTACT_738778] team  has extensive practical experience in 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_738743].  
 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389  
UT Houston Protocol Template  IRB APPRPaOge 2V0 oAf 2L1 DATE: 05/01/[ADDRESS_1009395] party monitoring.  
 
Publication Plan  
 
Manuscripts will be prepared for submission to relevant peer reviewed journals. Anticipated manuscripts will 
address participants’ characteristics at baseline and the significance of changes in workplace injury and 
psychosocial items from baseline to follo w-up within and between intervention groups.  
 
We do not anticipate retuning results to participants.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UT Houston Protocol Template   
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SPH-20-1389 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 05/01/2023  