 
 
 
University of Minnesota      
 
 
 A PERSONALIZED APPR OACH TO ACHIEVING A 
SUSTAINED RESPONSE T O TREATMENT FOR 
ADOLESCENT DEPRESSIO N 
Phase II, pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], open trial 
 
 
 
Regulatory Sponsor:  Meredith Gunlicks -Stoessel  
Department of Psychiatry  
University of Min nesota  
Funding Sponsor:  Minnesota Medical Foundation (MMF) , University of 
Minnesota Office of the Vice President for Research  
Study Product:  Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depressed 
Adolescents (IPT -A) and Prozac (Fluoxetine)  
Protocol Number:  N/A 
UMN IRB code : 1206M15365  
 
 
 
 
 
Date  updated : 7-6-15  
  
  
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This document is confidential and the property of the University of Minnesota.  
No part of it may be transmitted, reproduced, published, or used by [CONTACT_137005].  
  Page ii 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_817459] S ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ . 1 
STUDY SUMMARY  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ....................  2 
1 INTRODUCTION  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ...............  4 
1.1 BACKGROUND  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .............  4 
1.2 INVESTIGATIONAL AGENT  ................................ ................................ ................................ ...........................  5 
1.3 CLINICAL DATA TO DATE ................................ ................................ ................................ ............................  9 
1.4 DOSE RATIONALE AND RISK/BENEFITS  ................................ ................................ ................................ ..... [ADDRESS_1131897] POPULATION (S) FOR ANALYSIS  ................................ ................................ ..............................  [ADDRESS_1131898] of Abbreviations  
 
 
AE  Adverse Event  
CC  Cubic Centimete rs 
CDRS   Children’s Depression Rating Scale  
CFR  Code of Federal Regulations  
CGI  Clinical Global Impressions  
CMRR  Center for Magnetic Resonance Research  
CRF  Case Report Form  
CTSI   Clinical and Translational Science Institute   
DSMB   Data and Safety Monit oring Board  
DSMP   Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
FDA  Food and Drug Administration  
GCP   Good Clinical Practice  
HIPAA  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of [ADDRESS_1131899]  Treatment -Resistant Depression  
VA  Veterans’ Affairs  
Clinical Research Protocol Template   Page 1 
Version 18SEP08  
Information Resources  
 
             Name / Address    Phone / Fax / E -mail 
Principal Investigator   [INVESTIGATOR_817436] -Stoessel        [ADDRESS_1131900]       [EMAIL_12697]  
       Minneapolis, MN [ZIP_CODE]  
 
 
Questions concerning eligibility             Ana Westervelt    [PHONE_17039]  
                  [ADDRESS_1131901]             [EMAIL_15495]  
                                                      Minneapolis, MN [ZIP_CODE]  
 
For patient enrollment                           Ana Westervelt  
 
 
Questions concerning drug ordering,       Ana Westervelt  
Shipment, transfer or returns  
 
 
Lab shippi[INVESTIGATOR_817437] /                     Ana Westervelt  
Questions on data management  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Page 2 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_817460] A Personalized Approach to Achieving  a Sustained Response to 
Treatment for Adolescent Depression  
Short Title  PTAD  GIA 
Protocol Number  1206M15365  
Phase  2 
Methodology  open label  pi[INVESTIGATOR_83715]  3 years  
Study Center(s)  Single -center  
Objectives  To develop and assess the feasibility, acceptability, and 
preliminary efficacy of a personalized approach to delivering 
continuation treatment  
Number of 
Subjects  30 
Diagnosis and 
Main Inclusion 
Criteria  Male and female adolescents (ages 12 -18) will be eligible for the 
study if they completed acute phase treatment and showed at 
least a partial response to treatment (CGI -I of minimally improved 
or better  (CGI -I < 3)). Adolescents will enter continuation 
treatment having either received [ADDRESS_1131902], 
Dose, Route, 
Regimen  Adolescents who received fluoxetine during the acute phase and 
were  responders (CGI -I = much improved or very much improved  
(CGI -I = 1 or 2) ) will continue their acute phase  dosing regimen 
and w ill meet with the psychiatrist on a monthly basis. 
Adolescents who  received fluoxetine during the acute phase and 
were partial responders (CGI -I = minimally  improved  (CGI -I = 3) ) 
will enter the continuation phase on 40mg fluoxetine, and will 
have their dos e increased to 60mg.  Adolescents who received 
only IPT -A during acute phase and  were partial responders (CGI -
I = minimally improved  (CGI -I = 3) ) will begin treatment with 
fluoxetine, in  addition to continuing their IPT -A treatment. The 
dosage schedule will  be 10mg per day for the  first week and 
20mg per day for the following 5 weeks. If no treatment response 
is observed by  [CONTACT_941] 6th week, the dosage can be increased to 
40mg per day.15  
Duration of 
administration  16 weeks   
Reference therapy  Interpersonal Psyc hotherapy  for Depressed Adolescents (IPT -A) 
  Page 3 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_817461]  1. Mean [95% confidence interval] treatment satisfaction for each 
adaptive treatment strategy (ATS)  
 
2. Mean ther apy session attendance and drop out rates for each 
ATS.  
 
3. Within -subject change scores in CDRS -R, SAS -SR, and CGAS 
scores for the early and late decision point groups from pre - to 
post-treatment using repeated measures ANOVA.  
 
  Page 4 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_467384]  1 Introduction  
This document is a protocol for a human research study. This study is to be conducted 
according to US and international standards of Good Clinical Practice (FDA Title 21 part 
312 or 812 and International Conference on Harmonization guidelines), applicable 
government regulations and Institutional research policies and procedures.  
1.[ADDRESS_1131903] two decades. Two psychotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_817438]’s criteria for “well -established” treatments 
(interpersonal psychotherapy and cognitive behavioral therapy).[ADDRESS_1131904] reported long -term follow -up 
data, 25 -50% of the adolescents in these studies experienced a depressive relapse 
following the completion of tr eatment.10-[ADDRESS_1131905], particularly 
within the adolescent’s family.10,[ADDRESS_1131906] and relationship problems that may trigger a 
relapse.19 Interpersonal Psychotherapy for Depressed Adolescents (IPT -A)20 is a 
natural treatment modality for targeting both depressive symptoms a nd interpersonal 
risk factors. IPT -A is an evidence -based psychotherapy that aims to reduce 
adolescents’ depressive symptoms by [CONTACT_4205][INVESTIGATOR_817439].21-[ADDRESS_1131907] found that perceived 
parent –adolescent conflict predicted a poorer treatment response.10,[ADDRESS_1131908] of negative life events in provoking 
relapse.28 This suggests that continuation version s of IPT -A may be useful for 
preventing the relapse of adolescent depression, as well.  
 
The primary aim of this study is to develop and assess the feasibility and acceptability of 
a personalized approach to delivering continuation treatment for adolescent depression. 
The development of evidence -based guidelines for personalizing treatments has been 
identified as a public health priority29 (NIMH Strategic Plan, 2008,  Strategy 3.2: Expand 
and deepen the focus to personalize intervention research). Personalized interventions, 
also known as adaptive treatment strategies , provide empi[INVESTIGATOR_3675] -derived guidelines or 
decision rules that recommend when, how, and for whom treat ment should be changed 
to meet the needs of individual patients.30,31 Adaptive treatment strategies can, for 
example, operationalize for patients who are re sponding to a given treatment, what kind 
of treatment plan to follow for the continuation phase of treatment. These decision rules 
are based on patient characteristics and outcomes collected during the treatment 
process, such as patient response and adhere nce.  
 
We are currently conducting a pi[INVESTIGATOR_14737] a personalized approach to acute phase 
treatment for adolescent depression (Gunlicks -Stoessel, PI, K23MH090216). 
Adolescents begin treatment with IPT -A and may have their treatment augmented either 
with a n increased number of therapy sessions or the addition of fluoxetine if they are 
showing an insufficient response to treatment. The proposed study would examine the 
feasibility and acceptability of extending the adaptive treatment strategy into the 
continu ation phase of treatment. There is a clear need for the development and 
empi[INVESTIGATOR_817440]. Given the 
significant impact that adolescent depression has on both adolescent and adult 
development and funct ioning, a continuation treatment that achieves a sustained 
remission and prevents relapse could have considerable public health significance.  
1.2 Investigational Agent  
PROZAC® (fluoxetine capsules, USP) is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor for oral 
admi nistration. It is also marketed for the treatment of premenstrual dysphoric disorder 
(Sarafem®, fluoxetine hydrochloride). It is designated (±) -N-methyl -3-phenyl-3-[(α,α,α -
trifluoro -p-tolyl)oxy]propylamine hydrochloride and has the empi[INVESTIGATOR_299754] 
C17H18F3NO•HCl. Its molecular weight is 345.79.  
 
Fluoxetine hydrochloride is a white to off -white crystalline solid with a solubility of 14 
mg/mL in water. Eac h Pulvule® contains fluoxetine hydrochloride equivalent to 10 mg 
(32.3 μmol), 20 mg (64.7 μmol), or 40 mg (129.3 μmol) of fluoxetine. The Pulvules also 
contain starch, gelatin, silicone, titanium dioxide, iron oxide, and other inactive 
ingredients. The 10 and 20 mg Pulvules also contain FD&C Blue No. 1, and the 40 mg 
Pulvule also contains FD&C Blue No. 1 and FD&C Yellow No. 6.  
 
  Page 6 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_817462]™ capsules, a delayed -release formulation, contain enteric -coated 
pellets of fluoxetine hydrochloride equivalent to 9 0 mg (291 μmol) of fluoxetine. The 
capsules also contain D&C Yellow No. 10, FD&C Blue No. 2, gelatin, hypromellose, 
hypromellose acetate succinate, sodium lauryl sulfate, sucrose, sugar spheres, talc, 
titanium dioxide, triethyl citrate, and other inactive ingredients.  
 
Although the exact mechanism of PROZAC is unknown, it is presumed to be linked to 
its inhibition of CN S neuronal uptake of serotonin. Studies at clinically relevant doses in 
man have demonstrated that fluoxetine blocks the uptake of serotoni n into human 
platelets. Studies in anima ls also suggest that fluoxetine is a much more potent uptake 
inhibitor of serotonin than of norepi[INVESTIGATOR_238]. Antagonism of muscarinic, histaminergic, 
and α1 -adrenergic receptors has been hypothesized to be associated with various 
anticholinergic, sedative, and cardiovascular effects of classical tricyclic antidepressant 
(TCA) drugs. Fluoxetine binds to these and other membrane receptors from brain tissue 
much less potently in vitro than do the tricyclic drugs.  
 
Systemic Bioavailability — In man, following a  single oral 40 mg dose, peak plasma 
concentrations of fluoxetine from 15 to 55 ng/mL are observed after [ADDRESS_1131909] where the pH exceeds 5.5. The enteric 
coating delays the onset of absorption of fluoxetine 1 to 2 hours relative to the 
immediate -release formulations. OCHCH2CH2NHCH3 • HClF3C21  
 
Weekly Dosing — Administration of PROZAC Weekly once weekly results in increased 
fluctuation between peak and trough concentrations of fluoxetine and norfluoxetine 
compared with once -daily dosing [for fluoxetine: 24% (daily) to 164% (weekly) a nd for 
norfluoxetine: 17% (daily) to 43% (weekly)]. Plasma concentrations may not necessarily 
be predictive of clinical response. Peak concentrations from once -weekly doses of 
PROZAC Weekly capsules of fluoxetine are in the range of the average concentrati on 
for 20 mg once -daily dosing. Average trough concentrations are 76% lower for 
fluoxetine and 47% lower for norfluoxetine than the concentrations maintained by 20 mg 
once -daily dosing. Average steady -state concentrations of either once -daily or once -
weekl y dosing are in relative proportion to the total dose administered. Average steady -
state fluoxetine concentrations are approximately 50% lower following the once -weekly 
regimen compared with the once -daily regimen. Cmax for fluoxetine following the [ADDRESS_1131910] 20 mg 
once -daily dose by 1 week [see Dosage and Administration (2.1)] . 
 
Daily Dosing -- Adult — The efficacy of PROZAC was studied in 5 - and 6 -week placebo -
controlled trials with depressed adult  and geriatric outpatients (≥18 years of age) whose 
diagnoses corresponded most closely to the DSM -III (currently DSM -IV) category of 
Major Depressive Disorder . PROZAC was shown to be significantly more effective than 
placebo as measured by [CONTACT_817463] (HAM -D). PROZAC 
was also significantly more effective than placebo on the HAM -D subscores for 
depressed mood, sleep disturbance, and the anxiety subfactor.  
 
Two 6 -week controlled studies (N=671, randomized) comparing PROZAC [ADDRESS_1131911] shown PROZAC 20 mg daily to be effective in the treatment of elderly 
patients (≥60 years of age) with Major Depressive Disorder. In these studies, PROZAC 
produced a significantly higher rate of response and remission as defined, respectively,  
by a 50% decrease in the HAM -D score and a total endpoint HAM -D score of ≤8. 
PROZAC was well tolerated and the rate of treatment discontinuations due to adverse 
reactions did not differ between PROZAC (12%) and placebo (9%).  
 
A study was conducted involv ing depressed outpatients who had responded (modified 
HAMD -17 score of ≤[ADDRESS_1131912] 3 weeks of open -label treatment and 
absence of Major Depressive Disorder by [CONTACT_2681] -III-R criteria) by [CONTACT_817464] 12 -
week open -treatment phase on PROZA C 20 mg/day. These patients (N=298) were 
randomized to continuation on double -blind 23 PROZAC 20 mg/day or placebo. At 38 
weeks (50 weeks total), a statistically significantly lower relapse rate (defined as 
symptoms sufficient to meet a diagnosis of Major Depressive Disorder for 2 weeks or a 
modified HAMD -17 score of ≥14 for 3 weeks) was observed for patients taking 
PROZAC compared with those on placebo.  
 
Pediatric (children and adolescents) — The efficacy of PROZAC 20 mg/day in children 
and adolescents (N =315 randomized; 170 children ages 8 to <13, 145 adolescents 
ages 13 to ≤18) was studied in two [ADDRESS_1131913] closely to the DSM -III-R or 
DSM -IV category of Major Depressive Disorder.  
 
In both studies independently, PROZAC produced a statistically significantly greater 
mean change on the Childhood Depression Rating Scale -Revised (CDRS -R) total score 
from baseline to endpoint than did placebo. Subgroup analyses on t he CDRS -R total 
score did not suggest any differential responsiveness on the basis of age or gender.  
 
Weekly dosing for Maintenance/Continuation Treatment --A longer -term study was 
conducted involving adult outpatients meeting DSM -IV criteria for Major Dep ressive 
Disorder who had responded (defined as having a modified HAMD -17 score of ≤9, a 
CGI-Severity rating of ≤2, and no longer meeting criteria for Major Depressive Disorder) 
for 3 consecutive weeks at the end of 13 weeks of open -label treatment with PRO ZAC 
20 mg once daily. These patients were randomized to double -blind, once -weekly 
continuation treatment with PROZAC Weekly, PROZAC 20 mg once daily, or placebo. 
  Page 8 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_817465] 20 mg once daily demonstrated superior 
efficacy (having a  significantly longer time to relapse of depressive symptoms) 
compared with placebo for a period of 25 weeks. However, the equivalence of these 2 
treatments during continuation therapy has not been established.  
 
 ------------------------  INDICATIONS AND US AGE ---------------------------   
PROZAC®  (fluoxetine hydrochloride)  is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor 
indicated for:  
• Acute and maintenance treatment of Major Depressive Disorder (MDD) in adult 
and pediatric pa tients aged 8 to 18 years  
• Acute  and maintenance treatment of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) in 
adult and pediatric patients aged 7 to 17 years   
• Acute and maintenance treatment of Bulimia Nervosa in adult patients  
• Acute treatment of Panic Disorder, with or without agora phobia, in adult patients  
  
-----------------------  
DOSAGE AND 
ADMINISTRATION 
----------------------  
Indication  Adult  Pediatric  
MDD (2.1)  20 mg/day in 
am (initial 
dose)  10 to 20 
mg/day (initial 
dose)  
Depressive 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_817441] I Disorder 
(2.5)  Oral in 
combination 
with 
olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]: 5 
mg of oral 
olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_321712] 20 mg of 
fluoxetine 
once daily 
(initial dose)  -  
Treatment 
Resistant 
Depression (2.6)  Oral in 
combination 
with 
olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_050]: 5 
mg of oral 
olanzapi[INVESTIGATOR_321712] 20 mg of 
fluoxetine 
once daily  
(initial dose)  -  
 ----------------------  DOSAGE FORMS AND STRENGTHS ---------------------   
  Page 9 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_467384]  • Pulvules: 10 mg, 20 mg, 40 mg (3)  
• Weekly capsules: 90 mg (3)  
1.3 Clinical Data to Date  
Psychotherapy . According to the American Psychological Association’s crit eria for 
evaluating the extent to which a particular psychosocial intervention model has 
evidence of treatment efficacy to warrant its dissemination,32,33 interpersonal 
psychother apy (IPT -A) has been categorized as  a “well-established” intervention for 
adolescent depression.3 In clinical trials, depressed adolescents treated with IPT -A 
demonstrated fewer depressive symptoms, better social functioning, and better global 
functioning at the completion of treatment than  adolescents in control conditions. 21-23 
 
Pharmacotherapy. Fluoxetine  has a treatment response rate of approximately 60% 
4,13,34,35. It is one of two antidepres sant medications that has FDA approval for use with 
children and adolescents.  
 
Combined Treatment. Five recent studies have examined the efficacy of a combination 
of psychotherapy and medication in comparison to psychotherapy alone and/or 
medication alone,  with response rates ranging from 50 -70%.35-39  Three studies found 
that the combined treatment approach was significantly more efficacious in reducing 
depres sive symptoms than medication or psychotherapy alone,35-37 whereas the other 
two did not.38,39   
1.4 Dose Rationale and Risk/Benefits  
Adolescents  who received  fluoxetine  during  the acute phase  and were  responders (CGI -
I = much  improved  or very much improved)  will continue  their acute  phase  dosing  
regimen  and will meet  with the psychiatrist on a monthly  basis. Adolescents  who 
received  fluoxetine  during  the acute  phase  and were  partial responders  (CGI -I = 
minimally  improved)  will enter  the continuation  phase  on 40mg  fluoxetine,  and will have 
their dose  increased  to 60mg.[ADDRESS_1131914] 2 months  and monthly  for the second 2  months.   Adolescents  who 
received  only IPT-A during  acute  phase  and were  partial responders  (CGI -I = minimally  
improved)  will begin  treatment with fluoxetine  during  the continuation  phase,  in addition  
to continuing  their IPT -A treatment.  The dosage  schedule  will be 10mg  per day for the  
first week  and 20mg  per day for the following  [ADDRESS_1131915] as favorable to the subjects as that presented by [CONTACT_817466] -study 
treatment.  
 
2 Study Objectives  
Aim 1: Assess the feasibility and acceptability of the personalized continuation 
treatment strategy.  
 Hypoth esis 1: Adolescents who responded to the acute phase treatment 
provided in the K23 study and their parents will consent to participate in 
continuation treatment.  
 Hypothesis 2: Adolescents will be adherent to continuation treatment and will 
complete the con tinuation treatment protocol.  
 Hypothesis 3: Adolescents and parents will report satisfaction with continuation 
treatment.  
 Hypothesis 4: Treating clinicians will report satisfaction with continuation 
treatment.  
Aim 2: Estimate variances of primary and secon dary outcomes with the continuation 
treatment.  
 Hypothesis 5: Adolescents who were responders to acute treatment will show 
sustained response to continuation treatment.  
 Hypothesis 6: Adolescents who were partial responders to acute treatment will 
show signi ficant improvement in depressive symptoms and social and global 
functioning.  
Aim 3: Conduct exploratory hypothesis -generating analyses to inform further 
development of the personalized continuation treatment strategy to be tested in a 
subsequent R01 propos al. 
3 Study Design  
3.1 General Design  
Adolescents will receive 16 weeks of continuation treatment. They will be treated by [CONTACT_817467]. The personalized 
continuation treatment plan is illustrated below.  
 
Continuat ion IPT -A. The goal of IPT-A20 is to decrease depressive  symptoms  by 
[CONTACT_817468][INVESTIGATOR_817442].  This is accomplished  throug h review  of the 
  Page 11 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_817469]’s  significant relationships  which  leads  to the identification  of the interpersonal  
problem  areas  on which  to focus  the treatment,  development  of communication  and 
interpersonal  problem solving  skills,  and role-playing.  During  the Continuation  IPT-A 
sessions, the therapi[INVESTIGATOR_817443],  and address  any current interpersonal  
problems before  they result  in a recurrence  of depressive  symp toms.   Adolescents who 
have  responded  to acute  phase  treatment (CGI -I = much improved  or very much  
improved) will attend 4  biweekly  IPT-A sessions  followed  by 2 monthly  sessions.  
Adolescents  who showed  a partial response  to acute  phase  treatment (CGI -I = 
minimally improved)  will attend  8 weekly  IPT-A sessions  followed  by 2 monthly  
sessions.  
 
Continuation  Pharmacotherapy.   Adolescents  who received  fluoxetine  during  the acute  
phase  and were  responders (CGI -I = much  improved  or very much improved)  will 
continu e their acute  phase  dosing  regimen  and will meet  with the psychiatrist on a 
monthly  basis.  Adolescents  who received  fluoxetine  during  the acute  phase  and were  
partial responders  (CGI -I = minimally  improved)  will enter  the continuation  phase  on 
40mg  fluoxet ine, and will have their  dose  increased  to 60mg.[ADDRESS_1131916] 2 months  and monthly  for the second 2  
months.   Adolescents  who received  only IPT-A during  acute  phase  and were  partial 
responders  (CGI -I = minimally  improved)  will begin  treatment with fluoxetine  during  
the continuation  phase,  in addit ion to continuing  their IPT -A treatment.  The dosage  
schedule  will be 10mg  per day for the  first week  and 20mg  per day for the following  [ADDRESS_1131917] 4 weeks  and biweekly thereafter.   Pharmacotherapy  sessions  will include  
assessment  of vital signs, adverse  effects, safety,  and symptomatic  response.  
 
Assessments.   Assessments  will be administered  by [CONTACT_817470].   Adolescents  will enter  continuation  treatment  at week  16.  
Assessments  will be conducted  at week  24 and 32. The week  32 evaluation  is already  
funded  through  the K23 study.  Assessment measures  include  the Schedule  for 
Affective  Disorders  and Schizophrenia for School -aged  Children -Present  and Lifetime  
Version  (K-SADS -PL),42 Children’s  Depression  Rating  Scale -Revised  (CDRS -R),43 
Columbia  Suicide  Severity Rating  Scale (CSSRS),44 Global  Assessment Scale  for 
Children  (C-GAS),45 Beck  Depression  Inventory -II (BDI-II),46 Social  Adjustment Scale -
Self-report  (SAS -SR),[ADDRESS_1131918]  Behavior  Questionnaire  (CBQ),48 and Client  
Satisfaction  Questionnaire  (CSQ -8).49 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  Page 12 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_467384]  R 
R PR 
PR NR 
NR  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 IPT-A 
IPT-A plus 
FLX Referred out of study  2 monthly IPT -A sessions  
2 monthly IPT -A sessions  
Continue FLX  
2 monthly IPT -A sessions  
Continue  FLX 
2 monthly IPT -A sessions  
Continue FLX  4 biweekly IPT -A sessions  
8 weekly IPT -A sessions  
Add FLX  
4 biweekly IPT -A sessions  
Continue FLX  
8 weekly IPT -A sessions  
Increase dose FLX  
Referred out of study  
R = Responder (CGI -I = much improved or very much improved), PR = Partial Responder (CGI -I = minimally im proved),  
NR = Nonresponder (CGI -I = no change or worsening)  Treatment Phase  
Assessment  Acute  
Week 16  Continuation  
Week 24  Week 32  
  Page 13 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_467384]  3.2 Primary Study Endpoints  
The primary outcome measure is feasibility/acceptability (treatment satisfaction, session 
attendance, drop -out rates)  
3.3 Secondary Study Endpoints  
The secondary  outcome measure s include depressive symptoms Children’s Depression 
Rating Scale  (CDRS ), Children’s Global Assessment Scale (C -GAS), Social Adjustment 
Scale (SAS -SR), and response status as defined by [CONTACT_817471] 
(CGI) .50 Responders will be defined as having a 1 or  2 (much or very much improved), 
partial responders w ill be defined as having a 3 (minimally improved) whereas non -
responde rs will be defined as having a 4 -7 on the CGI (minimally  improved to v ery 
much worse ). 
3.4 Primary Safety Endpoints  
Primary safety endpoints include s uicidality (Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale) , 
side e ffects (Side Effects Measure) , and vital signs (blood pressure, pulse, weight) . 
 
[ADDRESS_1131919] Selection and With drawal  
4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
 Male and female adolescents ages 12 -18 
 Completed acute phase treatment and showed at least a partia l response to 
treatment (CGI -I of minimal ly improved or better  (CGI -I < 3)).50  
4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
 Completed acut e phase treatment and were are non -responder to treatment 
(CGI -I of no change or worsening  (CGI -I > 4)).  
4.[ADDRESS_1131920] Recruitment and Screening  
We will only enroll adolescents who completed acute phase treatment in our linked 
study ( Gunlicks -Stoessel, PI, K23MH090216 ) and showed at  least a partial response to 
treatment (CGI -I of minimally improved or better  (CGI -I < 3)). Adolescents will enter 
continuation treatment having either received [ADDRESS_1131921] may be withdrawn from the study prior to expected completion for the 
following reasons:  
 Participant or participant’s parent(s) withdraw consent  
 Participant fails to adhere to protocol require ments (no show to 3 appointments)  
  Page 14 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_467384]   Participant experiences adverse side effects to the fluoxetine  that are intolerable 
to the adolescent or the parent.   
 Participant experiences a significant worsening in symptoms: the participant  will 
be evaluated by [CONTACT_817472]: 1) a suicide attempt, 2) serious suicidal ideation (with a plan and/or intent) 
and refusal to contract for safety, 3) psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], 4) possible need 
for psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_18543], or 5) significant worsening of depressive or other 
clinical symptoms (CDRS -R> 76 or CGI improvement score> 5). Adolescents will 
be removed from the study immediately following review if the independent 
safety monitor  deems that the patient requires  treatment outside of study 
protocols or if the treatment provided in the study is contraindicated.  
 
If a subject exits the study for any  reason , the participant  will be provided with referrals 
to receive treatment out of the protocol.  
 
4.4.[ADDRESS_1131922] to follow -up if they do not resp ond to 3  phone calls to their primary number.   
 
5 Study Drug  
5.1 Description  
The study drug will come as a tablet that the participant will be advised to take once a 
day, preferably in the morning with a meal.  
5.2 Treatment Regimen  
Adolescents  who received  fluoxetine  durin g the acute phase  and were  responders (CGI -
I = much  improved  or very much improved  (CGI -I = 1 or 2) ) will continue  their acute  
phase  dosing  regimen  and will meet  with the psychiatrist on a monthly  basis. 
Adolescents  who received  fluoxetine  during  the acute  phase  and were  partial 
responders  (CGI -I = minimally  improved  (CGI -I = 3) ) will enter  the continuation  phase  
on 40mg  fluoxetine,  and will have their  dose  increased  to 60mg.   Partial responders  will 
meet  with the psychiatrist  biweekly  for the first 2 mont hs and monthly  for the second 2  
months.   Adolescents  who received  only IPT-A during  acute  phase  and were  partial 
responders  (CGI -I = minimally  improved  (CGI -I = 3) ) will begin  treatment with fluoxetine  
during  the continuation  phase,  in addition  to continui ng their IPT -A treatment.  The 
dosage  schedule  will be 10mg  per day for the  first week  and 20mg  per day for the 
following  [ADDRESS_1131923] 4 weeks  and biweekly thereafter.   Pharmacotherapy  sessions  will 
include  assessment  of vital signs, adverse  effects, safety,  and symptomatic response.  
  Page 15 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_467384]  5.3 Method for Assigning Subjects to Treatment Groups  
There is no random ization in this study. Assignment to treatment groups is described 
above (based on CGI -I score) . 
5.[ADDRESS_1131924]  will count the number of pi[INVESTIGATOR_817444].  Families will be provided with the study pager number with instructions for 
emergencies during after hours. Families will be advised to call 911 in case of life 
threatening emergencie s.  
5.6 Prior and Concomitant Therapy  
Adolescents will not be permitted to take any medications for a psychiatric diagnosis 
other than ADHD. Depressed adolescents with a comorbid diagnosis of ADHD who are 
on a stable dose of stimulant medication (> 3 months) w ill be eligible to participate in the 
studies.  Adolescents will not be permitted to participate in alternative forms of 
psychotherapy (e.g. family therapy, group therapy, additional individual therapy) . 
5.[ADDRESS_1131925] will give the adolescent  a prescription for the study medication  that they 
will then fill with a licensed  pharmacy. If the families’  insurance company does will not 
cover the cost of the medication, the family will need to pay for the medication out of 
pocket.  
 
The following pro ducts are manufactured by [CONTACT_817473]: Pulvule are available in 10mg, 20mg and 40mg capsule strengths and 
packages as follows:  
Pulvule  Strength  
 [ADDRESS_1131926]  responded  to acute  phase  treatment (CGI -I 
= much improved  or very much  improved)  will attend 4  biweekly  IPT-A sessions  
followed  by 2 monthly  sessions.  Adolescents  who showed  a partial response  to acute  
phase  treatment (CGI -I = minimally improved)  will attend  8 weekly  IPT-A sessions  
followed  by 2 monthly  sessions.  
 
Continuation  Pharmacotherapy.   Adolescents  who received  fluoxetine  during  the acute  
phase  and were  responders (CGI -I = much  improved  or very much improved)  will 
continue  their acute  phase  dosing  regimen  and will meet  with the psychiatrist on a 
monthly  basis.  Adolescents  who received  fluoxetine  during  the acute  phase  and were  
partial responders  (CGI -I = minimally  improved)  will enter  the continuation  phase  on 
40mg  fluoxetine,  and will have their  dose  increased  to 60mg.  Partial responders  will 
meet  with the psychiatrist  biweekly  for the first 2 months  and monthly  for the second 2  
months.   Adolesce nts who received  only IPT-A during  acute  phase  and were  partial 
responders  (CGI -I = minimally  improved)  will begin  treatment with fluoxetine  during  
the continuation  phase,  in addition  to continuing  their IPT -A treatment.  The dosage  
schedule  will be 10mg  per day for the  first week  and 20mg  per day for the following  [ADDRESS_1131927] sizes for larger clinical trials.51 Consequently, the proposed research study does 
not aim to evaluate the efficacy  of the adaptive treatment strategies. Rather, the sample 
size was determined by [CONTACT_817474]. With these aims in 
mind, an i ntent -to-treat sample size of 30  was sele cted. A sample size of 30  will help 
ensure there are enough depressed adolescents in each adaptive tr eatment strategy  to 
assess feasibility and acceptability . 
 
7.2 Statistical Methods  
All statistical analyses  will be conducted  on the intent -to-treat sample.  
 Hypothesis  1: Among  families  in the acute  phase  study  who are eligible  to 
participate  in continuation  treatment, the  percentage  of adolescents  and parents  
  Page 17 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_817475],  and associated  95% 
confidence  intervals  will be calculated.  
 Hypothesis  2: The mean/median  (depending  on the distribution)  number and 
proportion  of sessions  attended  by [CONTACT_65754],  as well as the  associated  95% 
confidence  intervals,  will be calculated. The proportion  of adolescents droppi[INVESTIGATOR_817445],  and the associated  95% confidence  interval,  will 
be calculated.  
 Hypothesis  3: An overall  mean  treatment satisfaction  rating, and  associated  95% 
confidence  interval,  will be calculated  based on  adolescents’  and parents’  
responses  on the  CSQ -8. 
 Hypothesis  4: An overall  mean  treatment satisfaction  rating  and the associated  
95% confidence  interval will be calculated  based  on clinicians’  response  on the 
clinician  satisfaction  measure.  
 Hypotheses  5 & 6: (1) Primary analyses  will examine  within -subject change  
scores  in CDRS, C- SSRS  and CGAS over the  course  of acute  and continuation  
treatment  using  repeated  measures  analysis  of variance  (ANOVA). Linear 
regression  and analysis  of covariance  (ANCOVA)  adjusting  for pre-treatment  
scores  will also be used  to analyze  changes in  adolescents’  outcomes.  The 
magnitudes  of changes  in outcomes  variables  over time will be assessed  using  
the paired  t-test or Wilcoxon  signed -rank test for continuous  variables.   Mixed -
effects  regression  models  will also be employed  to compare  CDRS,  C-SSRS,  
and CGAS  scores  over multiple  time points  in order to obtain  informatio n on 
specific  patterns  of change  over time. (2) Secondary  analyses  comparing  within -
subjects  change  scores  across  treatment  groups  on self-report  measures  of 
depression  (BDI-II) and functioning  (CBQ,  SAS-SR) will be conducted  using  two- 
sample  t-test, Wilcoxon rank sum test,  and linear regression  analysis.  
Hierarchical linear  modeling  (HLM)  will also be conducted  to compare  scores  
over multiple  time points  within  each  treatment group.  (3) Recovery  will be 
defined  as an absence  of depression  symptoms  on the KSADS -PL for at least  [ADDRESS_1131928]. The percentage  of adolescents  who meet 
recovery  criteria, and  associated  95% confidence  interval will be calculated.  
The percenta ge of adolescents  who meet relapse  criteria,  and associated  95% 
confidence  interval will  be calculated.  For those  with a relapse, the mean  (SD) 
time from recovery to relapse  will be calculated.  
 
Exploratory  Analyses:  Exploratory analyses  will be conducted  to determine  whether  
comorbid  psychiatric  disorders, baseline  severity of depression,  and different  forms  of 
functioning  (CBQ,  SAS-SR, CGAS) predict or moderate  positive  or negative  treatment  
outcomes. Potential  predictors and  moderators  will be used  to refine the personalized  
treatment  strategy  that will be tested  in the subsequent R01.  
7.[ADDRESS_1131929] Population(s) for Analysis  
All population s. 
 
  Page 18 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_467384]  8 Safety and Adverse Events  
8.1 Definitions  
Adverse Event  
An adverse event  (AE) is any symptom, sign, illness or experience t hat develops 
or worsens in severity during the course of the study.  Intercurrent illnesses or 
injuries will be regarded as adverse events.  Abnormal results of diagnostic 
procedures are considered to be adverse events if the abnormality:  
 results in study withdrawal  
 is associated with a serious adverse event  
 is associated with clinical signs or symptoms  
 leads to additional treatment or to further diagnostic tests  
 is considered by [CONTACT_118296] -serious.  A serious adverse 
event  (SAE  ) is any AE that is:  
 fatal 
 life-threatening  
 requires or prolongs hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408]  
 results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity  
 a congenital anomaly or birth defec t 
 an important medical event  
 
Important medical events are those that may not be immediately life threatening, 
but are clearly of major clinical significance.   They may jeopardize the subject, and 
may require intervention to prevent one of the other serio us outcomes noted 
above.  For example, drug overdose or abuse, a seizure that did not result in in -
patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or intensive treatment of bronchospasm in an emergency 
department would typi[INVESTIGATOR_15355].  
 
All adverse events that d o not meet any of the criteria for serious should be 
regarded as non-serious adverse events .  
Adverse Event Reporting Period  
The study period during which adverse events must be reported is normally 
defined as the period from the initiation of any study pr ocedures to the end of the 
study treatment follow -up.  For this study, the study treatment follow -up is defined 
as [ADDRESS_1131930] art of the study.  A preexisting 
condition will be recorded as an adverse event if the frequency, intensity, or the 
character of the condition worsens during the study period.  
General Physical Examination Findings  
  Page 19 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_817476], any clinically significant a bnormality will be recorded as a preexisting 
condition.  At the end of the study, any new clinically significant 
findings/abnormalities that meet the definition of an adverse event must also be 
recorded and documented as an adverse event.   
Post -study Adver se Event  
All unresolved adverse events will be followed by [CONTACT_283877], the subject is lost to follow -up, or the adverse event is otherwise 
explained.  At the last scheduled visit, the investigator will instruct each subj ect to 
report any subsequent event(s) that the subject, or the subject’s personal 
physician, believes might reasonably be related to participation in this study.   
 
Abnormal Laboratory Values  
A clinical laboratory abnormality should be documented as an adv erse event if any 
one of the following  conditions is met:   
 The laboratory abnormality is not otherwise refuted by a repeat test to 
confirm the abnormality  
 The abnormality suggests a disease and/or organ toxicity  
 The abnormality is of a degree that requires  active management; e.g. 
change of dose, discontinuation of the drug, more frequent follow -up 
assessments, further diagnostic investigation, etc.  
 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], Prolonged Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_817446] >24 hours  or prolonged 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_25676] a serious adverse event  
unless specifically instructed otherwise in this protocol.  Any condition responsible 
for surgery will be documented as an adverse event if the condition  meets the 
criteria for and adverse event.     
 
Neither the condition, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], prolonged hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], nor surgery are 
reported as an adverse event in the following circumstances:  
 Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_817447] a preexisting condition.  Surgery should not be 
reported as an outcome of an adverse event if the purpose of the surgery 
was elective or diagnostic and the outcome was uneventful.  
 Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5111].  
 Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_186996], unless it is a worsening or increase in frequency of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_817448]. 
8.[ADDRESS_1131931] seek information on adverse 
events by [CONTACT_5147], as appropriate, by [CONTACT_5148].  Information on all 
  Page 20 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_817477] s ource document, and also in the 
appropriate adverse event module of the case report form (CRF).  All clearly related 
signs, symptoms, and abnormal diagnostic procedures results will recorded in the 
source document, though should be grouped under one diagno sis. 
 
All adverse events occurring during the study period must be recorded.  The clinical 
course of each event will be followed until resolution, stabilization, or until it has been 
determined that the study treatment or participation is not the cause.   Any serious 
adverse event that occurs after the study period and is considered to be possibly related 
to the study treatment or study participation should be recorded and reported 
immediately.  
8.[ADDRESS_1131932] be reported by [CONTACT_16470] 24 hours of finding 
out of the event.  A Serious Adverse Event (SAE) form must be completed by [CONTACT_94105] 24 hours.  The investigator will 
keep a copy of this SAE form on file at the study site.  Report serious adverse 
events by [CONTACT_36982]:  
 
University of Minnesota, Office of the Vice President of Research  
 [EMAIL_15496]  
(612) 625 -2356 
 
Minnesota Medical Foundation  
[EMAIL_15497]  
(612) 624 -3333  
 
At the time of the initial report, the following information should be provided:  
 Study identifier  
 Study Center  
 Subject number  
 Name [CONTACT_18467]/device  
 A description of the event  
 Date of onset  
 Current status  (on-going, 
resolved)   Whether study treatment was 
discontinued  
 The reason why the event is 
classified as serious  
 Investigator assessment of the 
association between the event 
and study treatment  
 
Within t he following [ADDRESS_1131933] the understanding of the event.  Significant new 
information o f ongoing serious adverse events should be provided promptly to 
the study sponsor . 
  Page 21 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_467384]  8.3.2  IRB Notification by [CONTACT_16473] (including follow -up informatio n) must be 
submitted to the IRB within 10 working days if it falls under the UPI[INVESTIGATOR_817449].   
8.3.3  FDA Notification by [CONTACT_533348] -threatening exper ience associated with the use of 
the drug as soon as possible but no later than 7 calendar days from the 
sponsor’s original receipt of the information.  
 
If a previous adverse event that was not initially deemed reportable is later found 
to fit the criteria  for reporting, the study sponsor will submit the adverse event in a 
written report to the FDA as soon as possible, but no later than 15 calendar days 
from the time the determination is made.  
8.4 Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_817450] 16.  Assessments will be 
conducted at week  24 and 32.   The adolescent completes the BDI -II at each therapy 
session, and therapi[INVESTIGATOR_817451]' clinical status 
using the CGI -I and CGI -S at each therapy session. The su bject will be evaluated by  [CONTACT_817478]: 1) a suicide 
attempt, 2) serious suicidal ideation (with a plan and/or intent) and refusal to contract for 
safety, 3) psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], 4) possi ble need for psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or 
5) significant worsening of depressive or other clinical symptoms (CDRS -R> 76 or CGI 
improvement score> 5). Adolescents will be removed from the study immediately 
following review if the independent safety monit or deems that the patient requires 
treatment outside of study protocols or if the treatment provided in the study is 
contraindicated. In these cases, the family will be provided with referrals to receive 
treatment out of the protocol.  
 
While fluoxetine is generally well tolerated, side effects can occur.  Adverse events will 
be closely monitored during each psychopharmacological treatment visit using the C -
SSRS and the Side Effects forms. The study psychiatrist will review with families the 
following potent ial fluoxetine related adverse events: gastrointestinal complaints 
(nausea, pain, diarrhea, and constipation), dizziness, allergic reactions, increased 
anxiety or irritability, increased activation/restlessness, sleep changes (increased or 
decreased), sexu al side effects, appetit e changes (increase or decrease ), unusual 
thoughts, sweating, fatigue, suicidal ideation/attempts/and or behaviors. In addition to 
these issues, the study psychiatrist will make the adolescents and their families aware 
of the Food a nd Drug Administration advisory that the use of antidepressants like the 
SSRIs may lead to suicidal thinking/attempts in depressed youths and that the FDA has 
placed product warning label with information highlighting the need for close 
observation for wor sening of depression and the emergence of suicidality in children 
treated with these medications. This information will be a part of the consent process for 
the study so that families are aware of these issues when considering participation in 
  Page [ADDRESS_1131934], who will 
follow up wi th the family. In the event of minor side effects (e.g., mild headaches), the 
medication may be maintained at the current dose levels or reduced. If any adverse 
medication reactions do occur, the medication will be withdrawn and clinical staff will 
follow the patient closely until the adverse reaction remits.  
 
8.5 Medical Monitoring  
It is the responsibility of the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_344899]/her site.  This safety monitoring will include careful assessment and appropriate 
reporting of adverse events as noted above, as well as the construction and 
implementation of a site data and safety -monitoring plan (see section 9 Auditing, 
Monitoring and Inspecting).  Medical monitoring will include a regular assessment of the 
number and type of serious adverse events.  
8.5.[ADDRESS_1131935] week. Clinicians will report to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_666218], 
unexpected problems that involve risk to the participants or others, and any breaches of 
confidentiality. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_817452] 24 hours of their  
occurrence. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_817453] 1) whether participants’ safety, 
privacy and confidentiality has been consistently assured, 2) whether research 
instruments have been administered in a uniform manner and in a way that protects 
participants’ privacy, 3) progress towards recruitment goals, quality of data collection 
(e.g., appropriate completion of forms), and participant retention/ attrition rates, an d 4) a 
review of new scientific literature pertinent to the safety of participants or the ethics of 
research participation. The study psychiatrists, the independent safety monitor,  
psychologists, research clinicians, and clinical interviewers will take all  appropriate 
actions to prevent and treat psychiatric emergencies in participating adolescents and 
family members as outlined in the Procedures to Minimize Potential Risks.  
 
On an annual basis, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_20196]. Mufson  will monitor the safety, quality and co nduct 
of this study and decide whether adequate subject safeguards are in place. They will 
review: 1) the progress of the proposed study, including assessments of data quality 
and participant recruitment, accrual and retention; 2) outcome and adverse event  data 
to determine whether there is any change to the anticipated benefit -to-risk ratio of study 
  Page 23 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_817479], be changed, or terminated; 3) 
external factors or relevant information (e.g., pertinent scientific literat ure reports or 
therapeutic developments, results of related studies) that may have an impact on the 
safety of study participants or the ethics of the research study; and 4) study procedures 
designed to protect the privacy of the research subjects and the c onfidentiality of their 
research data.  
 
[ADDRESS_1131936] of 1996  
(HIPAA).  Those regulations require a signed subject authorization informing the subject 
of the following:  
 What protected health information (PHI) will be collected from subjects in this 
study  
 Who will have access to that information and why  
 Who will use  or disclose that information  
 The rights of a research subject to revoke their authorization for use of their PHI.  
 
In the event that a subject revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the investigator, 
by [CONTACT_5151], retains the ability to use all in formation collected prior to the revocation of 
subject authorization.  For subjects that have revoked authorization to collect or use 
PHI, attempts should be made to obtain permission to collect at least vital status (i.e. 
that the subject is alive) at the  end of their scheduled study period.  
 
All research forms and audiotapes of the treatment sessions will contain the study 
assigned subject ID number only as identifying information. Research forms and will be 
kept in a locked file cabinet at the University  of Minnesota. Clinical records will be kept 
in a separate locked file cabinet at the University of Minnesota. Only research staff and 
the treating clinical staff will have access to the research and clinical files.  
 
Confidentiality will be strictly mainta ined. In order to safeguard the confidentiality and 
security of data files, computer accounts containing data will be password protected.  
Identifying information, records, and audio/ videotapes of clinical interactions will be 
stored in a locked cabinet i n a locked office, only accessible to research staff members; 
a participant identification number will identify all materials. Participant identification 
numbers will be unrelated to participant characteristics (e.g. date of birth, social security 
number),  and a list with the pairings of names and identification numbers will be kept in 
a separate password protected document a network drive, separate from the data files 
and tapes. All staff will sign confidentiality statements.  
 
  Page [ADDRESS_1131937] or 
someone else is in danger (e.g., prostitution, IV drug use, child abuse (see below), 
suicidality, homicidality). Prior to eliciting this information, the child will be fully informed 
that the clinician m ay need to report such information. Before parents will be made 
aware of this information, our procedure will be to first talk with the child and explain 
what information will be disclosed to parents. Because information relating to abuse will 
be assessed,  participants will be informed of the need to report child abuse prior to 
eliciting this information. All staff will follow federal and state child abuse  reporting 
requirements.  
 
Participants will be assigned a coded identification number that will be used  on all data 
collection measures. To minimize the risk of loss of confidentiality, the data collected in 
this study will be protected by [CONTACT_666267]. The first will include the 
subject consent forms, names, addresses, telephone numbers, date of birth, and 
subject ID. Other databases will include the questionnaire data from the project, and 
participants’ study ID will be the only unique pi[INVESTIGATOR_817454]. Audio files of assessment and treatment  sessions will be stored in a 
separate storage area online. Only study IDs will be used to link audio files to 
questionnaire data. These files will all be password protected and accessible to only a 
limited number of project personnel. The collected materi als will be used only for 
research purposes; participants’ records with identifying information will not be released 
to anyone without participants’ written permission.  The databases will be password 
protected and the database password will be changed on a  regular basis. The 
Department’s computing system is protected from outside access. All staff members will 
be required to close password -protected applications or lock their workstations when 
they are away from their desks. All paper forms will be kept in locked file cabinets at the 
University of Minnesota.  During data analysis all identifying information, with the 
exception of the participant identification number is removed from the data. No 
information about identities of the study participants will be p ublished or presented at 
conferences.  
9.2 Source Documents  
Source data is all information, original records of clinical findings, observations, or other 
activities in a clinical trial necessary for the reconstruction and evaluation of the trial.  
Source data a re contained in source documents   Examples of these original 
documents, and data records include: hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1097], clinical and office charts, 
  Page 25 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_817480], memoranda, subjects’ diaries or evaluation checklists, pharmacy 
dispensing records, recorded data from automated instruments, copi[INVESTIGATOR_19093], microfiches, photographic 
negatives, microfilm or magnetic media, x -rays, subject files, and records kept at the 
pharmacy, at the laborat ories, and at medico -technical departments involved in the 
clinical trial.  
 
Data generated by [CONTACT_692290]' medical records and/or study progress notes. Data may be transcribed legibly 
on case repor t forms  supplied for each subject or directly inputted into an electronic 
system or any combination thereof.  
9.3 Records Retention  
It is the investigator’s responsibility to retain study essential documents for at least [ADDRESS_1131938].  These docu ments will be retained for a longer period if required 
by [CONTACT_16477].  In such an instance, it is the responsibility of the 
sponsor to inform the investigator/institution as to when these documents no longer 
need to be retained.  
 
10 Study Monitoring, Auditing, and Inspecting  
10.1 Study Monitoring Plan  
This study will be monitored according to FDA/GCP guidelines.  (Explain who will be 
monitoring what sites or self-monitoring  according to the U of M plan.  The investigator 
will allocate adequate t ime for such monitoring activities.  The Investigator will also 
ensure that the monitor or other compliance or quality assurance reviewer is given 
access to all the above noted study -related documents and study related facilities (e.g. 
pharmacy, diagnostic  laboratory, etc.), and has adequate space to conduct the 
monitoring visit.  
 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_817455], validity, and confidentiality of data collection procedures through regular 
monitor ing of clinical and research activities during weekly project meetings with the 
study staff. At the start of each treatment session, clinicians will be required to ask both 
adolescents and parents whether any adverse events or suicidality have occurred in the 
past week. Clinicians will report to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_666218], 
unexpected problems that involve risk to the participants or others, and any breaches of 
confidentiality. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_817456] (IRB) at the 
University of Minnesota within 24 hours of their occurrence. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_817457] 1) whether participants’ safety, privacy and confidentialit y has been 
consistently assured, 2) whether research instruments have been administered in a 
  Page [ADDRESS_1131939] that protects participants’ privacy, 3) progress towards 
recruitment goals, quality of data collection (e.g., appropriate completion of  forms), and 
participant retention/ attrition rates, and 4) a review of new scientific literature pertinent 
to the safety of participants or the ethics of research participation. The study 
psychiatrists, the independent safety monitor  psychologists, resear ch clinicians, and 
clinical interviewers will take all appropriate actions to prevent and treat psychiatric 
emergencies in participating adolescents and family members as outlined in the 
Procedures to Minimize Potential Risks.  
 
On an annual basis, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_20196]. Mufson  will monitor the safety, quality and conduct 
of this study and decide whether adequate subject safeguards are in place. They will 
review: 1) the progress of the proposed study, including assessments of data quality 
and participant recruitmen t, accrual and retention; 2) outcome and adverse event data 
to determine whether there is any change to the anticipated benefit -to-risk ratio of study 
participation and whether the study should continue, be changed, or terminated; 3) 
external factors or re levant information (e.g., pertinent scientific literature reports or 
therapeutic developments, results of related studies) that may have an impact on the 
safety of study participants or the ethics of the research study; and 4) study procedures 
designed to protect the privacy of the research subjects and the confidentiality of their 
research data.  
10.2 Auditing and Inspecting  
The investigator will permit study -related audits  and inspections by [CONTACT_1201], the 
sponsor, government regulatory bodies, and University com pliance and quality 
assurance groups of all study related documents (e.g. source documents, regulatory 
documents, data collection instruments, study data etc.).  The investigator will ensure 
the capability for inspections of applicable study -related facili ties (e.g. pharmacy, 
diagnostic laboratory, etc.).  
 
Participation as an investigator in this study implies acceptance of potential inspection 
by [CONTACT_137713].  
11 Ethical C onsiderations  
This study is to be conducted according to US and international standards of Good 
Clinical Practice (FDA Title 21 part 312 and International Conference on Harmonization 
guidelines), applicable government regulations and Institutional research  policies and 
procedures.  
 
This protocol and any amendments will be submitted to a properly constituted 
independent Institutional Review Board (IRB), in agreement with local legal 
prescriptions, for formal approval of the study conduct.  The decision of th e IRB 
concerning the conduct of the study will be made in writing to the investigator and a 
copy of this decision will be provided to the sponsor before commencement of this 
study.  The investigator should provide a list of IRB members and their affiliate to the 
sponsor.  
  Page [ADDRESS_1131940] with this study (patent ownership, 
royalties, or financial gain greater than the minimum allowable by [CONTACT_1385], etc.) 
must refer to the Rege nts Policies on Individual Conflict of Interest Policy or Institutional 
Conflict of Interest Policy. These policies require University Faculty and staff to report 
external professional activities and business and significant financial interests related to 
his or her University activities by [CONTACT_17258] a REPA (Report of External Professional 
Activities) at least once per year. Faculty and staff should also file a REPA when 
substantial changes in business or financial interests occur, when an activity that 
presents a potential conflict of interest is anticipated, or when submitting an application 
for research support or technology transfer, submitting research protocols to the IRB, or 
receiving financial contributions. All University of Minnesota investigators  will follow the 
University conflict of interest policy.  
12.[ADDRESS_1131941] Stipends or Payments  
The adolescent will receive $30 in cash directly after the week 24 evaluation and the 
parent will receive $[ADDRESS_1131942] results and all data derived from the study.  
 
  Page 28 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_467384]  14 References  
 
 
1. Lewinsohn PM, Roberts RE, Seeley JR, Rohde P, Gotlib IH, Hops H. Adolescent 
psychopathology II: Psychosocial risk factors for depression. Journal of Abnormal 
Psychology. 1994;103:302 -315. 
2. Weissman MM, Wolk S, Goldstein RB, et al. Depressed adolescents grown up. Journal 
of the American Medical Association. 1999;281:1707 -1713.  
3. David -Ferdon C, Kaslow NJ. Evidence -based psychosocial treatments for child and 
adolescent depression. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology. 2008;37:62 -
104. 
4. Emslie GJ, Heiligenstein JH, Wagner KD, et al. Fluoxetine for  active treatment of 
depression in children and adolescents: A placebo -controlled, randomized clinical trial. 
Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. 2002;41:1205 -1215.  
5. Keller MB, Ryan ND, Strober M, et al. Efficacy of paroxeti ne in the treatment of 
adolescent major depression: A randomized, controlled trial. Journal of the American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 2001;40:[ADDRESS_1131943] B, Silva S, Vitiello B, et al. Remission and residual symptoms after short -term 
treatment in the Treatment of Adolescents With  Depression Study (TADS). American 
Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 2006;45(12):1404 -1411.  
7. Wagner KD, Ambrosini P, Rynn M, al. e. Efficacy of sertraline in the treatment of 
children and adoles cents with major depressive disorder: Two randomized controlled 
trials. Journal Of The American Medical Association. 2003;290:1033 -1041.  
8. Wagner KD, Jonas J, Findling RL, Ventura D, Saikali K. A double -blind, randomized, 
placebo -controlled trial of escit alopram in the treatment of pediatric depression. Journal 
of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. 2006;45:280 -288. 
9. Frank E, Prien RF, Jarrett RB, et al. Conceptualization and rationale for consensus 
definitions of terms in major depres sive disorder: Remission, recovery, relapse, and 
recurrence. Archives of General Psychiatry. 1991;48:851 -855. 
10. Birmaher B, Brent DA, Kolko D, et al. Clinical outcome after short -term psychotherapy 
for adolescents with major depressive disorder. Archives  of General Psychiatry. 
2000;57:29 -36. 
11. Clarke G, Rohde P, Lewinsohn P, Hops H, Seeley J. Cognitive -behavioral treatment of 
adolescent depression: Efficacy of acute group treatment and booster sessions. Journal of 
the American Academy of Child & Adolesc ent Psychiatry. 1999;38:272 -279. 
12. Curry J, Silva S, Rohde P, et al. Recovery and recurrence following treatment for 
adolescent major depression. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2011;68:263 -270. 
13. Emslie GJ, Rush AJ, Weinberg WA, Kowatch RA, Carmody T,  Mayes TL. Fluoxetine in 
child and adolescent depression: acute and maintenance treatment. Depression and 
Anxiety. 1998;7:[ADDRESS_1131944] ers. Journal of the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry. 2007;46:1503 -1526.  
15. Emslie G, Heiligenstein JH, Hoog SL, al. e. Fluoxetine treatment for prevention of 
relapse of depression in children and adolescents: A double -blind, placebo -controlled 
  Page 29 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_817481]. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry. 
2004;43:1397 -1405.  
16. Kroll L, Harrington R, Jayson D, Fraser J, Gowers S. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_817458] -behavioral therapy for major depression in adolescent psychi atric patients. 
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 1996;35:1156 -
1161.  
17. TADS Team. The Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS): Long -term 
effectiveness and safety outcomes. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2007;64:1132 -1144.  
18. Asarnow JR, Goldstein MJ, Tompson M, Guthrie D. One -year outcomes of depressive 
disorders in child psychiatric in -patients: Evaluation of the prognostic power of a brief 
measure of expressed emotion. Journal of Child Psychology and Ps ychiatry. 
1993;34:129 -137. 
19. Brent DA, Kolko DJ, Birmaher B, Baugher M, Bridge J. A clinical trial for adolescent 
depression: Predictors of additional treatment in the acute and follow -up phases of the 
trial. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 
1999;38:263 -270. 
20. Mufson L, Dorta KP, Moreau D, Weissman MM. Interpersonal psychotherapy for 
depressed adolescents . 2 ed. [LOCATION_001]: Guilford Press; 2004.  
21. Mufson L, Dorta KP, Wickramaratne P, Nomura Y, Olfson M, Weissman MM. A 
randomized effectiveness trial of interpersonal psychotherapy for depressed adolescents. 
Archives of General Psychiatry. 2004;61:577 -584. 
22. Mufson L, Weissman MM, Moreau D, Garfinkel R. Efficacy of interpersonal 
psychotherapy for depressed adolescents. Archives of General Psychiatry. 1999;56:573 -
579. 
23. Rossello J, Bernal G. The efficacy of cognitive -behavioral and interpersonal treatments 
for depression in Puerto Rican adolescents. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology. 1999;67:[ADDRESS_1131945] of perceived 
interpersonal functioning on treatment for adolescent depression: IPT -A versus treatment 
as usual in school -based health clinics. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 
2010;78 :260-267. 
25. Asarnow JR, Emslie G, Clarke G, et al. Treatment of selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitor -resistant depression in adolescents: Predictors and moderators of treatment 
response . Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatr y. 
2009;48: 330-339. 
26. Frank E. Interpersonal psychotherapy as a maintenance treatment for patients with 
recurrent depression. Psychotherapy. 1991;28:259 -266. 
27. Frank E, Kupfer DJ, Perel JM, Cornes C, Jarrett DB, Mallinger AG. Three year outcomes 
for ma intenance therapi[INVESTIGATOR_99635]. Archives of General Psychiatry. 
1990;47:[ADDRESS_1131946] women from depression in the face of stressful lif e events? 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 2002;70:[ADDRESS_1131947]: A strategic plan for 
research on mental illness. Archives of General Psychiatry. 2009;66:128 -133. 
  Page 30 
CONFIDENTIAL  
This material is the property of the University of Minnesota.  Do not disclose or use except as authorized in writing by [CONTACT_467384]  30. Collins LM, Murphy SA, Bierman KA. A conceptual framework for adaptive preventive 
interventions. Prevention Science. 2004;5:185 -196. 
31. Lavori PW, Dawson R, Rush AJ. Flexible treatment strategies in chronic disease: Clinical 
and research implications. Biologi cal Psychiatry. 2000;48:[ADDRESS_1131948]. 1996;49:[ADDRESS_1131949]. 1998;51:3 -16. 
34. Emslie G, Kowatch R, Costello L, Travis G, Peirce L. Double -blind study of fluoxetine 
in depressed children and adolescents. Proceedings of the American Academy of Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry. 1995;11:41 -42. 
35. TADS Team. Fluoxetine, cognitive –behavioral therapy, and their combination for 
adolescents with depression: Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS) 
randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Medical Association. 2004;292:807 -
820. 
36. Brent D, Emslie G, Clarke G, et al. Switching to another SSRI or to venlafaxine with our 
without cognitive behavioral therapy for adolescents with SSRI -resistant depression. 
Journal of the American Medical Association. 2008;299:901 -913. 
37. Clarke GN, Debar L, Lynch F, et al. A randomized effectiveness trial of brief cognitive –
behavioral therapy for depressed adolescents receiving antidepressant medication Journal 
of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 2005;44:888 -898. 
38. Goodyer IM, Dubicka B, Wilkinson P, et al. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs) and routine specialist care with and without cognitive behaviour therapy in 
adolescents with major depression: Randomised controlled trial. British Medical Journa l 
2007.  
39. Melvin GA, Tonge BJ, King NJ, Heyne D, Gordon MS, Klimkeit E. A comparison of 
cognitive -behavioral therapy, sertraline, and their combination for adolescent depression. 
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry. 2006;45 :1151 -
1161.  
40. TADS Team. Treatment for Adolescents with Depression Study (TADS): Rationale, 
design, and methods. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent 
Psychiatry. 2003;42:531 -542. 
41. Brent D, Emslie G, Clarke G, et al. Switching to anoth er SSRI or to venlafaxine with or 
without cognitive behavioral therapy for adolescents with SSRI -resistant depression: The 
TORDIA randomized controlled clinical trial. Journal of the American Medical 
Association. 2008;299:901 -913. 
42. Kaufman J, Birmaher B , Brent D, Rao U. Schedule for Affective Disorders and 
Schizophrenia for School -Age Children -Present and Lifetime version (K -SADS -PL): 
Initial reliability and validity data. Journal of the American Academy of Child and 
Adolescent Psychiatry. 1997;36:980 -988. 
43. Poznanski EO, Mokros HB. The Children's Depression Rating Scale - Revised (CDRS -
R). Los Angeles: Western Psychological Services; 1996.  
44. Posner K, Oquendo MA, Gould M, Stanley B, Davies M. Columbia Classification 
Algorithm of Suicide Assessment (C –CASA): Classification of suicidal events in the 
FDA’s pediatric suicidal risk analysis of antidepressants. American Journal of 
Psychiatry. 2007;164:[ADDRESS_1131950] HR, Aluwahlia S. A children's Global 
Assess ment Scale (CGAS). Archives of General Psychiatry. 1983;40:1228 -1231.  
46. Beck AT, Steer RA, Brown GK. Manual for Beck Depression Inventory, 2nd edition . San 
Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation; 1996.  
47. Weissman MM, Bothwell S. Assessment of socia l adjustment by [CONTACT_18654] -report. 
Archives of General Psychiatry. 1976;33:[ADDRESS_1131951]: A behavioral -family 
systems approach . [LOCATION_001]: Guilford; 1989.  
49. Larsen DL, Attkisson CC, Hargreaves  WA, Nguyen TD. Assessment of client/patient 
satisfaction: Development of a general scale. Evaluation and Program Planning. 
1979;2:197 -207. 
50. Guy W. ECDEU assessment manual for psychopharmacology . 2 ed. Washington, DC: 
US Government Printing Office; 1976 . 
51. Kraemer HC, Mintz J, Noda A, Tinklenberg J, Yesavage JA. Caution regarding the use of 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_25831]. Archives of General 
Psychiatry. 2006;63:484 -489. 
 
 