 
Version 201 4JAN31  Confidential  Page 1 of 13  
 Official Title: High Definition Neuromuscular Stimulation in Tetraplegia  
NCT  NUMBER: 04075812  
STUDY PROTOCOL AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
DOCUMENT DATE: JANUARY 31, [ADDRESS_269143] injury (SCI) is an insult to the spi[INVESTIGATOR_223637] a change, either temporary or 
permanent, in its normal motor, sensor y, and/or autonomic function.  It is estimated that the 
annual incidence of spi[INVESTIGATOR_1828] (SCI), not including those who die at the scene of the 
accident, is approximately [ADDRESS_269144] injury increased from 28.7 years in the 1970’s to [ADDRESS_269145]; those with paraplegia have lesions in the thoracic, lumbar, 
or sacral regions of the spi[INVESTIGATOR_1831]. Since 2005, the most fre quent neurologic category at 
discharge of persons reported to the database is incomplete tetraplegia (40.8%), followed by 
[CONTACT_223646] (21.6%), incomplete paraplegia (21.4%) and complete tetraplegia (15.8%). 
Less than 1% of persons experienced compl ete neurologic recovery by [CONTACT_2360][INVESTIGATOR_2345] 
(National Spi[INVESTIGATOR_223638], 2012).   
 
Previous Work  
Battelle  (a private nonprofit  applied science and technology development company 
headquartered in Columb us, Ohio ) has developed a technology that provides high definition  
neurostimulation (Bouton et. al. 2012 ).  This technology can target s pecific muscles in the 
forearm to allow wrist and hand/finger movements. The objective of the study proposed  in this 
 
Version 201 4JAN31  Confidential  Page 3 of 13  
 submission is to demonstrate high definition  neuromuscular stimulation  of a paralyzed limb 
through computer -generated  commands (or as triggered by a battery -operated EEG wireless 
headset ).  This will be a n important step  towards creating a neural bridge/by[CONTACT_223647][INVESTIGATOR_1828], stroke , or motor neuron disease. See  Figure 1 for an overall 
system diagram and neuromuscular sleeve and glove components of the system. . 
 
The high definition  Neuromuscular Stimulator is a n investigational  device developed by [CONTACT_223648] 
(Columbus, Ohio) that has been reviewed by a registered IRB (at Battelle) and has been used  
with human subjects  with no adverse effects .  The sleeve to be added in figure 1 (b,c) is a non -
significant risk addition. The sleeve has been approved by [CONTACT_34033] a significant risk study 
(see attached) that uses a chip implanted into the moto r cortex. The sleeve itself is a non -
significant risk device and does not elevate the present study to significant risk.  
 

 
Version 201 4JAN31  Confidential  Page 4 of 13  
  
 
Figure 1. a) Overall Neural Bridging System Diagram.; b,c ) Neuromuscular stimulation sleeve 
and glove  
Study Rationale  
Most neuromuscular stimulation systems have large area pads and only allow gross motion.  The 
high definition  technology developed by [CONTACT_223649], including 
individual fi nger movement.  The objective of th is study is to demonstrate  high definition  non-
invasive neuromuscular stimulation of an upper extremity in tetraplegic , also termed 
quadriplegic,  participants  as an important step towards developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a neural bridge/by[CONTACT_223650][INVESTIGATOR_223639] .  In initial 
sessions, the computer will generate pre -determined movements and create the corresponding 
stimulation patterns and isolate individual wrist and hand/finger movements (after a calibration 
period).  
 
In later sessions, and with training, the participant may be able to imagine a small number (1 -3) 
basic movements that are detected by [CONTACT_223651].  The stimula tion NMES will be in the form of a cuff/array is 
comprised of 12mm circular or a sleeve consisting of a flexible circuit that has electrodes with 
custom of 12mm diameter. In the case of the sleeve, the cuff and electrodes will be housed in a 
spandex -type m aterial. A non -toxic conductive enhancer (hydrogel discs applied,  or conductive 

 
Version 201 4JAN31  Confidential  Page 5 of 13  
 lotion)  lotion will form the interface between the electrodes and the skin allowing stimulation of 
small and large muscles and  in the arm and hand to evoke a wide variety of spatial patterns and 
associated movements. The optional glove (Figure 1, b and c) connects  to the sleeve and 
provides information back to the system about the position of the hand and arm in space, as well 
as the flexion and extension of the fingers and wrist. The glove does not provide stimulation and 
is for positional information gathering on ly. 
 
Purpose  
The purpose of this study is to demonstrate high definition  non-invasive neuromuscular 
stimulation of an upper extremity in tetraplegic participants.  This will be an important step 
towards developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a neural bridge/by[CONTACT_223652][INVESTIGATOR_223640].   
 
Protocol Overview and Design  
The target population will be people with C 4-[ADDRESS_269146] injuries (motor and senso ry 
complete neurologic injuries ) who are more than [ADDRESS_269147] served basis, there may be inadequate 
representation of ethnicities, genders, and race in the study sa mple.  
 
The total duration of the study is expected to be about 18 months , and each participant is 
expected to be on the study for about 6 months. Once the study is completed, participants will be 
discontinued from the study . Participants may also discontinue the study if they wish at any time.  
 
Version 201 4JAN31  Confidential  Page 6 of 13  
  
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria:  
• Must be 21 years or older.  
• Must be tetraplegic  (C4-6 ASIA A)  
• [ADDRESS_269148] injury and neurologically stable  
• Participant is willing to comply with all follow -up evaluations at the specified times.  
• Participant is able to provide informed consent prior to enrollment in the study.  
• The participant is fluent in English.  
 
Exclusion Criteria:  
• No active wound hea ling or skin breakdown issues . 
• No history of poorly controlled autonomic dysreflexia . 
• Other implantable devices such as heart/brain pacemakers  
• Subjects who rely on ventilators  
 
Informed Consent   
Informed consent will be obtained by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_223641]. The informed consent form will be reviewed with the participant and all 
questions will be addressed before the participant signs the consent form . The participant will 
also be given a copy of the signed consent, and a copy of the consent will be placed in the 
patient’s medical record. Participants will be given the option to agree or not agree to be 
videotaped throughout the study. These videos wil l be used for educational purposes; including 
lectures and presentations. Participant’s videotape decision will not affect his/her participation in 
the study.  
 
Study Phases  
The study design will consist of the following two (2) phases listed below.  
I. Baselin e assessment  and calibration  (approximately  1 month ) 
II. Testing motions: pre -sequenced and EEG -triggered motions; further calibration  as 
needed (approximately 5 months ) 
 
Version 201 4JAN31  Confidential  Page 7 of 13  
  
Phase I - Baseline  
• Medical history review  
• Physical and neurological exam  
• EMG  
• Fit and calibrate external stimulator :  The Battelle Neuromuscular Stimulator will be 
setup and calibrated to evoke wrist and hand/finger movements.   
 
Phase II  – Testing Motions  
After the  Battelle Neuromuscular Stimulator is setup and calibrated, various spatial and temporal 
stimulation patterns will be tested to evoke wrist/hand  movements  in various sequences of 
individual and combined movements . 
 
Each subject will be asked to participate in test sessions, for up to [ADDRESS_269149] less than 3 hours (including setup time).  The first half 
hour, approximately, will be needed for setup of the stimulator system.  Active stimulation time 
will be monitored to avoid fatigue.  Once the stimulator is calibrated  and tested , the patient may 
also be asked to imagine approximately [ADDRESS_269150]/hand movement.  If successful this will be an importan t 
first step toward regaining volitional control of a paralyzed limb.  
 
Outcomes and Data Analysis  
Statistical analysis will be conducted with a biostatistician consultant. Continuous outcome 
variables will be summarized by [CONTACT_67423], median, standard deviat ion, minimum and maximum.  
Adverse effect data will be reported continuously, including all serious an d non -serious adverse 
effects .   
 
Primary a nd Secondary Outcomes  
The primary outcome measure of this study is the achievement of individual wrist and 
hand/finger joint  movement via high definition  neuromuscular stimulation .   
The targeted primary and secondary outcomes are therefore as follows:  
 
Version 201 4JAN31  Confidential  Page 8 of 13  
 • Primary outcome - consistent and repetitive voluntary movement in the targeted muscle 
groups  
• Secondary outcome - consistent movement in the targeted muscle groups that is functional 
(manipulate or pi[INVESTIGATOR_223642])  
 
Risk Analysis  
Risks  
Training and ther apeutic sessions involving functional electrical stimulation will need to be 
monitored for autonomic dysreflexia signs and symptoms.  
As with any muscle stimulator, there can be a risk of excessive current and skin irritation or 
burns.  The Neuromuscular S timulator, however, limits the average output current density to less 
than 2mA/cm2 at the skin and the  average power density to less than 0.25W/cm2 to provide safe 
levels and avoid tissue damage  However, despi[INVESTIGATOR_223643] -in safety limits, current and power 
density could exceed FDA guidelines if electrodes lift off of the skin. This has the potential to 
cause potentially causing minor irritation or first degree burns locally. The research investigator 
will monitor frequently during test sessions for any signs of electric shock, skin irritation, and/or 
burns. The sleeve material itself is spandex, with reg istration marks printed on it. The material 
itself has been tested for biocompatibility; the printing has not, nor has the sleeve after 
laundering. The investigators, who will already be monitoring frequently for signs of irritation 
from electric shock, wi ll also monitor for signs of allergic skin reaction.  The sleeve has been 
approved by [CONTACT_34033] a significant risk study (see attached) that uses a chip implanted into the 
motor cortex. The sleeve itself is a non -significant risk device and does not elevat e the present 
study to significant risk.  
 
The study PI [INVESTIGATOR_6254] -investigators will be responsible for the evaluation, monitoring, and 
documentation of events meeting the criteria and definition of an adverse event (AE) or serious 
adverse event (SAE) as provided in this clinical in vestigation.  The study participants will be 
evaluated for any possible AEs from the time written study informed consent is obtained until 
study closure or the subject exits the study.  
• Any pre -existing condition unless a worsening of that condition in terms of nature, 
severity, or frequency develops.  
 
Version 201 4JAN31  Confidential  Page 9 of 13  
 • Medical or surgical procedure unrelated to the clinical protocol (i.e., dental or cosmetic 
procedure)  
• Technical observation or a device events that does not result in a medically undesirable 
situation for the subject  
 
Documentation of Adverse Events  
All AEs from the time the study informed consent is signed through the final study visit will be 
recorded as AEs on the study event log; each event being documented separately.  All AEs and 
SAEs will be followed until:  
• AE is r esolved and has returned to normal/baseline or has stabilized  
• Subject has withdrawn from the study  
• AE is judged by [CONTACT_223653]  
• Study closure  at which time, the responsibility for following any ongoing AEs will be  
transferred to the incoming clinical care team.  
 
 
[CONTACT_223658]  will serve as Point of Contact [CONTACT_223654].  All non -
serious adverse events will be reported to the Ohio State University Institutional Review Board 
(IRB) during  the annual reporting period.  
 
 
For those events that are determined to be related to stimulation therapy or device specific, the 
sponsor/investigator will report the strength of the relatedness using the following terms:  
• Definite ly related : The event is resolved by [CONTACT_223655]  
• Probabl y related : The event resolves upon discontinuing stimulation and cannot be 
reasonably explained by [CONTACT_423]’s current clinical state  
• Possibl y related : The event may have been produced by [CONTACT_1177]’s clinical state, 
however, the effect of stimulation cannot be ruled out  
• Unlikely related: The event did not occur temporally to stimulation and can be explained 
by [CONTACT_423]’s current clinical state  or any other cause  
• Unrelated: The event is explained by [CONTACT_423]’s current clinical state or any other 
cause  
 
 
Version 201 4JAN31  Confidential  Page 10 of 13  
 For purposes of determination of a UADE the following categories will be considered 
related: “definitely related” and “probably related”.  
 
Reporting of Serious Adverse Events  
SAEs reported during the protocol defined reporting period per section 4.1.4 will be:  
• Evaluated for their relatedness per section 4.1.4  
• Reported to the Data Safety Monitoring Committee  
 
Procedures for Minimizing Risks  
The risks associates with this study are minimal. Participants may  terminate from the study if 
they wish at any time. Study participants may also wish to discontinue participation for any 
reason. Subjects who prematurely withdraw from the study due to an adverse event will be 
followed (e.g. telephone contact, and/or follow -up visits, etc.) until resolution of the event. Risks 
to confidentiality are negligible in this protocol, since participants will not be identified by [CONTACT_2300], 
or by [CONTACT_223656], in any summary reports or publications. CRFs will be maintained in 
locked files and password -protected databases behind the Ohio State University Medical Center 
firewall. Data and safety monitoring activities for this study will continue until all subjects have 
completed their participation in the study.  
 
Potential Benefits  
Functional electrical stimulation (FES) systems have been created that stimulates muscle and 
restores functional movement in paralyzed limbs. This is one of the first studies  in humans to 
combine high definition  neuromuscular stimulation and EEG  to produce  real-time control of a 
paralyzed limb.  
 
Study Justification  
The target population will be people with C 4-[ADDRESS_269151] injuries (motor and sensory 
complete neurologic injuries ) who are more than [ADDRESS_269152] and produce volitional movement in humans.  
 
Device Description  
The Battelle System (as shown in Figure 2) is comprised of an Emotive (San Francisco, CA) 
EEG headset, a personal computer  (PC)  which runs the appropriate  algorithm s, and a non-
invasive Neuromuscular Stimulator.  The Neuromuscular Stimulator has been revie wed and 
approved  for use in a non -significant risk study  by a registered IRB .  In this study both wrist and 
individual finger movement was demonstrated (Bouton and Annetta 2012)  – see Figure 3 .   
 The Emotive  device is battery -operated and wireless and the  Neuromuscular Stimulator is 
electrically isolated from mains power and earth ground and is compliant with the applicable 
patient and touch leakage currents in accordance with IEC60601 -1:2005.  Therefore, the two 
subsystems that are in contact [CONTACT_223657].  Furthermore, a  hazard analysis was performed 
to identify and evaluate other potential risks associated with the use and operation of the system.  
Require d risk controls were incorporated in the design of the system hardware.  
EMOTIV EEG 
Headset (Optional)PC
ISOLATED
USB
NEUROMUSCULAR 
STIMULATION 
CUFFSMULTI-CHANNEL 
STIMULATOR DIG 
ENCLOSUREMULTI-CHANNEL 
STIMULATOR 
STIM ENCLOSURE
MULTI-CHANNEL 
STIMULATOR 
POWER SUPPLY 
(ISOLATED)
Emotiv EPOC 
USB Receiver
120VAC5VDC, 24VDC
 
 
Figure 2.  Overall S ystem Diagram with Additional Details . 
 
 
Version 201 4JAN31  Confidential  Page 12 of 13  
  
Figure 3.  Neuromuscular Stimulator in Able -Bodied Study . 
 
Stimulation Parameters  
The stimulation parameters of the Neuromuscular Stimulator are as follows :  
• Maximum peak current is 20mA  with a m aximum pulse width of 0.5ms. 
• Maximum pulse frequency is 50 pulses per second.  
• Maximum output voltage is 300 volts ± 10%.  
 
• Maximum average current density  is 2 mA/cm2 at the Neuromuscular Stimulation Cuff   
electrode surface.  
• Maximum average power density is 0.25 W/cm2 at the Neuromuscular Stimulation Cuff  
electrode surface.  
 
Monitoring Plan  
Plan Description  
The data management for this study will maintain a level of data integrity and confidentiality that 
will provide optimum adherence to all [ADDRESS_269153] the events of a study, confirm protocol compliance, and produce data that 
is accurate and appropriate in demonstrating study results.  
 

 
Version 201 4JAN31  Confidential  Page 13 of 13  
 REFERENCES  
 
Bouton, C., “Fusing Neural Decoding and Neuromodulation Technologies and Associated 
Engineering Challenges,” North American Neuromodulation Society, 15th Annual Meeting, Las 
Vegas, NV (8 -11 Dec 2011).  
 
Bouton C., Annetta A., Arora S., Buck V., Eubanks C., Friend J., Glenn B., Mack N., Masters 
M., Schimmoeller A.,  “High Definition Neuromuscular Stimulation and Encoding ,” IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Conference Brain Machine Interface Workshop,  San 
Diego, CA (Sep 2012).  
 
Bouton, C.  and Annetta, N. , “Neural Bridging: Recoding Motor Cortex Activity and Linking to 
High Resolution Neuromuscular Stimulation ,” North American Neuromodulation Society, 16th 
Annual Meeting, Las Vegas, NV (6 -9 Dec 2012).  
 
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_223644] a Glance, National Spi[INVESTIGATOR_223645], 
Birmingham, Alabama https://www.nscisc.uab.edu February 2012 . 