 
 1  
 
 
PROTOCOL TITLE : Food Allergy Symptom Self -management with Technology (FASST) 
for Caregivers: An mHealth Intervention to Address Psychosocial Outcomes in Caregivers of 
Children with Food Allergy   
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Brantlee Broome, PhD, MSN, RN  (PI) 
 
Document Date:  5/7/2021  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 Specific  Aims  
     Overview : Caregivers  of children  with life threatening  severe  food allergic  reactions  are more  likely  to 
experience  fatigue,  depression  and anxiety.  These  distress ing psychosocial  conditions,  in turn, may impact  
child and family  functioning.  Unfortunately,  there  is a paucity  of self-management  tools  for caregivers  to 
address  these  consequence s. This proposal  leverage s advances  in mHealth  to develop  and test such  a tool. 
     Approximately  [ADDRESS_838883]  growing  national  public  health  concerns  with 
incidence  at 8% of children  and prevalence  increasing  by 50% between  1997  and 2011 .2  Severe  allergic  
reaction s may include  food-induced  anaphylaxis  (FIA) , an acute  life-threatening  event  affecting  more  than 40% 
of children  diagnosed  with food allergies .[ADDRESS_838884]  
the severity  of subsequent  reactions  but raises  the risk of future  fatal reactions.3  Between  2007  and 2016,  FIA 
increased  by 377%  in the US, underscoring  the need  for better  prevention  and treatment  2 and for 
interventions  to address  significant  distress  experienced  by [CONTACT_629125] .4  
     Our recent  preliminary  research  4 corroborates  findings  in the literature  3; 5-11 suggesting  that 32% of 
caregivers  with a child who is newly  diagnosed  with food allergy(ies)  experience  clinically  significant  
psychological  distress.[ADDRESS_838885].   
     To address  this gap, we propose  to develop  an intervention  that specifically  targets  fatigue  and associated  
psychosocial  symptoms.  Bounce  Back  Now (BBN)13, an existing  technology -enhanced,  self-management  
mHealth  intervention  designed  to address  disaster  survivors’  psychosocial  health  needs  using  a smartphone -
formatted  approach , will be tailored  and adapted  for caregivers  of children  with food allergy (ies), hence  the 
renaming  to Food  Allergy  Symptom  Self-Management  with Technology  (FASST)  for caregivers . Over  the 
course  of 6-months,  we will conduct  preliminary  feasibility  testing  of FASST  in a 4-week  small  randomized  trial 
of 30 caregivers  of children  18 years -of-age who are newly  diagnosed  (90 days  from diagnosis)  with food 
allergy (ies).    
 
Aim 1a: Perform  key informant  interviews  (n = 10) and analyze  via conventional  content  analysis  to determine  
ways  to improve  app acceptability.  
Aim 1b: Adapt FASST  using  data collected  during  key informant  interviews . 
Aim 2:  Conduct  preliminary  testing  of implementation  processes  including  feasibility , acceptability,  adherence  
and satisfaction  using  the RE-AIM framework  with process  measures,  surveys,  and key informant  interviews  in 
[ADDRESS_838886]  (n = 20) or the control  condition  (i.e., basic  app with resource  
links)  (n = 10).  
Aim 3: Obtain  estimates  of variability  and measure  caregiver  experienced  fatigue,  anxiety,  depression,  sleep,  
self-efficacy , and quality  of life at baseline ,  4-week  intervention  completion  and 3-months  post intervention . 
 
B. Significance  
B1. Food  allergy  is a highly  complex  condition  and is growing  in frequency  and severity  among  
children,  negatively  affecting  quality  of life.  
     Approximately  6 million  children  in the U.S. suffer  from food allerg y 1, and incidence  is increasing.2 Food -
induced  anaphylaxis  (FIA)  is a health  risk associated  with food allergy  affecting  more  than 40% of children  
diagnosed  with food allergies .[ADDRESS_838887]  the 
severity  of subsequent  reactions  but raises  the possibility  of future  fatal reactions. 3 Although  FIA reactions  in 
children  are rare, they are responsible  for over 200 deaths  and 30,000  emergency  room  visits  annually  in the 
United  States.14 There  is no cure for food allergies  and treatment  involves  avoidance  of food allergens  and 
emergency  treatment  of symptoms  caused  by [CONTACT_629126].15 A caregiver’s  ability  to adhere  to this 
standard  of care may be challenged  by a whole  host of new factors  that accompany  the diagnosis,  the most  
salient  being  the potential  for a fatal reaction  from ingestion  of ubiquitous  substances  which  are often  invisible.  
 
 3 This creates  an ever-present  element  of hypervigilance  and stress -related  fatigue  as caregivers  learn  to 
manage  food allergies  as a chronic  condition  and as they learn  to respond  to food-induced  reactions  as an 
acute  illness  or event.  Caregivers  with newly  diagnosed  children  are particularly  challenged  to balance  
appropriate  vigilance  and management  strategies  while  tempering  the effects  of food allergy  on quality  of life.16 
B2. Caregivers  experience  symptoms  that may reduce  caregiving  effectiveness.   
     The PI’s research,  and that of others,  highlights  that caregivers  of children  with food allergy  describe  the 
physical  challenges  of care as overwhelming  and constant.  The perpetual  hypervigilance  and ensuing  
exhaustion  associated  with time-consuming  and persistent  condition -management  activities  – such  as 
monitoring  a child’s  food consumption  at school  or when  with friends,  shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_357807], and preparing  special  food 
– have  the greatest  impact  on caregiver  quality  of life and are associated  with fatigue,  uncertainty,  constant  
stress,  social  isolation,  reduced  spontaneity,  and persistent  anxiety,  fear, and depression . 4-[ADDRESS_838888]  
pronounced .17  As caregivers  begin  to understand  the necessary  precautions  and potential  consequences  of 
accidental  ingestion  associated  with FIA and the required  condition -management  activities,  fear and anxiety  
emerge  as the predominant  emotions.  While  a certain  level of anxiety  is essential  for adequate  management,  
high levels  of sustained  anxiety  in caregivers  of children  with food allergy  may be maladaptive,  increas ing the 
overall  burden  of caring  for a child with FIA and negatively  impacting  the caregiver’s  ability  to provide  care to 
self, child,  and famil y.18 
B3. Self-management  strategies  for caregiver  stress  and fatigue  are lacking.  
     Despi[INVESTIGATOR_629086],  decreased  quality  of life, and diminished  caregiving  effectiveness,  there  are a lack of caregiver -
centered  self-management  interventions  to address  stress -related  fatigue,  depression  and anxiety  symptoms . 
However,  symptom  self-management  is exceedingly  relevant  to the caregiver  of a child with newly  diagnosed  
food allergy(ies)  as management  is complex  and compounded  by [CONTACT_629127]’s  control  
which  are further  intensified  by [CONTACT_629128].  The short -term goal of this technology -
enhanced,  self-management  mHealth  intervention  is to enhance  and promote  effective  self-management  
behaviors  to improve  the psychosocial  well-being  of the caregiver  that in the long-term will lead to improved  
outcomes  for the child,  namely  prevention  of potentially  fatal food induced  reactions.  
              
C. Innovation  
     This proposal  is innovative  because  it is the first to address  psychosocial  manifestations  of 
caregiving  to children  with newly  diagnosed  food  allergy (ies) using  a technology -based  self-
management  scalable  strategy  that has the potential  to be translated  to other  populations  of caregivers  of 
children  with complex  medical  conditions .  This proposal:  
• Targets  caregivers  who are new to the disease  process  and management  requirements  and therefore  
have  unique  needs  that will be addressed  using  a smartphone -formatted  approach.   This demonstrates  
an innovative  approach  that is both cost effective  and sustainable  over time (fewer  personnel  required ). 
• Focuses  the intervention  on psychosocial  symptoms  such  as fatigue , addressing  an unmet  need  
recognized  within  the literature  but neglected  by [CONTACT_39487].    
• Uses  a scalable  strategy  to engage  caregivers  during  a critical  time-period  in the caregiving/condition  
trajectory  ( 90 days  from diagnosis)  when  psychosocial  functioning  is most  at risk. 
• Addresses  barriers  to accessing  care such  as transportation,  work  schedules,  and childcare  through  
the application  of technology.  Addressing  these  barriers  lends  to the translatability  of the intervention  to 
other  populations  of caregivers  of children  with complex  medical  conditions.   
• Uses  a technology -based  intervention  that has been  tailored  based  on caregiver -reported  needs  and 
desires  and provider  expertise  which  is expected  to increase  engagement  and reach  of self-
management  strategy.  
 
D. Approach  
D1. Overview  
     This feasibility  study  is designed  to modify  an existing  technology -enhanced,  self-management  mHealth  
intervention  (BBN)  and evaluate  its impact  on reach,  self-management  behaviors,  caregiver  psychosocial  
symptoms  and quality  of life targeting  caregivers  of children  with newly  diagnosed  food allergy  during  the first 
90 days  after diagnosis.   Our clinical  sample  will be recruited  from the Medical  University  of South  Carolina  
 
 4 (MUSC)  Health  Allergy  and Immunology  Clinic within  the MUSC  West  Ashley  Primary  Care  office.  A sample  of 
(n=10)  caregivers  of children  with established  food allergy  ( 1 year from diagnosis)  will be recruited  for key 
informant  interviews  that will inform  tailoring  and adapting  FASST .  Feasibility  (rate of recruitment,  attrition,  rate 
of missing  data,  adoption,  implementation,  satisfaction,  acceptability)  will be tested  in a randomized  sample  
(n=30)  of caregivers  of children  newly  diagnosed  with food allergy  ( 90 days  from diagnosis).   Participants  
(n=20) will be randomized  to the experimental  condition  (FASST)  or (n=10) to a control  condition  (i.e., basic  
app with resource  links).  
     Participants  randomized  to the intervention  arm (n=20) will receive  the modified  mHealth  application  
(FASST)  that contains  elements  of condition  specific  education  and information,  symptom  self-monitoring,  and 
symptom  self-management.   Participants  in the control  arm (n=10) will receive  the modified  mHealth  
application  (FASST)  that contains  only the element  of condition  specific  education  and information.        
D2. Investigative  Team  and Preliminary  Work  
     This interdisciplinary  team  provides  extensive,  complementary  expertise  that will facilitate  successful  
conduct  of the proposed  project.  The primary  mentor,  [CONTACT_187293],  a nurse  scientist,  has vast experience  with 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_629087].  [CONTACT_187293]  adds  nursing  expertise,  
theory -driven  models,  self-management/self -care,  and expertise  in intervention  development  and testing.  Co-
mentor  [CONTACT_242410]  has a background  in clinical  psychology  and is the Director  of Technology  Applications  
Center  for Healthful  Lifestyles  (TACHL)  and is PI [INVESTIGATOR_629088]-funded  grants.  Fifteen  of the federally  funded  
grants  that he has led as PI (including  5 NIH awards)  have  incorporate d technology -based  strategies  and/or  
telehealth  platforms  to deliver  interventions.  [CONTACT_242410]  brings  experience  with technology,  telehealth,  user 
centered  design,  intervention  adaptation,  as well as intervention  development  and testing.  This includes  
development  of web-based  self-help interventions,[ADDRESS_838889]. 
Williams’  clinical  interests  include  anaphylaxis  and food allergy.  Finally,  [CONTACT_187296],  biostatistician,  and co-
investigator  on several  NIH-funded  projects,  including  several  with [CONTACT_187293],  will provide  expertise  in 
measurement  strategies  and statistical  analyses.  
D3. Method  
D3.1.  Setting,  Sample  and Recruitment . Prior  to participant  recruitment,  we will tailor  and adapt  BBN  to 
FASST  based  on existing  literature  and expertise  of the study  team.  We will then recruit  10 caregivers  of 
children  with established  food allergy  ( 1 year from diagnosis)  to participate  in key informant  interviews  that 
will inform  the most  practical  changes  needed  when  tailoring  and adapting  FASST  prior to the intervention . We 
consider  these  key informant  interview ees as co-designers  of FASST  as they possess  a level of experience  
with and understanding  of food allergy  management  and the psychosocial  consequences  of caring  for a child 
during  the critical  period  following  a child’s  food allergy  diagnosis  that caregivers  of newly  diagnosed  children  
have  yet to experience.  Caregivers  will be recruited  via the Medical  University  of South  Carolina  (MUSC)  
Health  Allergy  and Immunology  Clinic  within  the MUSC  West  Ashley  Primary  Care  office.  Caregivers  will be 
recruited  who have  at least  one child with an established  food allergy(ies)  diagnosis  (1 year from diagnosis)  
and are familiar  with the disease  process  and management  as determined  by: [CONTACT_629129]  [ADDRESS_838890]  the caregiver,  briefly  describe  the study,  and ask permission  for the principal  investigator  ([CONTACT_629154])  or research  assistant  (RA) to contact  [CONTACT_629130].  Once  permission  is granted,  the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_629089].  Prior  to consenting,  all questions  will be resolved  to 
the patient’s  satisfaction.  If a participant  does  not appear  to understand  the information  contained  within  the 
consent  document  or of what  is expected  of them  as a study  subject,  then a member  of the study  team  will 
review  the consent  document  again  with the participant.  If after this second  review,  the subject  does  not 
demonstrate  an understanding,  they will not be enrolled  in the study.  Only participants,  with no observed  
cognitive  impairment,  will be consented  and enrolled  into the study.  
Feasibility  testing.  Thirty  caregivers  of children  with newly  diagnosed  ( 90 days  from diagnosis)  will be 
recruited  into the feasibility  Aim 2 of the study.  Eligible  caregivers  will again  be identified  through  the MUSC  
Health  Allergy  and Immunology  Clinic.  Inclusion  criteria  are as follows:  caregivers  of children  18 years -of-age 
who are newly  diagnosed  ( 90 days  from diagnosis)  with food allergy (ies).  Only participants,  with no observed  
 
 [ADDRESS_838891]  the potential  participant  to 
determine  eligibility.   
D3.2.  Intervention  
     The intervention  will be a multicomponent  (3-part) technology -based  package  delivered  via a mobile  device  
and used  over a 4-week  period.  The intervention  will target  influences  and processes  informed  by [CONTACT_629131] . Component  1 (education  and support)  will consist  of continuous  access  to directed  
educational  resources  about  food allergy  and its management.   These  materials  will be easily  accessible  via a 
mobile  device  and will include  embedded  PDFs  and links to websites  developed  and tested  by [CONTACT_629132].  An example  includes  education  materials  provided  by [CONTACT_629133]  
(FARE),  the leading  national  organization  and most  trusted  source  of food allergy  information,  programs  and 
resources,  such  as the Food  Allergy  & Anaphylaxis  Emergency  Care  Plan. To address  potential  literacy  
barriers,  all resources  will be provided  in a web compatible  format  and compliant  with current  accessibility  
guidelines.  Component  2 (symptom  monitoring  and tracking)  will consist  of a mobile -device  based  application  
for daily tracking  and monitoring  of fatigue,  anxiety  and other  psychosocial  symptoms  in caregivers  of children  
with newly  diagnosed  food allergy(ies)  that also permits  upload  of physical  and emotional  symptom  logs to 
study  personnel.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_629090]  a daily text reminder  to participants  randomized  to the intervention  arm 
of the study  reminding  them  to complete  their daily physical  and emotional  symptom  log.  Logged  symptom  
trends  will be graphically  illustrated  by [CONTACT_629134].  Based  on feedback  from 
component  2, participants  will be given  directed  guidance  related  to component  3 (symptom  self-
management).   Component  [ADDRESS_838892]-intervention  completion.  As well, the RA will send  caregivers  a weekly  text message  using  
a semi -structured  protocol  to “check  in” with participants  and promote  engagement.   
D3.3.  Control  group  
     The control  group  will receiv e Component  1 of the intervention.    
D3.4. Primary  Aim 1a and 1b: Key informant  interviews  and intervention  tailoring  and adaptation  
    We will use a purposive  sampling  strategy  to identify  caregivers  of children  with established  ( 1 year from 
diagnosis)  food allergy(ies)  familiar  with the disease  process  and management.  Data  obtained  through  key 
informant  interviews  using  a semi -structured  protocol  and a qualitative  descriptive  approach21 will inform  
tailoring  and adaptation  of FASST . The purpose  of interviews  will be to obtain  feedback  from caregivers  of 
children  with established  food allergy(ies)  who have  been  managing  the condition  for one year or more.   
Participants  will be asked  about  their experience  in the first year of managing  their child’s  food allergy,  with 
specific  questions  regarding  the first [ADDRESS_838893]  been  prepared  for the feasibility  testing  (Aim 2) with access  to the 
FASST  application  and text messaging.  After  allowing  time for participants  to explore  the intervention  (with  
direct  observation),  the PI [INVESTIGATOR_629091] 8-[ADDRESS_838894]  observations  to inform  adaptation  of the intervention.  The interview  will be 
audio  recorded  and transcribed.  Following  data analysis  (described  in D3.7.) the results  from the interviews  will 
be used  to adapt  the intervention  to meet  the specific  needs  of caregivers  of children  18 years -of-age with a 
newly  diagnosed  food allergy(ies).   
 
 
 6 D3.5. Primary  Aim 2: Feasibility  Testing  
     To determine  feasibility,  we will apply  the RE-AIM framework  to assess  the Reach,  Efficacy,  Adoption,  
Implementation,  and Maintenance  of the intervention  with [ADDRESS_838895]  number  for technical  assistance  if needed.  Baseline  measures  (Table  1) will be 
collected  during  the same  meeting.  Participants  will participate  in the intervention  over a 4-week -period.  At the 
end of the 4-week  period,  the PI [INVESTIGATOR_629092]  a post-intervention  meeting  with each  individual  caregiver  
participant  during  which  measures  data for Aim [ADDRESS_838896]-intervention  to assess  implementation  and preliminary  evidence  of 
maintenance  (Table  1).The PI [INVESTIGATOR_629093].   
Post -intervention  interviews.  Five participants  from each  study  arm will be randomly  selected  and asked  to 
participate  in post-intervention  key informant  interviews  with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_629094]-depth  data on 
accessibility,  usability,  and adherence  to intervention  guided  by [CONTACT_39505]-AIM framework  (Table  1). Semi -
structured  interviews  will be conducted  in-person  or via phone  (participant’s  choice)  using  a qualitative  
descriptive  approach,[ADDRESS_838897] approximately  45-60 minutes,  and will be conducted  according  to an interview  
guide  with open -ended  questions  and probes.   
     Reimbursement  for participants  will be a $[ADDRESS_838898] provided  at each  of the 3 data collection  points,  with 
participants  in key informant  interviews  (pre- and post-intervention)  receiving  an additional  $[ADDRESS_838899]-intervention.  Self-report  measures  will be collected  during  meetings  between  the PI [INVESTIGATOR_240787].  Participants  will complete  measures  using  a mobile  tablet  device.  Data  will be captured  using  
REDCap  data management  system.   The PI [INVESTIGATOR_629095].   
 
Table  1: Intervention  Domains  and Measures   
Major  tasks  and domains  Measures/instruments/  
questions  and Cronbach’s  alpha  ( ) Data  sources  and time points  
Demographics/clinical  
characteristics  Caregiver  demographics  including  age, marital  
status,  employment  status,  race/ethnicity,  highest  
education  level,  and income;   child age, health  
history,  race/ethnicity,  medications,  health  care 
utilization,  rural/urban  residence,  insurance,  family  
characteristics  Caregiver  interview;  baseline  
Reach:   
Sample   
Recruitment  Monitoring  of sample  representativeness;  types  of 
recruitment  activities;  rates  of recruitment;  % eligible,  
consented,  provided  with informational  session  Recruitment  tracking  forms;  
quality  checks  by [CONTACT_976]; weekly  
meetings  with mentor,  clinic  staff,  
and research  team  
Efficacy:  
Fatigue  
Emotional  distress:  anxiety  
Emotional  distress:  
depressive  symptoms  
 
Quality  of Life 
 
Sleep  Disturbance  
Self-Efficacy  
 
 
 
Measures  of self-
management  behaviors:   
PROMIS  Fatigue  SF 6a(>0.9)23 
PROMIS  Emotional  Distress:  Anxiety  6a (0.97)24 
 
PROMIS  Emotional  Distress:  Depressive  symptoms  
SF 6a (0.97)25 
Food  Allergy  Quality  of Life-Parental  Burden  
(0.85)26 
PROMIS  Sleep  Disturbance  SF 6a (0.9)27 
Food  Allergy  Self-Efficacy  Scale  for Parents  (0.63 -
0.89)28 
 
 
# days  recorded  symptoms;  # days  and types  of 
recorded  treatments/interventions   
Tracking  forms;  fidelity  checklist;  
transmissions  from web-based  
application  to PI/RA;  post-
intervention  interviews;  weekly  
meeting  with mentor,  clinic  staff,  
and research  team;  baseline,  4-
weeks  post-intervention,  3-
months  post-intervention  
 
 7  
Sample  size considerations  
The purpose  of this study  is to establish  feasibility  of implementing  the integrated  intervention  and obtain  
estimates  of variability  for efficacy  outcomes , rather  than to confirm  or refute  hypotheses.  The proposed  pi[INVESTIGATOR_629096]  N=30  subjects  for participation.   Because  this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_629097],  a target  sample  size of 30 is appropriate .29 
 
D3.7. Data  Analysis  
Qualitative  analyses  (Aim  1): Data  from observational  sessions  and key informant  interviews  with caregivers  
and providers  will be analyzed  using  conventional  content  analysis30 and nVivo  qualitative  data analysis  
software  version  1031 to code  data into common  themes.  These  themes  will be compared  to the intervention  
and the components  of the intervention  will be adapted  based  on the thematic  findings.  A tree diagram  may be 
used  to identify  the hierarchical  structure  of themes.   
Feasibility  processes  (Aim  2): For the feasibility  trial, we will collect  multiple  measures  informed  by [CONTACT_39505]-
AIM framework  to assess  feasibility  and inform  future  efficacy  and effectiveness  trials.  Variables  will include  
those  pertaining  to the study  procedures  as well as participant  variables.  Data  to be collected  are described  in 
Table  1. Specifically,  95% confidence  intervals  for proportions  will be used  to estimate  dichotomous  outcomes  
including  the proportion  of caregivers  who agree  to participate  out of the number  approached,  the proportion  
adherent  to the intervention  protocol,  i.e. providing  daily symptom  monitoring/tracking,  using  the education  
component,  etc. For the continuous  feasibility  measures  (e.g.,  patient  satisfaction  scores  from patient  surveys  
and end-of-study  interview),  frequency  distributions  and the median  and mean  responses  (with  95% 
confidence  intervals)  will be obtained.  
Outcome  measures  and estimates  of variability  (Aim  3): Demographic  and clinical  variables  obtained  at 
baseline  will be described  via measures  of central  tendency  (mean,  median),  variability  and frequency  
distributions  as appropriate.  Additionally,  demographic  and clinical  characteristics  for those  who adhered  to the 
study  protocol  (study  completers)  versus  those  who did not adhere  (non-adherers  and drop-outs)  will be 
compared  to better  describe  the population  for this study.  For continuous  measures  for the caregiver  (fatigue,  
anxiety,  depression,  quality  of life, sleep  disturbance,  pain and self-efficacy),  the difference  between  pre and 
post intervention  measurements  will be estimated  via 95% confidence  intervals.   Monitoring  and tracking  
symptoms  
Adoption:  
Adherence  
 
 
 
 
Acceptability   
 
 
Education  
 
 
Symptom  monitoring  and 
tracking  # days  symptoms  recorded;  # times  problem -based  
intervention  accessed;  length  of time in minutes  
problem -based  intervention  accessed;  # times  
educational  component  accessed;  length  of time in 
minutes  educational  component  accessed   
 
Caregiver  satisfaction;  # problems  reported;  types  of 
problems  reported  
 
# times  accessed  educational  materials;  length  of 
time in minutes  educational  materials  accessed  
 
# days  recorded  symptoms  Tracking  forms;  data transmitted  
from web-based  application;  
fidelity  checklist;  weekly  
meetings  with mentor  and 
research  team;  caregiver  
interview  at end of study  
Implementation:  
Technology  
 
 
Consistency  of intervention   
# problems  encountered  with mobile  device,  # 
problems  reported  to research  staff;  types  of 
problems  reported  
instructional  session  conducted  as planned;  fidelity  to 
protocol  maintained   
Tracking  forms;  weekly  meeting  
with mentor  and research  team;  
caregiver  interview  at end of 
study  
Maintenance:  
Projection  of future  
adoption   
# caregivers  who would  continue  intervention;  
caregiver  perception  of the intervention  Caregiver  interview  at end of 
study;  weekly  meetings  with 
mentor  and team  
 
 [ADDRESS_838900] -intervention  qualitative  analyses  (Aim  2): Data  collected  from post-intervention  key informant  
interviews  will be analyzed  using  directed  content  analysis30 and nVivo  qualitative  data analysis  software  
version  10.[ADDRESS_838901]        
Recruitment         
Intervention  delivery  (with  assessments)        
3-month  follow  up assessments        
Data  analysis,  manuscript  preparation,  grant  
submission        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 9 Provisions  to Monitor  the Data  to Ensure  the Safety  of Subjects  
There  is a well-developed  and NIH/NINR  prepared  DSMP  that involves  the use of a Safety  Monitoring  
Committee  (SMC)  that shall meet  semi -annually  post initial  study  enrollment.  The Committee  is comprised  of 
key individuals  that include:  a safety  monitoring  committee  chair  (SMCC ), a biostatistician  (BS),  and the 
Program  Manager  (PM).  Post initial  study  enrollment,  the SMC  will convene  semi -annually  and all reports  will 
be forwarded  to the IRB and Sponsor  in accordance  with institutional  policies  and sponsor  requirements.  
 
SECTION  A. Safety  Monitoring  Committee  (SMC)  
The study’s  SMC  will be comprised  of the following  individuals,  who will perform  data safety  management  and 
monitoring  of the study:  
Susan  Newman,  PhD,  RN, CRRN  Safety  Monitoring  Committee  Chair  (SMCC)  
Martina  Mueller,  PhD Biostatistician  (BS) 
Mohan  Madisetti,  MSc.  Program  Manager  (PM)  
 
Individual  Roles  and Responsibilities  
Principal  Investigator,  (PI). Although  not part of the SMC,  as PI, [CONTACT_629155]  will overall  be responsible  for the 
immediate  protection  of all human  participant  study  participants  enrolled  in the study.  
 
Safety  Monitoring  Committee  Chair  (SMCC) . [CONTACT_305424]  is an Associate  Professor  and the Director  of the 
Ph.D.  in Nursing  Science  program  in the College  of Nursing.  [CONTACT_305424]  is a Certified  Rehabilitation  
Registered  Nurse  currently  researching  the role of peer mentoring  in the process  of adapting  to life with a spi[INVESTIGATOR_629098].   Her work has been  supported  by [CONTACT_629135],  Independent  Living  and 
Rehabilitation  Research,  National  Institutes  of Health,  and the Agency  on Healthcare  Research  and Quality.   [CONTACT_629156]  will act as the study’s  Safety  Monitoring  Committee  Chair  (SMCC) . [CONTACT_305424]  has no real or 
apparent  conflict  of interest  that would  affect  her performance  in this role on the study.  [CONTACT_305424]  will 
correspond  semi -annually  with the SMC  to review  de-identified  cumulative  AE study  data to assess  any impact  
on the safety  of participants  or on the ethics  of the study.  As the SMCC  she will be responsible  for reviewing  all 
cumulative  reported  SAE related  to study  treatment  and data safety  monitoring  reports  generated  by [CONTACT_629136], MUSC’s  IRB and NINR.  [CONTACT_305424]  will be immediately  notified  of 
the occurrence  of any SAE by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_629099]-time regarding  the protocol  and human  participant  safety.   
 
Martina  Mueller  PhD,  Biostatiscian  (BS).  [CONTACT_187296]  is a Professor  in the College  of Nursing  with a joint 
appointment  in the Department  of Biostatistics,  Bioinformatics  and Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]  (DBBE)  at MUSC.  [CONTACT_187296]  
has served  and is currently  serving  as a member  of several  NIH/NINR  R01/R21  DSM  Boards,  and Committees . 
[CONTACT_187296]  will be responsible  for conducting  semi-annual  interim  analyses,  generating  semi-annual  AE safety  
reports  from the electronic  study  research  database  and disseminating  de-identified  information  to the SMC . 
The interim  data analyses  will only include  safety  related  results;  analyses  in regards  to study  outcome  will not 
be performed.  The interim  AE reports  will provide  typology,  frequency  data and outcomes  of all reported  and 
documented  AE in the electronic  study  database.  With no patient  contact,  [CONTACT_187296]  has no apparent  conflict  
of interests  to serve  in this capacity.  
 
Mohan  Madisetti  MSc,  Program  Manager  (PM).  [CONTACT_187297]  is the P20 Progam  Manager  at the College  of 
Nursing  and a member  of MUSC  Institute  of Human  Values  with Fellowship  certification  in Research  Ethics.  [CONTACT_629157]  has served  and is currently  serving  as a member  of several  NIH/NINR  R01/R21  DSM  Boards  and 
Committees,  and FDA Industry  Sponsored  Clinical  Trials.  With no patient  contact,  [CONTACT_187297]  has no apparent  
conflict  of interests  to serve  in this capacity.  [CONTACT_187297]  will be responsible  for the classification  of all reported  
adverse  events  (AE) and for ensuring  that all serious  adverse  events  (SAE)  are forwarded  to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_629100].  In addition,  and in conjunction  with the PI, 
[CONTACT_187297]  will be responsible  for amending  the protocol  in accordance  with the SMC  recommendations,  
submitting  reportable  SAEs  and protocol  deviations  to MUSC  IRB, and, submitting  annual  Progress  Reports  to 
the NIH/NINR  through  MUSC’s  OSRP.  He will also be responsible  for maintaining  the regulatory  binder,  
ensuring  data management  validation  and verification  of the electronic  study  research  database,  conducting  
monthly  internal  quality  control  audits  on all participant  records,  notifying  the PI [INVESTIGATOR_187206],  and the 
 
 10 forwarding  of reportable  SAE to the NIH/NINR  Program  Official  through  MUSC’s  OSRP  within  72hrs  of IRB 
review  and acknowledgement . 
 
SECTION  B. Procedures  for Safety,  Risk  and Confidentiality  
1. Monitoring  Study  Safety  
From  the initial  screening  of participant  by [CONTACT_629137]  (GCP)  and regulations  
pertaining  to the Conduct  of Human  Participant  Research  to study  contact  [CONTACT_629138]-time review  of AE by [CONTACT_629139]’s  IRB, procedures  for monitoring  study  safety  are consistently  afforded  throughout  study.  Specific  
study  safety   procedures  include:  
• Participants  will be screened for inclusion  and exclusion per the protocol; the PI [INVESTIGATOR_629101]  100% 
of participants’  eligibility  prior to study  enrollment through review of inclusion and exclusion criteria with 
potential participants.  
• Participants  will be fully informed  as to all know risks  and the possibility of risk from study  participation in 
the informed consent process. These risks are minimal.  
• Participants  will be instructed to notify  the researchers of any/all suspected or experienced  adverse 
events  whether they believe them to  be related  or not to the  intervention.  
• All reported participant AEs will be tracked through to resolution.  
• All investigators and researchers  will maintain active  CITI Human Subject Research and Good Clinical 
Practice training.  
• The PM will conduct a monthly internal quality control audit of all participant records to ensure 
compliance with MUSC  IRB regulations; the PI [INVESTIGATOR_187208] (PC) will work together to  
correct any  errors.  
• The PI [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or designee  will observe and evaluate  ten (10%) percent of eligibility  screening  visits, 
informed consents and study instructions performed by [CONTACT_629140]/or retraining of study  personnel  if fidelity  to both applicable federal regulations and the 
protocol  is not observed.  
• The BS willl generate  semi-annual  AE reports  for the PI [INVESTIGATOR_629102].  
• The SMC will have access to real-time study  data and will be able to provide immediate  
recommendations to the PI.  
• Investigator  performance and compliance  will be provided for through  MUSC  IRB and ORI study 
oversight.  
 
2. Minimizing  Research -Associated  Risk 
Diligent  study  safety  monitoring  will be conducted  by [CONTACT_629141]’s  continuing  review  
process:  
• Tracking  and follow -up of participant  accrual (inc. withdrawn consents) will minimize risk by [CONTACT_68108], 
disclosing, and mitigating any potentially unknown risk(s) of harm to study participants.  
• Timely and  appropriate reporting of informed consent process deficiencies, protocol  deviations,  privacy 
breaches, conflicts  of interest, and/or  changes in personnel.  
• Ongoing soliciting, monitoring and appropriate reporting  of adverse  event activities.  
• Timely and  appropriate IRB submission of safety -related documents such as audit reports, sponsor 
progress reports, SMC  reports,  and other  materials or communications that might impact the safe 
conduct  of this study.  
• Active cooperation with  the IRB, ACO,  sponsor, and other  applicable  entities  in the event of a random or 
for-cause internal  or external  audit.  
 
Institution -Wide  Assurances  
This protocol  will be conducted  fully in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_629103]’s  Statement  of Assurance,  when  submitted  to the IRB as a required  
component  of the MUSC  IRB Human  Research  Review  Application.   
 
 11  
3. Protecting  Confidentiality  of Participant  Data  
Certificate  of Confidentiality.  This study  will be conducted  in accordance  with recently  enacted  policy  regarding  
the automatic  granting  of Certificates  of Confidentiality  to NIH/NINR   federally  funded  research.  Participants  will 
be made  aware  of their rights  and the limitations  of the release  of Protected  Health  Information  during  the 
Informed  Consent  process.  
 
Participant  Screening  and Enrollment.  All data from participants  screened  for the study  will be entered  into 
an electronic  study  database.  Designated  research  staff will collect,  gather,  and enter  required  data (written  
informed  consent,  HIPAA  Authorization,  and demographics)  onto study  data forms.  Screened  patients  who do 
not meet  study  eligibility  will have  specific  screening  data entered  into the study  database.  The collected  data 
will be helpful  in examining  the patient  population  and feasibility  of enrollment  criteria  and will include  reason  for 
exclusion.  All dates  will be shifted  and other  Personal  Health  Information  (PHI)  will be removed  from the study  
database  upon  study  completion.  All data obtained  from this study  will be used  for research  purposes  only and 
will comply  with Federal  HIPAA  regulations.   Master  Screening  and Enrollment  Logs  will used  by [CONTACT_629142] [INVESTIGATOR_187211].  
 
Case  Report  Forms  (CRF).  All proposed  study  specific  case  report  forms  (source  documents)  for data 
collection  will be designed  by [CONTACT_978], and, when  possible,  transferred  into electronic  Case  Report  Forms  
(eCRFs)  for use in the study’s  REDCap  database.  These  study  specific  eCRFs  source  documents  (study  logs 
for correspondence,  compensation  and other  forms  such  as pre-eligibility  screens)  will be coded  by [CONTACT_2416]’s  unique  study  ID# for all data collected  including  study  instruments  will be maintained  in the 
participant  research  record.  Completed  instruments  that require  signature  [INVESTIGATOR_2394] a paper  CRF will be scanned  and 
uploaded  into the study  database  to all for remote  electronic  safety  monitoring  as well as maintained  on file in 
accordance  with MUSC  policies  and applicable  Federal  Regulations  for the Conduct  of Human  Participant  
Research.   
 
Binders.  The PC will prepare  and maintain  a participant -specific  CRF binder  for each  participant  containing  all 
non-eCRFs  records.  A regulatory  file will be maintainedby  [CONTACT_629143]-approved  Protocol,  original  
Informed  Consent  documents,  HIPAA  forms  and other  required  study -related  regulatory  documents.  All paper  
research  records  and CRFs  will be maintained  in a locked  file cabinet,  stored  in a room  for research  files that is 
accessible  only via a password  protected  entry  system  that features  security  cameras,  within  the College  of 
Nursing.  Access  to the research  records,  study  database  and PHI’s  will be restricted  to study  personnel  as 
approved  by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_629104]. As with all studies  conducted  at MUSC,  this study  is also eligible  for a 
random  audit  by [CONTACT_629144].  
 
Data  Processing.  This study  will use Research  Electronic  Data  Capture  (REDCap)  for data capture  and 
management.  REDCap  is a software  toolset  and workflow  methodology  for the electronic  collection  and 
management  of research  and clinical  trials data.  REDCap  provides  secure,  web-based,  flexible  
applications,  including  real-time validation  rules  with automated  data type and range  checks  at the time of 
data entry.  Exports  are made  available  for several  statistical  packages  including  SPSS,  SAS,  SATA,  R and 
Microsoft  Excel.  The study -specific  REDCap  electronic  database  will be designed  and developed  by [CONTACT_978], CI, 
or PC.  The provision  of REDCap  is made  available  through  the South  Carolina  Clinical  & Translational  
Research  (SCTR)  Institute  at MUSC  with NIH Grant  awards  UL1RR029882  and UL1TR000062.   
 
Data  Security.  Ensuring  data security,  compliance  with [ADDRESS_838902]  Operating  Procedures  (SOP)  to ensure  a high level of data security  while  
coordinating  electronic  and paper  data management  activities  for clinical  research  trials.  The REDCap  study  
database  will be hosted  in the Biomedical  Informatics  secure  data center  at MUSC,  a secure  environment  for 
data systems  and servers  on campus,  and includes  firewall,  redundancy,  failover  capability,  backups  and 
extensive  security  checks.  The secure  data center  has strict  access  control;  only authorized  core personnel  
may access  the facility  un-escorted.  Only authorized  users  are allowed  to connect  to the network,  and the 
security  of the network  is actively  monitored.   Power  and environmental  controls  have  several  layers  of 
backups,  from interruptible  power  supplies  to alternate  and redundant  feeds  to the local utility  company.  The 
 
 [ADDRESS_838903].  All transactions  are 
securely  delivered  to the application  using  Secure  Sockets  Layer  (SSL  – SHA-1 with RSA Encryption;  2048 -
bits).  It is then transmitted  internally  (behind  the firewall)  to the database  server.  All transactions  are logged  at 
the server  layer  (httpd  logging),  application  layers  (REDCap  logs activity  to a database  table),  and the 
database  layer,  using  both query  and binary  logging.  This feature  provides  audit  trails  for all changes,  queries,  
data exports  and reports.  MUSC  Information  security  policies  are available  at: https://mainweb -
v.musc.edu/security/policy/   
 
Data  Entry.  Only MUSC  IRB approved  study  personnel  that are authorized  to have  access  to the REDCap  
study  database  will be granted  password  access.  Study  personnel  using  computers  that are connected  to the 
Internet  will directly  enter  data into the remotely  housed  database . As such,  no electronic  study  data will be 
stored  on hard drives  and/or  any portable  electronic  devices.  Additionally,  all personnel  with access  to the 
database  will have  current  University  of Miami  CITI training  in the Conduct  of Human  Subject  Protections,  and 
HIPAA  and Information  Security  trainings  that are completed  annually.  Each  participant  will be assigned  a 
unique  study  identifier,  all PHIs  will be masked,  and data exports  will be limited  to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_629105].  
 
Data  Monitoring.  Ongoing  quality  control  procedures  will be implemented  for data collection,  storage  and 
processing.  The PM will conduct  routine  monitoring  of the study  database  and generate  a monthly  report  for 
review  at study  team  meetings.  Standing  agenda  items  for these  meetings  will include  participant  recruitment  
and retention,  AE’s,  protocol  deviations,  data integrity  and overall  study  conduct.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_629106].  Discrepancies  that warrant  clarification  will be sent to appropriate  parties  
for review  and resolution.  All data entry  and changes  made  in the study  database  by [CONTACT_629145],  and provide  a transparent  visible  audit  trail for reviewers.  
 
SECTION  C. Procedures  for Identifying,  Reviewing  and Reporting  Adverse  Events  
1. Identifying.  Potential  minimum risks identified for participants are outlined in the Protection of Human  
Participants  and will also be outlined in the IRB-approved informed consent document. Additional  unknown 
risks may occur and, if so, will be identified through diligent monitoring  by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_629107]. During the informed consent process, participants will be advised  of the potential  
risks of participation as identified in the IRB-approved  informed consent  document and reminded 
throughout the study  that the researchers should be promptly informed  about any concerns regarding  
potential  side effects,  adverse events, or clinical  deterioration.  Participants  will also be  instructed to notify  
the PI, PC,  and/or  designee of any suspected adverse  events immediately if possible.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_629108]. The SMC  will have real -time access to the study database to review  and monitor all reported 
SAE that were reported as related  to the intervention. Additionally, the BS will generate and provide de -
identified cumulative  administrative human  participant semi -annual  safety  reports for the SMC to review.  
  
2. Reviewing.  Adverse  events  will be initially be assessed  and graded  by [CONTACT_629146]’s  IRB Adverse  Event  Reporting  Policy  
http://academicdepartments.musc.edu/research/ori/irb/HRPP/HRPP Guide Section 4.7  
• Expected/Anticipated —Identified in nature,  severity, or frequency  in the current protocol,  informed 
consent, investigator  brochure, or with other  current risk information.  
• Unexpected/Unanticipated —Not identified in nature,  severity, or frequency in the current  protocol, 
informed consent, investigator brochure, or with other current  risk information.  
 
 13 • More Prevalent —Occurs more frequently than anticipated or at a higher prevalence than  expected.  
• Serious —Results in death, is life threatening,  requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_629109], results in persistent  or significant disability/incapacity, cancer,  overdose, or causes a 
congenital  anomaly/birth defect.  
 
The relationship  of adverse  events  to study  participation  will be determined  by [CONTACT_629147]:  
• Unrelated —There is not a reasonable possibility that the adverse  event may have been  caused by [CONTACT_182825], device or intervention.  
• Possibly  Related —The adverse  event may have been caused by [CONTACT_33641], device, or intervention, 
however there is insufficient information to determine the likelihood  of this possibility.  
• Related —There is a reasonable possibility that the adverse event may have been caused  by [CONTACT_33641],  
device or intervention.  
 
3. AE and UPI[INVESTIGATOR_629110].  All reportable AE and unanticipated problems (UPI[INVESTIGATOR_629111]) experienced by 
[CONTACT_187272]/NINR and MUSC IRB in compliance  with their Adverse Event 
Reporting Policy requirements,  using the IRB's  password protected on -line secure  server adverse event 
reporting system.  Within 24 hours after a reportable AE, SAE or  unanticipated problem  has been reported 
by [CONTACT_2299], it will be graded by [CONTACT_187273], forwarded to the study’s SMC  for review, and then will be 
submitted by  [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_187218]. The Institutional  Official(s) will review the event and discuss the report 
with the IRB Chair and the  Director of the Office of Research Integrity. After IRB review  and 
acknowledgement,  the PI [INVESTIGATOR_187219], and  the PI [INVESTIGATOR_187220] a copy of the reportable AE, SAE 
or unanticipated problem and IRB  acknowledgement letter to the NIH/NINR Program Officer through 
MUSC’s OSRP.  The activities  will be reported  to the NIH/NINR  within  72hrs. In addition, all cumulative 
reportable AE, SAE  and unanticipated problems included in the SMC  reports  will be submitted  to the 
NIH/NINR  in the PI’s Annual Progress  Reports.  
4. Examples of Potential Reportable Adverse Events:  In accordance with MUSC  IRB Adverse  Event 
Reporting Policy,  an AE is reportable is it meets  all of the following  criteria:  1) is unexpected 2) is related  
and/or  possibly related, and 3) is serious and/or suggests  that the research places  subjects or others  at a 
greater risk of physical or psychological harm than  was previously known or recognized. Additionally, per 
MUSC’s policy all participant  deaths, protocol deviations, complaints  about the research, and  breaches  of 
confidentiality are reportable events. An example of an AE would  be physical pain (symptom) that could 
potentially be associated with caregiving activities.  The steps  to be taken may include  withdrawing the 
subject  from the study  and inviting  him or her to restart the study after symptoms subside. An example of 
an SAE  would  be the death  of a participant from acute chest syndrome, which although  would  be viewed as 
unexpected and unrelated to the intervention is nonetheless a reportable  serious  event. No further steps  
would be taken except to review, grade  and report  the event. An example  of an unanticipated problem 
would  be the participant trips and falls while retrieving their phone to read a text message reminder. The 
steps in this case would be to  report the event as per the IRB and NINR policy, and to discuss appropriate 
actions regarding whether the participant should remain in the study with the SMC. These  events and 
problems will be reported  in accordance with  the IRB and NIH/NINR  policy  as noted in Section C.3. 
 
SECTION  D. Multi -site Monitoring  and Compliance  
This is not a multi-site study.  
 
SECTION  E. Assessment  of External  Factors  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_48112]  a semi -annual  assessment  of external  factors  through  a review  of literature  related  to new 
developments  in the areas  of food allergy  caregiver  self-management,  symptom  management  (including  anxiety  
and fatigue),  symptom  reporting  and other  approaches  that may have  an impact  on the safety  of participants  or 
on the ethics  of the study.  To determine  whether  any changes  are necessitated  to the study  protocol,  the SMC  
will review  any identified  literature  or product  safety  data that may pose  as a potential  impact  to the risk benefit  
ratio study  and/or  safety  of study  participants.  
 
SECTION  F. Interim  Analysis  
 
 [ADDRESS_838904] the feasibility  of a multi -component,  technology -based  intervention  to promote  self-
management  and symptom  management  among  caregivers  of children  newly  diagnosed  with food allergy . To 
our knowledge,  there  are no similar  interventions  specifically  designed  for this population  and purpose.  As such,  
the PI [INVESTIGATOR_629112] -annual  qualitative  interim  analysis  reports  on a) adverse  events;  and b) data 
obtained  during  phone  end-of-study  interviews  to understand  issues  related  to the uptake,  usability,  and 
adoption  of this platform  among  this population.  We will evaluate  the screening  and enrollment  procedures,  
barriers  to participation  and retention,  including,  safety,  adherence,  acceptability,  technology  problems  
encountered  if any, and user feedback  from the participants  and providers.  This information  gained  from this 
structured  process  will be used  to both guide  the refinement  of the current  protocol  and to inform  the design  of a 
larger  efficacy  trial. Interim  analysis  of outcome  variables  (fatigue , anxiety , and quality  of life) was not 
considered  to avoid  inexact  inferences  and increased  chance  of error due to few data points,  as well as 
potential  for bias if interim  results  were  known  to the investigators.  Therefore,  there  are no planned  stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_629113].  
 
Withdrawal  of Subjects  
Participants  may voluntarily  elect  to withdraw  their consent  at any time for any or no given  reason  while  
enrolled  in the study.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_629114]’s  best interest,  if they do not follow  the investigator’s  instructions,  and/or  if they fail to maintain  to 
contact  [CONTACT_629148].  Withdrawals  of participants  may also occur  if there  is a 
protocol  violation  or early  study  closure.  All data gathered  from withdrawn  participants  will be used  in the 
analysis  plan under  an Intention -to-Treat  (ITT)  model.  
 
 
Risks  to Subjects  
The risks associated  with this intervention  are not considered  greater  than those  that patients  would  otherwise  
be exposed  to when  receiving  normal  standard  of care (SOC).  However,  as with all studies,  there  are inherent  
risks involved  with the conduct  of human  subject  research  that gathers  Protected  Health  Information  (PHI).  
Participants  will be made  aware  of these  risks during  the Informed  Consent  process.  Identified  study  risks 
include:  Loss  of privacy,  emotional  distress,  physical  discomfort,  and randomization.   
 
Loss  of privacy:  PHI from participants  will be gathered  and stored  electronically  on secure  and encrypted  
servers  and there  are risks associated  for the loss of privacy  and confidentiality.  We will further  minimize  the 
potential  for loss of confidentiality  through  the physical  separation  of participant  names  from their research  
record  according  to the process  described  above.  Audio  recordings  of participants  interviews  will be uploaded  
for transcription  within  48 hours  to an outside  agency  with which  MUSC  has established  a Business  Associates  
Agreement  (BAA).  Once  uploaded,  all audio  recordings  will be deleted  from the portable  storage  device.  
 
Emotional  distress:  Some  of the questions  asked  may be upsetting  to participants  or make  them  feel 
uncomfortable  answering  them.  Participants  will be instructed  that if they do not wish to answer  a question,  
they can skip it and go to the next question.  
 
Physical  fatigue:  Completion  of the questionnaire  and interview  may be tiring  to some  participants.   
Participants  will be given  ample  time to complete  the questionnaire  and may take breaks  as necessary  
throughout  the process.   
 
Randomization:  Participants  are being  assigned  to a study  group  by [CONTACT_3364].  The intervention  included  in the 
first study  arm may prove  to be less or more  effective  or have  more  or less or unknown  side effects  than the 
second  study  arm or other  available  treatments.   
 
Potential  Benefits  to Subjects  or Others  
Because  this proposal  focuses  symptom  self-management  for caregivers  of children  newly  diagnosed  with 
food allergy,   it does  represent  a potential  immediate  benefit  to the caregiver  due to the potential  for improved  
psychosocial  well-being . Furthermore,  it is hoped  that this proposal  will contribute  to generalizable  scientific  
 
 [ADDRESS_838905]  developed  with 
patient/provider  engagement  could  be adopted  en-masse  and improve  outcomes  for caregivers,  children,  and 
families  impacted  by [CONTACT_629149] a larger  scale.  Accordingly,  the researchers  view the anticipated  risk 
benefit  of study  participation  is favorable.  
 
Drugs  or Devices  
This study  does  not involve  the use or storage  of any drug product.  All investigational  materials  are readily  
commercially  available  and are not industry  regulated.   
 
Dissemination  Plan  
Purpose:  This plan will ensure  that all regulatory  requirements  are met in accordance  with: [IP_ADDRESS]  NIH Policy  
on Dissemination  of NIH-Funded  Clinical  Trial Information  designed  to promote  broad  and responsible  
dissemination  of information  from NIH-funded  clinical  trials  through  ClinicalTrials.gov.  
Consistent  with the expectations  of this policy:  
1. Our clinical  trial under  the award  will be registered  and results  information  will be submitted  to 
ClinicalTrials.gov  as outlined  in the policy  and according  to the specific  timelines  stated  in the policy.  
2. The informed  consent  documents  for our clinical  trial will include  a specific  statement  relating  to posting  of 
clinical  trial information  at ClinicalTrials.gov.  
3. The College  of Nursing  at the Medical  University  of South  Carolina  has an internal  policy  in place  to ensure  
that clinical  trials  registration  and results  reporting  occur  in compliance  with policy  requirements.  
Specifically,  the PI [INVESTIGATOR_629115]’s  Research  Regulatory  Coordinator  who will assist  with 
ClinicalTrials.gov  registration  as needed.  Registration  to ClinicalTrial.gov  will be no later than [ADDRESS_838906]  with posting  result  information  that is not later than one 
year after the trial’s  primary  completion  date.   
The Associate  Dean  for Research  is also involved  in this process  as follows:  reviews  registrations,  receives  
reports  on clinical  trials  registration  and compliance  updates.  
The Medical  University  of South  Carolina  is committed  to the open  and timely  dissemination  of research  
outcomes.  The Investigators  involved  in the proposed  study  recognize  that promising  new methods,  
technologies,  data,  software  programs,  and insights  may arise  during  the course  of their research.  We are 
aware  of and agree  to abide  by [CONTACT_629150],  as described  by [CONTACT_629151] 
“Principles  and Guidelines  for Recipi[INVESTIGATOR_629116]”.  
During  the course  of the study,  we plan to make  presentations  of interim  results  at national  scientific  meetings.  
Final  research  results  will be published  in a timely  manner  in scientific  journals.  Manuscripts  to be submitted  for 
publication  will be accessible  through  the digital  archive  PubMed  Central  in compliance  with the NIH Public  
Access  Policy.  Final  non-restricted  research  data will be shared  upon  request  following  publication  of the main  
findings.  Final  research  data are defined  as recorded  factual  material  commonly  accepted  in the scientific  
community  as necessary  to document  and support  research  findings.  Datasets  resulting  from the proposed  
study  will be redacted  of any identifiers  that would  permit  linkages  to individual  research  participants  and 
variables  that could  lead to deductive  disclosure  of individual  participants.  We will make  the data and 
associated  documentation  available  to users  under  a data-sharing  agreement  that provides  for a commitment  
to using  the data only for research  purposes  and not to identify  any individual  participant;  a commitment  to 
securing  the data using  appropriate  computer  technology;  and a commitment  to destroying  or returning  the 
data after analyses  are completed.  
Sharing  research  results  with study  participants  is a major  priority  at the Medical  University  of South  Carolina.  
However,  because  this is a small  pi[INVESTIGATOR_629117],  results  from this project  will not be shared  with study  
participants.   We anticipate  results  from future  projects  stemming  from this current  work  will be made  available  
to study  participants.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 16  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Literature  Cited  
 
1 Sicherer,  S. H. (2011).  Epi[INVESTIGATOR_629118].  Journal  of Allergy  and Clinical  Immunology,  127(3), 
594-602.  doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2010.11.044  
2 Gupta,  R. S., Warren,  C. M., Smith,  B. M., Blumenstock,  J. A., Jiang,  J., Davis,  M. M., & Nadeau,  K. C. 
(2018).  The public  health  impact  of parent -reported  childhood  food  allergies  in the United  States.  
Pediatrics,  142(6). doi:10.1542/peds.2018 -1235  
3 Mandell,  D., Curtis,  R., Gold,  M., & Hardie,  S. (2005).  Anaphylaxis:  How  do you live with  it? Health  and 
Social  Work,  30(4), 325-335.  doi:10.1093/hsw/30.4.325  
4 Broome,  S. B., Lutz,  B. J., & Cook,  C. (2015).  Becoming  the Parent  of a Child  With  Life-Threatening  Food  
Allergies.  Journal  of Pediatric  Nursing,  30(4), 532-542.  doi:10.1016/j.pedn.2014.10.012  
5 Akeson,  N., Worth,  A., & Sheikh,  A. (2007).  The psychosocial  impact  of anaphylaxis  on young  people  
and their  parents.  Clinical  and Experimental  Allergy,  37(8), 1213 -1220.  doi:10.1111/j.[ADDRESS_838907],  L. M., Mudd,  K., Sonntag,  C., Dillinger,  L., & McKenna,  K. (2006).  The impact  
of food  allergy  on the daily  activities  of children  and their  families.  Annals  of Allergy,  Asthma  and 
Immunology,  96(3), 415-421.  doi:10.1016/S1081 -1206(10)[ZIP_CODE] -8 
 
 17 7 Gillespie,  C. A., Woodgate,  R. L., Chalmers,  K. I., & Watson,  W. T. A. (2007).  "Living  With  Risk":  
Mothering  a Child  With  Food -Induced  Anaphylaxis.  Journal  of Pediatric  Nursing,  22(1), 30-42. 
doi:10.1016/j.pedn.2006.05.007  
8 Hu, W., Loblay,  R., Ziegler,  J., & Kemp,  A. (2008).  Attributes  and views  of families  with  food  allergic  
children  recruited  from  allergy  clinics  and from  a consumer  organization.  Pediatric  Allergy  and 
Immunology,  19(3), 264-269.  doi:10.1111/j.1399 -3038.2007.[ZIP_CODE].x  
9 Klinnert,  M. D., & Robinson,  J. L. (2008).  Addressing  the psychological  needs  of families  of food -allergic  
children.  Current  Allergy  and Asthma  Reports,  8(3), 195-200.  doi:10.1007/s11882 -008-0033 -7 
10 Sicherer,  S. H., Noone,  S. A., & Muñoz -Furlong,  A. (2001).  The impact  of childhood  food  allergy  on 
quality  of life. Annals  of Allergy,  Asthma  and Immunology,  87(6), 461-464.  doi:10.1016/S1081 -
1206(10)[ZIP_CODE] -2 
11 Williams,  N. A., Parra,  G. R., & Elkin,  T. D. (2009).  Subjective  distress  and emotional  resources  in 
parents  of children  with  food  allergy.  Children's  Health  Care,  38(3), 213-227.  
doi:10.1080/02739610903038792  
12 Annunziato,  R. A., Shemesh,  E., Weiss,  C. C., Izzo,  G. N., D'Urso,  C., & Sicherer,  S. H. (2013).  An 
assessment  of the mental  health  care  needs  and utilization  by [CONTACT_629152]  a food  allergy.  
Journal  of Health  Psychology,  18(11),  1456 -1464.  doi:10.1177/1359105312464675  
13 Ruggiero,  K. D., T; McCauley,  J; Gros,  K; Welsh,  K; Price,  M; Resnick,  H; Danielson,  C; Soltis,  K; Galea,  S; 
Kilpatrick,  D; Sauders,  B; Nissenboim,  J; Muzzy,  W; Fleeman,  A; Amstadter,  A. (2015).  Bounce  Back  
Now!  Protocol  of a population -based  randomized  controlled  trial to examine  the efficacy  of a Web -
based  intervention  with  disaster -affected  families.  Contemporary  Clinical  Trials,  40, 138-149.  
doi:10.1016/j.cct.2014.11.018  
14 Gupta,  R. S., Springston,  E. E., Kim,  J. S., Smith,  B., Pongracic,  J. A., Wang,  X., & Holl,  J. (2010).  Food  
allergy  knowledge,  attitudes,  and beliefs  of primary  care  physicians.  Pediatrics,  125(1), 126-132.  
doi:10.1542/peds.2009 -1116  
15 Knibb,  R. C. (2015).  Effectiveness  of Cognitive  Behaviour  Therapy  for Mothers  of Children  with  Food  
Allergy:  A Case  Series.  Healthcare  (Basel),  3(4), 1194 -1211.  doi:10.3390/healthcare3041194  
16 Fedele,  D. M., E; Faina,  A; Strand,  M; Cohen,  S; Robinson,  J; Atkins,  D; O’B Hourihane,  J; Klinnert,  M. 
(2016).  Patterns  of adaptation  to children’s  food  allergies.  Allergy,  71, 505-513.   
17 Quach,  L. L., & John,  R. M. (2018).  Psychosocial  Impact  of Growing  Up With  Food  Allergies.  Journal  for 
Nurse  Practitioners,  14(6), 477-483.e474.  doi:10.1016/j.nurpra.2018.03.017  
18 Cummings,  A. K., R; King;  R; Lucas,  J. (2010).  The psychosocial  impact  of food  allergy  and food  
hypersensitivity  in children,  adolescents  and their  families:   A review.  Allergy,  65, 933-945.   
19 Ruggiero,  K. J., Price,  M., Adams,  Z., Stauffacher,  K., McCauley,  J., & Danielson,  C. K. (2015).  Web  
intervention  for adolescents  affected  by [CONTACT_210793]:  Population -based  randomized  controlled  trial.  
Journal  of the American  Academy  of Child  & Adolescent  Psychiatry,  54(9), 709-717.  
doi:10.1016/j.jaac.2015.07.001  
20 Ruggiero,  K. J., Bunnell,  B. E., Andrews,  A. R., Davidson,  T. M., Hanson,  R. F., & Danielson,  C. K. (in 
press).  Protocol  development  and pi[INVESTIGATOR_629119] a tablet -based  application  to improve  quality  of 
care  in child  mental  health  treatment.  JMIR  Research  Protocols .  
21 Sandelowski,  M. (2000).  Whatever  happened  to qualitative  description?  Res Nurs  Health,  23, 334-340.   
22 Glasgow,  R. E., Vogt,  T. M., & Boles,  S. M. (1999).  Evaluating  the public  health  impact  of health  
promotion  interventions:  the RE-AIM framework.  American  Journal  of Public  Health,  89(9), 1322 -1327.   
23 Lai, J.-S., Cella,  D., Choi,  S., Junghaenel,  D. U., Christodoulou,  C., Gershon,  R., & Stone,  A. (2011).  How  
Item  Banks  and Their  Application  Can Influence  Measurement  Practice  in Rehabilitation  Medicine:  A 
PROMIS  Fatigue  Item  Bank  Example.  Archives  of Physical  Medicine  and Rehabilitation,  92(10, 
Supplement),  S20-S27.  doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apmr.2010.08.033  
 
 18 24 Choi,  S., Podrabsky,  T., McKinney,  N., Schalet,  B., Cook,  K. F., & Cella,  D. (n.d.).  PROsetta  Stone  analysis  
report  Retrieved  from   
25 Pi[INVESTIGATOR_3708],  P. A., Choi,  S., Salsman,  J., Butt,  Z., Moore,  T. L., Lawrence,  S. M., . . . Cella,  D. (2013).  
Assesment  of self-reported  negative  affect  in the NIH Toolbox.  Psychiatry  Research,  206(1), 88-97. 
doi:10.1016/j.psychres.2012.09.034  
26 Knibb,  R. S., C. (2015).  Validation  of the food  allergy  quality  of life-parental  burden  questionnaire  in the 
[LOCATION_006]. Quality  of Life Research,  22(7), 1841 -1849.  doi:10.1007/s11136 -012-0295 -3 
27 Yu, L. B., D; Germain,  A; Moul,  D; Stover,  A; Dodds,  N; Johnston,  K; Pi[INVESTIGATOR_3708],  P. (2011).  Development  of 
short  forms  from  the PROMIS  sleep  disturbance  and sleep -related  impairment  item  banks.  Behavioral  
Sleep  Medicine,  10(1), 6-24. doi:10.1080/15402002.2012.636266  
28 Knibb,  R. B., C; Stalker,C.  (2015).  Parental  confidence  in managing  food  allergy:  Development  and 
validation  of the Food  Allergy  Self-Efficacy  Scale  for Parents  (FASE -P). Clinical  and Experimental  Allergy,  
45(11),  1681 -1689.  doi:10.1111/cea.[ZIP_CODE].  
29 Leon,  A. D., L; Kraemer,  H. (2011).  The role and interpretation  of pi[INVESTIGATOR_629120].  
Journal  of Psychiatric  Research,  45(5), 626-629.  doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2010.10.008.  
30 Hsieh,  H., & Shannon,  S. E. (2005).  Three  approaches  to qualitative  content  analysis.  Qualitative  Health  
Research,  15(9), 1277 -1288.  doi:10.1177/1049732305276687  
31 QSR International  Pty Ltd. (2012).  NVivo  qualitative  data  analysis  software  (Version  10).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Intervention  Components  and Content  related  to Caregiving  Process  Model  
 
Intervention  
Component  Targeted  Processes  App Content  
1. Education  and 
Resources  Background  and Context  
• Socioeconomic 
Status  
 
Caregiver  Strain/Stress  
• Caregiving 
Demands  
• Perception of 
Formal Care  
 
 
 
 
 
 Intervention  provided  using  an accessible  
technology -based  package  delivered  via a mobile  
device  
 
What  is a Food  Allergy?:   
https://www.foodallergy.org/life -with-food-
allergies/food -allergy -101/what -is-a-food-allergy  
 
Recognize  and Respond  to Anaphylaxis:  
https://www.foodallergy.org/sites/default/files/2017 -
12/common -symptoms -poster_2017.pdf  
 
Symptoms  of an Allergic  Reaction  to Food:   
https://www.foodallergy.org/life -with-food-
 
 19  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copi[INVESTIGATOR_15867]  
• Social Support  allergies/food -allergy -101/symptoms -of-an-allergic -
reaction -to-food 
 
Medic  Alert  Bracelet : https://medicalalert.com  
 
Video  clips reviewing  the proper  usage  of auto -
injectable  epi[INVESTIGATOR_629121]-pen: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FXlqSuzzrws  
AuviQ:  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BhModQKXMTo  
 
How  To Read  Food  Labels:  
https://www.foodallergy.org/life -with-food-
allergies/living -well-everyday/how -to-read-food-
labels  
https://www.kidswithfoodallergies.org/page/choosing -
safe-foods.aspx  
 
Food  Allergy  and Anaphylaxis  Emergency  Care  
Plan:  (English  and Spanish)   
https://www.foodallergy.org/life -with-food-
allergies/food -allergy -anaphylaxis -emergency -care-
plan 
 
Talking  with Your  Child  about  their  Food  
Allergy :https://www.foodallergy.org/life -with-food-
allergies/newly -diagnosed/talking -to-children -about -
their-food-allergy   
 
 
Find  a Support  Group:   
https://www.foodallergy.org/education -
awareness/find -a-support -group  
 
Laws  and Regulations:  
https://www.foodallergy.org/life -with-food-
allergies/newly -diagnosed/laws -and-regulations  
 
Reliable  Websites:  
www.foodallergy.org  
www.kidswithfoodallergy.org  
http://www.aaaai.org/conditions -and-
treatments/allergies/food -allergies  
www.allergyhome.org  
 
2. Symptom  Monitoring  
and Tracking  Caregiver  Strain/Stress  
• Caregiving 
Demands  
Intrapsychic  Factors  
• Self-perception  Daily  text message  will be sent to caregiver  to 
remind  him/her  to log physical  symptoms  including:  
Fatigue/Trouble  Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_629122]/Stress  
Pain/Body  Aches/Headache  
Emotional/mood  symptoms  including:  
Depressed  mood  
Overwhelm  
 
 20  
 
Food  Allergy  and Anaphylaxis  Emergency  Care  Plan  
 Frustrated  
Worry  
 
All symptoms  will be pi[INVESTIGATOR_629123].    
 
Logged  symptom  trends  will be graphically  illustrated  
by [CONTACT_629153].  
 
The app will permit  upload  of physical  and emotional  
symptom  logs to study  personnel.  
3. Symptom  Self-
management  Copi[INVESTIGATOR_15867]  
• Social Support  
• Stress 
Management  
• Family Function  Based  on feedback  from component  2, participants  
will be given  directed  guidance  related  to component  
3. 
 
To address  fatigue/trouble  sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007],  participants  will 
be directed  to watch  several  short  videos  that focus  
on how to achieve  better  sleep;  participate  in guided  
imagery  exercise;  guided  meditation.  
 
Anxiety  and stress  will be addressed  through  deep  
breathing  exercises;  guided  relaxation;  exercises  to 
increase  mindfulness.  
 
Altered  emotional/mood  states  will be addressed  
through  focused  writing  exercises  within  the app.  
For example,  if a participant  endorses  negative  
emotions,  they will be encouraged  to log positive  
events/experiences  and emotions  to raise  mood  and 
esteem.   If a caregiver  endorses  “worry”,  they will 
have  the option  to create  a worry  tree to help decide  
what  worries  are controllable  and what  to do about  
them.    
https://www.getselfhelp.co.uk/docs/worrytree.pdf  
 
 21  

 
 22  
 
 

 
 23  
 
Interview  Guide  for Caregivers  of Children  with Food  Allergy(ies)  
 
 
 “Thanks  for agreeing  to help us with our study.   We’d  like to ask you a few questions  about  our program  so we 
can continue  to improve  what  we’re  doing.”   
 
Parent/Caregiver  Questions  
1.  Have you used a tablet  computer,  iPad, the internet,  or a smartphone  before?  
 1.1  [If so] How  often  do you use one?   
 
1.2  [If so] When  you use a tablet,  iPad,  the internet,  or a smartphone,  what  types  of things  do you use it 
for? 
 
2.  Have  you ever used technology  such as a tablet,  iPad, the internet,  or a smartphone  to help you manage  your 
health  or your child’s  health?  
[if No, skip to 3.]  If yes, ask: 
 
2.1  What  types  of activities  did you do on the tablet,  iPad, internet  or smartphone ? 
 
2.2  How  helpful  was it / were  they?  What  did you like about  these  activities?   Is there  anything  you 
didn’t  like?  
 
2.3  What  would  make  them  better?  
 
3. “Great.   Thanks.   Now  I’d like to ask you some  questions  about  the activities  we have  for our program.   
Remember,  there  are no right  or wrong  answers.   The things  that you tell us will help us improve  the activities  
for other  parents  and caregivers . There  are three  main  parts  to the program.” 
 
 “The first part uses educational  materials . They  are located  here [show  them  on tablet] . Experts  in food allergy  
created  them  for caregivers.  You can move  from  one page  to the next,  like this [show  them  on tablet].  Please  
take a few minutes  to look them  over.  If you notice  something  you like or don’t  like, or if something  confuses  
you or catches  your attention  we would  like to know  about  that.”  [allow  time for review]  
 
 3.1  What  do you like about  them?  
 
 3.2  What  would  make  them  better?  
 
3.3 Do you think  these  materials  would  be helpful  to you?  [if yes, How?  If no, Why  not?]  [if needed:  
How  could  you see yourself  using  them  to manage  your child’s  health?]  
 
4. “Thank  you. The second  part of the tablet  activities  is an app that helps  keep  track  of how caring  for a child  
with a food allergy  may impact  you. The app is located  here [show  them  on tablet].  The app allows  you to track  
any symptoms  you may experience  as someone  caring  for a child  with a food allergy.  Please  take a few minutes  
to look over this part of the app. If you notice  something  you like or don’t  like, or if something  confuses  you or 
catches  your attention  we would  like to know  about  that.”  [allow  time for review]  
 
 4.1 What  did you like about  this part of the app?  
 
 
 24  4.2 What  would  make  this part of the app better?  
 
5. “Wonderful,  thank  you. The app also allows  you to see on a graph  how your symptoms  may change  over 
time [show  them  on tablet].  Please  take a few minutes  to look over this part of the app.”  [allow  time for review]  
 
5.1 What  did you like about  this part of the app?  
 
 5.2 What  would  make  this part of the app better?  
 
6. “Great,  thanks.  Now,  let’s look at the last part of the app. This portion  allows  you to receive  directed  
guidance  on ways  to address  the symptoms  you reported  in the second  part of the app.  For example,  if you 
reported  that you felt fatigued,  the application  will provide  you with a brief  audio  clip that offers  ideas  to help 
you sleep  better.  Please  take a few minutes  to look over this part of the app.”  [allow  time for review]   As with 
the other  parts  of the app, if you notice  something  you like or don’t  like, or if something  confuses  you or 
catches  your attention  we would  like to know  about  that.”  [allow  time for review]  
 
6.1 What  did you like about  this part of the app?  
 
 6.2 What  would  make  this part of the app better?  
 
7. “Thank  you again  for reviewing  each part of the app. The final pi[INVESTIGATOR_629124].  This will include  receiving  a daily  text from  the study  team  that will remind  you to log your 
symptoms  every  day. The texting  feature  can be found  here [show  them  on tablet].  We’ve  sent some  examples  
of what  the daily  texts  will look like.”  
7.1 What  did you like about  the text messaging?  
 
 7.2 What  would  make  the text messaging  better?  
 
8.  If you had the choice  of using  this program  to help you better  care for yourself  and ultimately  your child , 
would  you want  to use it? Why  or why not? [if needed:  How  do you think  you would  use it? [e.g.,  how often,  
under  what  circumstances,  etc.?]  
 
9. “Thank  you so much  for your help today.  Is there  anything  else you can think  of that you would  like to share  
with us?” 
End interview,  collect  tablet,  provide  compensation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 