Study Title:  Neurobiological Drivers of Mobility Resilience: The Dopaminergic System 
PI:   [INVESTIGATOR_570782], PhD
Study ID:  HUM00156490-A
NCT#:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Protocol Version IRB Approval Date:  12/17/2024
1 
Version 2. 6 Neurobiological drivers of mobility resilience: the dopaminergic system  
1.SPECIFIC AIM
Walk
ing with age becomes both slower and less ‘automated’, requiring more attention and 
prefrontal resources1,2. As a result, older adults  have a greater risk of adverse mobility 
outcomes and falls. Walking disturbances in the elderly have been linked to changes in 
both cerebral, in particular small vessel disease (cSVD), and peripheral systems3. There 
is an urgent need to identify factors that can help compensate for these harmful factors and reduce walking impairments, as there are currently no effective treatments available. 
Although effective mobility is the end result of the functional capacity of both central and peripheral systems, the brain's unique modulatory and adaptive capacity may provide 
clues for novel interventions. For example, we have recently discovered that ~20% of older adults maintain fast walking speed even in the presence of age-related cSVD  and 
peripheral system impairments, thus appearing resilient to these harmful factors. Our work suggests that the nigrostriatal dopamine (DA) system may be a source of this resilience. As our recent findings suggest, DA neurotransmission positively predicts walking speed
4; 
it also attenuates the negative effects of age -related  cSVD and peripheral system 
impairments on walking speed. These findings are consistent with post -mortem evidence 
that a combination of loss of nigral DA neurons and cSVD best predict age -related walking 
impairment5-7. The nigrostriatal DA system plays a critical role in motor control; nigrostriatal  
DA neurotransmission regulates the automated execution of overlearned motor tasks via 
its connections with sensorimotor cortical and subcortical areas8. 
We hy
pothesize that higher nigrostriatal DA neurotransmission drives resilience to cSVD 
and peripheral system impairments, via higher connectivity of sensorimotor networks, thus 
increasing automaticity  of walking and reducing prefrontal engagement while walking. 
Resilience due to the nigrostriatal DA system is a novel and highly promising area of 
inquiry. Unlike cSVD and brain structural impairments, DA neurotransmission is potentially 
modifiable, thereby [CONTACT_570796]- resilient eld erly in a targeted 
fashion. This translational pi[INVESTIGATOR_570783] a biomechanistic target engagement study 
mechanisms targeting dopamine using Carbidopa / Levodopa (C-L Dopa)  administration 
in low DA non -resilient elderly with minimal parkinsonian symptoms (MPS, such as slow 
walking) to determine change in synaptic DA in relationship to brain imaging connectivity 
changes and quantitative spatiotemporal kinematic motor tests.  
Recent
ly, the first commercially available diagnostic tool for identifying alpha synuclein in 
cutaneous nerve fibers has been developed by [CONTACT_570797] (Syn- One TestTM). 
While traditional methods of identifying ɑ -synuclein in cerebrospi[INVESTIGATOR_570784]24, recent skin biopsy tests have demonstrated more than 
90% sensitivity and specificity in synucleinopathies25. Skin biopsies have shown ɑ -
synuclein aggregation in over 80% of patients with idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder (iRBD), which is currently the most clearly defined preclinical stage of LBD
23. This 
indicates the accumulation of ɑ -synuclein begins a decade to fifteen years prior to the 
onset of LBD23. On this basis, we hypothesize that elderly adults with parkinsonian signs, 
without a diagnosis of a synucleinopathy, may have alpha synuclein present in peripheral 
nerve fibers.  
2 
Version 2. 6 Exploratory AIM : Does increased DA neurotransmission in non- resilient elderly with 
parkinsonian signs (incl. gait <1.0msec ) with MPS affect  spatiotemporal kinematics, such 
as cadence or double support time in  a mechanistic target engagement study?  
Exploratory H1: One week of C-L D opa treatment  will change spatiotemporal kinematics, 
such as cadence or double support time,  by [CONTACT_570798] . 
Exploratory H2:  C-L Dopa treatment will have a biomechanistic effect on functional and 
metabolic mobility networks in the brain through increasing DA in elderly with parkinsonian 
signs . 
Exploratory H3:  Elderly adults with parkinsonian signs will have alpha synuclein 
accumulating in skin peripheral nerve fibers.  
Exploratory H4: C-L Dopa treatment will have biomechanistic effect on skeletal  muscle 
biomarker s 
2.BACKGROUND
Rati
onale. This exploratory mechanistic target engagement study will assess the effect of 
brief DA supplementation on dopamine availability , nigro- striatal functional connectivity 
and mobility in a sample of older adults with parkinsonian signs.  
The study will screen elderly people for the presence of slow walking (not explained by 
[CONTACT_570799]) and/or other parkinsonian signs.  Subjects will be 
contact[CONTACT_570800]. However, if 
enough subjects can’t be recruited from this database then subjects will be recruited through external sources, such as a flyer posting, online registries, and the University of 
Michigan Movement Disorders Clinic  and other physicians . These subjects will be 
screened using the telephone screening script, and after this screening they will be 
brought into the lab to screen for the presence of slow walking and/or other parkinsonian 
signs. If the clinical assessment does not show evidence for these parkinsonian signs then 
the person will be excluded from the C -L Dopa and imaging portions of the study (see 
study outline below).  
We wi
ll record eligibility, adherence, and tolerability to 1 -week supplementation ( 3 days 
of carbidopa monotherapy and 7±3 days of C -L Dopa at one tablet PO TID for three 
days followed by [CONTACT_82368] 1.5 tablets PO TID the next day for the next 4 days (±3 
days) ), and the effects of C- L Dopa  on mechanistic imaging measures of DA 
sensorimotor functional connectivity and on clinical mobility functions . This translational 
aim will provide preliminary information about the targeted modifiability of the DA sys tem 
in non- resilient elderly with  parkinsonian signs . 
Aft
er the completion of the open- label study, we will be conducting a placebo- controlled, 
double- blinded study to further examine mechanistic measures of spatiotemporal gait 
measures, and sensorimotor functional connectivity s through dopamine 
supplementation via C- L Dopa. Participants in this sub- study will receive the same 
assessments as those in the open- label study.  
Aft
er the completion of the placebo- controlled sub -study, we will conduct an additional 
open- label study  to further examine mechanistic spatiotemporal gait measures and 
3 
Version 2. 6 sensorimotor functional connectivity  through DA supplementation, with the addition of 
skeletal muscle  testing  and other markers before and after DA supplementation. 
3.RESE
ARCH PLAN
General Overview:  
Study design: 
1.Parent 
Study:  Open -label study. An outline of the study is shown in Figure 1. After
obtaining informed consent, subjects (max n=60) will undergo a screening exam to assess
for parkinsonian signs, including slow walking speed.  Elderly subjects without evidence of
parkinsonian signs will be excluded from the C -L dopa and imaging portions of the study .
Eligible subjects  with evidence of parkinsonism  (max n=20)  will then complete a motor, 
including gait, cognitive test battery ), and 3T brain MRI  (optional)  prior to starting the C-
L Dopa treatment portion of the study  (Refer to Table 1 and Table 3 ). Subjects will be 
pre-treated with carbidopa monotherap y 25 mg TID PO for 3 days . Prior to initiating C-
L Dopa 25/[ADDRESS_749300] battery on day 4.  Subjects will then increase to 1.5 tablets PO TID on day 7 (i.e., 
day 4 of C -L Dopa treatment) for the next 4 days ( ±3 days ). Carbidopa monotherapy will 
be given to prevent possible side- effects of nausea and participants will stay on [ADDRESS_749301] dose of C -L Dopa and be monitored by [CONTACT_3462].  After the week -long 
(±3 days ) C-L Dopa  25/[ADDRESS_749302] battery will be completed . A [11C]PE2I  
dopamine PET scan will be performed for assessment of overall nigrostriatal 
degeneration.  This target engagement study will allow  for biomechanistic assessment 
of hypothesized changes in the DA sensorimotor network and will allow us to correlate 
the C-L Dopa mechanist ic effects on DA sensorimotor connectivity  changes  before/after 
target engagement as assessed with multimodal graph analytical network methods 
using optional post -treatment  MRI of key relevant circuits related to DA.  Dopamine PE2I  
PET scan will be used for post hoc covariate effects.  
Figure [ADDRESS_749303]
udy 1:  Double- blinded, placebo- controlled study. After obtaining informed
consent, subjects (max n= 40) will undergo a screening exam to assess for parkinsonian
signs, including slow walking speed. Elderly subjects without evidence of parkinsonian
signs will be excluded from the C -L dopa and imaging portions of the study.
Eligib
le subjects  with evidence of parkinsonism (max n= 12, n=6 in each group)  will then 
be randomized to either receive a placebo or the active form of C -L Dopa. Participants will 
be randomized according to gender and age (+/ -7 years). These subjects will then 
complete a motor, including gait, and cognitive test battery  prior to starting the C-L Dopa  
supplementation portion of the study. These participants will have the option to complete 
a skin biopsy procedure to look for alpha synuclein in peripheral nerves  at any of their 
three visits . Subjects will be pre -treated with carbidopa monotherapy 25 mg TID PO or the 
placebo TID PO for 3 days . Participants in both groups will receive the same number of 
tablets and follow the same administration schedule. P rior to initiating C-L Dopa 25/[ADDRESS_749304] 
battery on day 4. Subjects increase to 1.5 tablet s C-L Dopa PO TID on day 7 (i.e., day 4 
of C-L Dopa supplementation) for the next 4 days ( ±3 days ). Carbidopa monotherapy will 
be given to prevent possible side- effects of nausea and participants will stay on [ADDRESS_749305] d ose of C -L Dopa and be monitored by [CONTACT_3462].  After the week -
long ( ±3 days ) C-L Dopa  25/[ADDRESS_749306] battery will be completed. A 
[11C]PE2I dopamine PET scan will be performed for assessment of overall nigrostriatal 
degeneration  in addition to a 3T brain MRI (optional) . These scans can occur before, 
during, or after the intervention.  
3.Sub-study 2
: Open- label  study . After obtaining informed consent, subjects (max n= 20
to allow for screen failures or attrition) will undergo a screening exam to assess for
parkinsonian signs, including slow walking speed. Elderly subjects without evidence of
parkinsonian signs will be excluded from the C -L dopa and imaging portions of the study.

5 
Version 2. 6 Eligible subjects with evidence of parkinsonism (max n=6  for net study completion) will 
then complete a test battery involving motor testing, muscle testing,  cognitive  testing , 
fasted blood draw, and muscle biopsy  prior to starting the C -L Dopa supplementation 
portion of the study. Subjects will be pre- treated with carbidopa monotherapy [ADDRESS_749307] batter y on day 4 prior to 
initiating the C-L Dopa  25/100 TID . Subjects increase to 1.5 tablets C -L Dopa PO TID on 
day 7 (i.e., day 4 of C- L Dopa supplementation) and continue for the next 4 days (±3 days). 
Carbidopa monotherapy will be given to prevent possible side- effects of nausea and 
participants will stay on [ADDRESS_749308] dose of C -L Dopa and be monitored by [CONTACT_25617]. After the week -long (±3 days) C -L Dopa 25/[ADDRESS_749309] battery 
including fasted blood draw and muscle biopsy will be repeated. A [11C]PE2I dopamine 
PET scan will be performed for assessment of overall nigrostriatal degeneration in addition to a 3T brain MRI (optional). These scans can occur before, during, or after the 
intervention.   
Subjec
ts who completed the parent study or sub- study 1 may be invited to participate in 
sub-study 2.  
Subjec
ts: 
Eligibility : Non -resilient elderly non- PD subjects (F/M, age 60 yr s or older ) with evidence 
of mild parkinsonian signs (MPS , slow gait (< 1m/s) ). The UPDRS motor component (part 
III) will used to assess for evidence of parkinsonian signs, including bradykinesia, tremor,
rigidity, and gait disturbances.
Incl
usion:  
1) Age 60  or older  (M/F)
2)Evidence of mild parkinsonian signs ( incl. MPS, slow gait (< 1m/s))
Exc
lusion: 
1)Evidence of  prior established diagnosis and/or treatment for PD13.
2)Presence of clinically significant degenerative joint disease and/or neuropathy
interfering with proper assessment of the motor UPDRS exam.3)Presence of significant dementia.
4)History of stroke with residual clinical deficit interfering with walking.
5)For optional MR imaging only : Participants in whom magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
is contraindicated including, but not limited to, those with a pacemaker, presence ofmetallic fragments near the eyes or spi[INVESTIGATOR_1831], or cochlear implant.
6)For optional  brain imaging only : Severe claustrophobia precluding neuroimaging
procedures .
7) Participants  that have been on monoamine oxidase inhibitor s (MAOIs ) within 2 weeks
prior to starting study .
8)Inability to stand or walk without an assistive device
9)Hypersensitivity to the carbidopa, levodopa, and tablet components.
10)History of m yocardial infarction (MI)  with residual arterial, nodal or ventricular
arrhythmia
6 
Version 2. 6 11)History o f peptic ulcer
12)Chronic wide angle glaucoma
13)Narrow angle glaucoma
14)Major psychotic disorder
15)Severe cardiovascular or pulmonary disease, bronchial asthma, renal, hepatic or
endocrine disease
16) Subjects  on dopamine D2 receptor antagonists, dopamine depleting agents, and
metoclopramide.17)Any other medical history determined by [CONTACT_570801].
18) For sub -study 1  optional skin biopsy and sub- study 2 muscle biopsy only:
1.Subjects who a re dependent on alcohol
2. Subjec ts who are unable /unwilling  to refrain from nicotine/tobacco use for [ADDRESS_749310] a history of allergic reaction to local anesthesia for skinbiopsies
5.Subjects with significantly impaired wound healing or history of scarring or keloid
formation
6.Subjects whose synucleinopathy may be explained by [CONTACT_22714]:
a.Cortical dementia of Alzheimer’s type
b. Encephalitis
c.Whipple’s disease
d.Toxin exposure
e.Repeated head injury
f.Stepwise disease progression suggestive of vascular etiology
Study Timeline : 
The open- label study will be performed over [ADDRESS_749311] 2 
months will be used for data analysis and report writing. 
The placebo
-controlled study  (sub-study 1) will be performed over [ADDRESS_749312] 2 months will be used for data analysis and 
report writing . 
Dissemination plan:  
Study findings will be published in peer -reviewed journals and presented at scientific 
meetings.  
Design : Within -subject study design using after -before difference measures.  
7 
Version 2. 6 Sample size: This is an exploratory pi[INVESTIGATOR_570785] , with a net study completion goal of 20 treated subjects  for the open-
label and 12 subjects for the placebo- controlled study (sub -study 1). The net study 
completion goal for the muscle testing study (sub -study 2) will be [ADDRESS_749313] : This project will elucidate the neurobiology of gait slowing at spatiotemporal 
kinematics, structural and functional levels of analysis, increasing our understanding of 
the interplay between these aging- associated processes and the brain network changes 
underlying late life mobility disorders. Additionally, if elderly adults with parkinsonian signs 
have alpha synuclein in their peripheral nerve fibers, they may be in the early stages of a synucleinopathy . Lastly, t his study aims to elucidate  the relationship between skeletal  
muscle biomarkers and motor performance in older non- resilient adults without 
Parkinson’s and examine  the relationship between DA neurotransmission and muscle 
health.  
Table 1 : Main c omponents of the Test Battery, including detailed gait and balance assessments  
Test Primary outcome parameter  Admin. Time  
Gait: Timed walking tests  (single & dual task gait) .  
Optional: Electronic gait assessments using mat s (Zeno 
Walkway s, Protokinetics) and/or sensors (APDM) under 
single and dual test conditions  and challenged gait.   Assessment of standard 
spatiotemporal gait 
parameters & variability measures  2 min  
Dynamic balance: Mini -BESTest 3, 
with optional APDM sensors   Total Mini -BESTest score  15 min  
Balance confidence/fear of falling : The Activities -specific 
Balance Confidence (ABC) scale 4 Total ABC score  5 min  
Cognitive -motor dual task: Stroop steppi[INVESTIGATOR_570786]  10 min  
Total: 45 min  
Primary Outcome variables , open -label study : 
(a) Bio
mechanical gait and postural parameters
(b) Cognition  (see Table 2)
Primary Outcome Measure:  Placebo- controlled study  (sub-study 1) : 
(a)Gait speed as measured during iTUG portion of the Mini- BESTest
Secondary Outcome Measures:  Placebo- controlled study  (sub-study 1) : 
(a)Parkinson’s disease cognitive rating scale (PDCRS) total score
(b)Stroop steppi[INVESTIGATOR_570787] : reaction time and total errors
Primary Outcome Meas u re: O pen-label muscle testing study (sub- study 2):  
(a)Gait speed as measured during iTUG portion of the Mini -BESTest
8 
Version 2. 6 Exploratory Outcome Measures: Open- label muscle testing study (sub- study 2)  
(a)Quantify the change in extracellular vesicle (EV) levels after 1- week C -L Dopa
supplementation.
(b)Mean torque value for each leg during Biodex muscle strength test .
Study Tr
eatment : 
Carbi
dopa Monotherapy: Due to the small risk of nausea and vomiting from taking C- L 
Dopa, all subjects will be pretreated with carbidopa 25 mg orally (PO)  three times a day 
(TID) monotherapy for 3 days prior to starting C- L Dopa.  
C-L D
opa administration : A low dose (25/100 1 tablet orally (PO)  three times a day (TID)
of C-L Dopa  immediate release will be used  for the first three days of C -L Dopa treatment
then if no side- effects will be increased on day 4 of the C -L Dopa treatment to 1.5 pi[INVESTIGATOR_570788]. All participants will continue to take carbidopa 25 mg TID PO for the whole duration
of the treatment period.
Drug S
upplies : Formulation, Preparation and Dispensing 
Carbi
dopa Monotherapy: 
Carbidopa will be prepared and dispensed by [CONTACT_570802].  
C-L Dopa
:
C-L Dopa  will be prepared and dispensed by [CONTACT_570803].
Plac
ebo: 
The placebo will be prepared and dispensed by [CONTACT_570804].  
Drug S
torage and Drug Accountability  
Carbi
dopa Monotherapy : Drug will be stored and accounted for at the Research Pharmacy 
at the University of Michigan per their established standing operating procedures.     
C-L Dopa
: Drug will be stored and accounted for at the Research Pharmacy at the
University of Michigan per their established standing operating procedures.
Plac
ebo: Drug will be stored and accounted for at the Research Pharmacy at the 
University of Michigan per their established standing operating procedures.  
Concom
itant Medications  
Use of
 both  carbidopa monotherapy and C- L Dopa, has been contraindicated with 
concurrent use with nonselective monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) or use within the last [ADDRESS_749314] ½ hour before each meal (i.e. , breakfast, lunch & supper).  However, the 
pre-meal intake of these drugs can be combined with non- proteineous  supplements, like 
fruit juices or fruits (banana, apple sauce, etc.). 
Iron 
salts or multi -vitamins containing iron salts have the potential to decrease the 
bioavailability of carbidopa and levodopa. Participants taking iron salts will be asked to 
supplement at the end of the day to minimize the potential C -L Dopa absorption 
reductions.  
Cli
nical Testing:  
Clinical assessment (see also Table 3 ) includes a general demographic, medical and, 
neurological examination, the measurement of visual acuity, (optional) visual contrast 
sensitivity (Rabin test), (optional) color blindness (Munsell 15), orthostatic vital signs, 
weight and height in all subjects, general motor assessment, including the Movement Disorder Society revised UPDRS examination (13), modified Hoehn & Yahr (14) to provide 
assessment of general motor impairments of PD. Questionnaires to assess overall sedentarism and physical activity will be administered. Detailed cognitive testing will also 
be performed.  
Functiona
l assessment of motor features:  
Several well -validated balance, gait, and fall -associated scales and tests will be used to 
further assess functional mobility 7 (see Table 3 ). In addition to these motor examinations 
we will also use questionnaires to assess for the presence of gait festination and freezing 
of gait 15-17. In addition, finger tappi[INVESTIGATOR_570789]. Optionally, 
foot tappi[INVESTIGATOR_570790] a measure of lower limb bradykinesia. A specialized mobility 
and postural control test battery to capture gait and postural functions will also be 
performed. Some tasks may be performed while performing a secondary cognitive task 
(e.g. counting backwards by 3s).  
Muscle
 Strength Testing : 
Biodex Strength Test: Participants will sit (~85° hip flexion) on an ergometer (Biodex 
System 4). The upper body will be stabilized with straps across the thorax and abdomen. Knee joint axis of rotation will be aligned with the measurement axis of the system. The 
leg being tested will be strapped around the mid- thigh. The knee angle will be placed at 
90° to cancel the effect of gravity on the test. Participants will be instructed to perform 
maximal effort during a static knee extension and to limit counterm ovement.  At least three 
[ADDRESS_749315] trial is higher than the preceding ones, or if 
the difference between trials was greater than 10%.  Participants will be encouraged 
verbally throughout the test. Biodex testing for isometric strength is established as the gold 
standard in the field and highly reliable28. Protocol for biodex isometric testing on knee 
extensors taken from prior studies at University of Mani toba29.  
Gri
p strength will be measured using a handheld Dynamometer.  
Musc
le Testing will be assessed during visit 1 only.  
Biol
ogical samples:  
Optional saliva samples may be collected for analysis of dopamine and other related 
genotypes  for the open -label study only . Samples will be processed and analyzed at 
laboratories the Department of Human Genetics, or at other intra - or extramural 
institutions.  (For sub -study 1 only ) Tissue samples may be collected via a biopsy 
procedure. Deidentified samples will be sent to CND Life Sciences Laboratory which will stain the tissue for alpha synuclein. The distribution of alpha synuclein and nerve fiber density will be evaluated.  
Skel
etal Muscle Biopsy (sub- study 2 only)  
The modified muscle biopsy technique was introduced nearly 60 years ago [22]  
and is a fundamental component of muscle health research (e.g., insulin sensitivity, 
inflammation). This technique is used commonly in the medical research field (as indicated 
by [CONTACT_17891] [e.g., NIH funded MoTrPAC]) and is currently utilized at the 
University of Michigan. Members of the research team have been involved with muscle 
biopsies for ~15 y, totaling >[ADDRESS_749316]. Jacob Haus, PhD will perform the muscle biopsies 
which are critical to completion of study objectives.  
Muscle biopsies will be obtained before and after the 1 -week  C-L Dopa 
supplementation period. Muscle samples (~200 mg; approximately the size of a pea) will be obtained from the vastus lateralis  muscle (thigh muscle) following local anesthetic 
delivery using the modified muscle biopsy technique
30,31,32, 34. Muscle tissue will be quickly 
trimmed of excess connective tissue and fat, blotted with gauze to remove blood, and processed specific to future analysis. Subjects will be instructed on how to care for the 
wound and supplied with ice and pressure bandages  after each biopsy to reduce 
inflammation and any soreness. A member of the research team will follow -up with each 
participant the day after a muscle biopsy.  All muscle biopsies will be performed and 
analyzed in laboratories within the University of Michigan.  Participants who use 
tobacco/nicotine  will be asked to refrain from  use for at least 12 hours prior to the biopsy 
procedure.
Blood Sampling 
Blood s
amples will be obtained before and after the 1- week C -L Dopa 
supplementation period for assessments of extracellular vesicles (EV). ~20mL of whole blood will be collected at each timepoint for analysis. Participants will be asked to arrive 
to the laboratory in a fasted state for the blood draw.  
11 
Version 2. 6 . Plasma will be separated from blood samples collected in vacutainer tubes via 
centrifugation before and after 1- week C -L Dopa supplementation. 
Extracellular vesicle (EV) analysis will be performed at the laboratory of [CONTACT_570809] at Wake Forest University (Winston- Salem, North Carolina). Plasma samples will 
be deidentified, then shipped to [CONTACT_570810] at which point total EVs (TE) will be isolated 
from the plasma using a modified precipi[INVESTIGATOR_570791]34,35. A 
material transfer agreement (MTA) will be established prior to shipment of any samples.  
One extra tube of blood will be stored for additional analysis if needed.  
Neurocogni
tive and functional status assessments:  
Table [ADDRESS_749317] battery  
Overall mental status  Optional: Mini Mental State Exam 18 
Montreal Cognitive Assessment Scale 19 
Parkinson’s disease cognitive rating scale26
Attention  D-KEFS: Trail Making Test, Stroop Color Word Interference Test 20
Learning & Memory  Optional: [LOCATION_004] Verbal Learning Test – II 21 
Executive/Working 
Memory  D-KEFS: Trail Making Test
Information processing 
speed  D-KEFS: Trail Making Test [ADDRESS_749318],
Optional: Reaction time
Optional:  Falling stick test
MR i
maging  (optional) : MR imaging will be performed on a 3 Tesla Philips Achieva 
system (Philips) utilizing a 15 -channel head coil and the ‘ISOVOX’ exam card protocol 
primarily designed to yield isotropic T 1 spoiled gradient (SPGR) spatial resolution. This 
protocol consists of a number of different sequences including a standard T 1-weighted 
series of a 3D inversion recovery -prepared turbo- field-echo will be performed in the 
sagittal plane with repetition time/echo time/inversion time = 9.8/4.6/1041 ms; turbo factor 
= 200; single average; field of view = 240 x 200 x 160 mm; acquired matrix = 240 x 200. 
Slices (n = 160) will be reconstructed to 1mm isotropic resolution. This sequence 
maximizes contrast among grey matter, white matter and CSF and provides high 
resolution delineation of cortical and subcortical structures. Other standard sequences include FLAIR, DTI, resting state functional connectivity MRI, or other relevant series.  The 
brain MRI scan can be performed on the same day as the clinical assessment or anytime throughout the supplementation period. 
PET imaging:  All PET data will be acquired at the University of Michigan PET facility on 
a Siemens BioGraph TruePoint Model 1094 PET/CT scanner, which produces 109 
slices, has an axial field- of-view of 22.0 cm with slice thickness of 2.027 mm, and 
intrinsic image resolution 4.2 mm full -width at half maximum (FWHM). Image 
reconstruction for both tracers will be done with fully 3D -iterative OSEM, using [ADDRESS_749319] -reconstruction files of 3.0 mm FWHM, yielding images of 
~5.[ADDRESS_749320] scan (130 kVp, 30 eff mAs, 6 x 3mm collimation, pi[INVESTIGATOR_23025] 
=1, rotation time =0.6 second) of the head will be performed prior to each brain PET 
12 
Version 2. 6 scan for attenuation correction purposes. “As low as reasonably achievable” (ALARA) 
techniques will be utilized to minimize subject radiation exposure. 
Subjects will be studied supi[INVESTIGATOR_050], with eyes and ears unoccluded, resting quietly in a dimly 
lit ro
om. [11C]PE2I  PET ligand are non- approved radiopharmaceutical that will be used in 
accordance with Food and Drug Administration regulations (21 CFR 361.1). All tracers are prepared following standard synthesis routines at the University of Michigan PET Chemistry and Cyclot ron facilities.
 
Dail
y life activity levels  (optional) : Overall activity levels during medication therapy  will 
also be assessed. Subjects  will be asked to wear an accelerometer based a ctigraph y 
device (Actigraph or ActivPAL)  for the duration of the carbidopa monotherapy and 
carbidopa- levodopa mechanistic study.  
Compl
iance Monitoring Phone Call:  A compliance phone call will be performed by a 
research staff member during the 7 day±3 C- L Dopa medication stage.  
Time
line: Refer to table [ADDRESS_749321] details. Day 0 may be completed over 
multiple visits. Once all tasks listed under Day 0 are completed Day 1 will start. Day 9(±3) 
tasks will be performed while participant is still taking C-L Dopa  and may require multiple 
visits. 
Table 3 . Open -label study: Detailed components, test protocol, and timeline  
Pre-Rx (Day 
0) 
Baseline  Day 
1-3Day 
4 Day 
4-6Day 
7-
10(±3) Day 10 
(±3) 
Informed Consent  ✓
Demographic Information  ✓
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  ✓
Clinical & Neurological 
Assessment  ✓ ✓
Optional: Saliva sample  ✓
MDS -UPDRS  ✓ ✓ ✓
Mini -BESTest ( optional: APDM 
Sensored)  ✓ ✓ ✓
Regular timed walking single & 
dual- task  
Optional: Zeno Walkways Single, 
Dual, and challenged gait Task   ✓ ✓ ✓
Optional:  APDM Mobility 
assessments  ✓ ✓ ✓
Optional: Oculovestibular ✓ ✓ 
Pegboard  ✓ ✓ ✓
Finger tappi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  ✓ ✓ ✓
Foot tappi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  ✓ ✓ ✓
13 
Version 2. 6  Optional: Reaction Time Test/  
Optional: React Stick Test  ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Four Square Step Test ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Maximum Step Length 
Test ✓     ✓ 
Activity questionnaire  ✓     ✓ 
Balance confidence/fear of falling: 
The Activities -specific Balance 
Confidence (ABC)  ✓    
 ✓ 
Optional: New -FOGQ  ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Short FES -I ✓     ✓ 
Sensonics UPSIT  ✓     optional: ✓ 
Optional: Eyetech OCAT  ✓     ✓ 
MoCA  ✓  ✓   ✓ 
Optional: MMSE  ✓     ✓ 
DKEFS -STROOP  ✓ 
  ✓   ✓ 
DKEFS -TMT  ✓ 
  ✓   ✓ 
Optional: CVLT  ✓     ✓ 
Information processing  
 ✓  ✓   ✓ 
General Feeling Questionnaire  ✓     ✓ 
Apathy Evaluation Scale  ✓     ✓ 
Geriatric depression scale  ✓     ✓ 
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_570792]  ✓     ✓ 
Optional: BPRS  ✓     ✓ 
Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_7110]  ✓     ✓ 
Mayo Sleep Questionnaire (22)  ✓     ✓ 
FSS ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Insomnia Questionnaire  ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Somnolence VAS  ✓  ✓   ✓ 
Snellen  Test ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Rabin  ✓     ✓ 
Adverse event assessment  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Optional Skin Biopsy  ✓      
Optional MRI  ✓     ✓ 
PE2I PET (will occur only 1 time)  ✓     ✓ 
14 
Version 2. 6  Optional DEXA  ✓      
Optional 90-120 minute 
observation (post medication)  after 
first intake     ✓ 
  
Carbidopa Monotherapy 25 mg 
TID PO   ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
C-L Dopa  25/100 1 tablet PO TID    ✓ ✓   
C-L Dopa  25/100 1 .5 tablet PO TID      ✓ ✓ 
Compliance Monitoring Phone Call   ✓   ✓  
Optional: Actigraphy   ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
       
 
Table 4. Sub-study 1: Placebo -controlled, double -blinded study: Detailed components, test protocol, and timeline  
 Pre-Rx (Day 
0) 
Baseline  Day 
1-3 Day 
4 Day 
4-6 Day 
7-
10(±3) Day 10  
(±3) 
Informed Consent  ✓      
Demographic Information  ✓      
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  ✓      
Clinical & Neurological 
Assessment  ✓  ✓   ✓ 
MDS -UPDRS  ✓   ✓   ✓ 
Mini -BESTest ( optional: APDM 
Sensored)  ✓  ✓   ✓ 
Regular timed walking single & 
dual- task  
Optional: Zeno Walkways Single, 
Dual, and challenged gait Task   ✓ 
  ✓  
 ✓ 
Optional:  APDM Mobility 
assessments  ✓  ✓   ✓ 
Pegboard   ✓  ✓   ✓ 
Finger tappi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  ✓  ✓   ✓ 
Optional: Foot tappi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  ✓  ✓   ✓ 
Optional: Reaction Time Test/  
Optional: React ion Stick Test  ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Four Square Step Test  ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Maximum Step Length 
Test ✓     ✓ 
Activity questionnaire  ✓     ✓ 
15 
Version 2. 6  Balance confidence/fear of falling: 
The Activities -specific Balance 
Confidence (ABC)  ✓    
 ✓ 
Optional: New -FOGQ  ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Short FES -I ✓     ✓ 
MoCA  ✓  ✓   ✓ 
PDCRS        
Optional: MMSE  ✓     ✓ 
DKEFS -STROOP  ✓ 
  ✓   ✓ 
DKEFS -TMT  ✓ 
  ✓   ✓ 
Optional: CVLT  ✓     ✓ 
General Feeling Questionnaire  ✓     ✓ 
Apathy Evaluation Scale  ✓     ✓ 
Geriatric depression scale  ✓     ✓ 
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_570792]  ✓     ✓ 
Optional: BPRS  ✓     ✓ 
Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_7110]  ✓     ✓ 
Mayo Sleep Questionnaire (22)  ✓     ✓ 
FSS ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Insomnia Questionnaire  ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Somnolence VAS  ✓  ✓   ✓ 
Optional: Snell en Test  ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Rabin  ✓     ✓ 
Adverse event assessment  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Optional Skin Biopsy  ✓      
Optional MRI  ✓ 
PE2I PET  ✓ 
Optional DEXA  ✓      
Optional 90-120 minute 
observation (post medication)  after 
first intake     ✓ 
  
Carbidopa Monotherapy 25 mg 
TID PO   ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
C-L Dopa  25/100 1 tablet PO TID    ✓ ✓   
C-L Dopa  25/100 1 .5 tablet PO TID      ✓ ✓ 
Compliance Monitoring Phone Call      ✓  
16 
Version 2. 6  Optional: Actigraphy  Give to pt  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
 
 
Table 5 . Sub-study 2: Open -label, exploratory muscle testing study . Detailed components, test protocol, and 
timeline  
 Pre-Rx (Day 
0) 
Baseline  Day 
1-3 Day 
4 Day 
4-6 Day 
7-
10(±3) Day 10  
(±3) 
Informed Consent  ✓      
Demographic Information  ✓      
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  ✓      
Blood Sample Collection (fasted)  ✓     ✓ 
Skeletal Muscle Biopsy  ✓     ✓ 
Muscle Biopsy Phone call 
Followup  ✓(next day)      ✓(next day)  
Biodex Muscle Strength Test  ✓      
Dynamometer Grip Strength Test  ✓      
Clinical & Neurological 
Assessment  ✓  ✓   ✓ 
MDS -UPDRS  ✓   ✓   ✓ 
Mini -BESTest ( optional: APDM 
Sensored)  ✓  ✓   ✓ 
Regular timed walking single & 
dual- task  
Optional: Zeno Walkways Single, 
Dual, and challenged gait Task   ✓ 
  ✓  
 ✓ 
Optional:  APDM Mobility 
assessments  ✓  ✓   ✓ 
Pegboard   ✓  ✓   ✓ 
Finger tappi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  ✓  ✓   ✓ 
Optional: Foot tappi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  ✓  ✓   ✓ 
Optional: Reaction Time Test/  
Optional: React ion Stick Test  ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Four Square Step Test  ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Maximum Step Length 
Test ✓     ✓ 
Activity questionnaire  ✓     ✓ 
Balance confidence/fear of falling: 
The Activities -specific Balance 
Confidence (ABC)  ✓    
 ✓ 
17 
Version 2. 6  Optional: Dual -task Impact on 
Daily -living Activities 
Questionnaire (DIDA -Q) ✓    
 ✓ 
Optional: New -FOGQ  ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Short FES -I ✓     ✓ 
MoCA  ✓  ✓   ✓ 
PDCRS  ✓  ✓   ✓ 
Optional: MMSE  ✓     ✓ 
DKEFS -STROOP  ✓ 
  ✓   ✓ 
DKEFS -TMT  ✓ 
  ✓   ✓ 
Optional: CVLT  ✓     ✓ 
General Feeling Questionnaire  ✓     ✓ 
Apathy Evaluation Scale  ✓     ✓ 
Geriatric depression scale  ✓     ✓ 
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_570792]  ✓     ✓ 
Optional: BPRS  ✓     ✓ 
Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_7110]  ✓     ✓ 
Mayo Sleep Questionnaire (22)  ✓     ✓ 
FSS ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Insomnia Questionnaire  ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Somnolence VAS  ✓  ✓   ✓ 
Optional: Snell en Test  ✓     ✓ 
Optional: Rabin  ✓     ✓ 
Adverse event assessment  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
Optional MRI  ✓ 
PE2I PET  ✓ 
Optional DEXA  ✓      
Optional 90-120 minute 
observation (post medication)  after 
first intake     ✓ 
  
Carbidopa Monotherapy 25 mg 
TID PO   ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
C-L Dopa  25/100 1 tablet PO TID    ✓ ✓   
C-L Dopa  25/100 1 .5 tablet PO TID      ✓ ✓ 
Compliance Monitoring Phone Call      ✓  
Optional: Actigraphy  Give to pt  ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 
18 
Version 2. 6   
Analysis:  
Statistical analysis : For all studies  and sub- studies , we anticipate that 90%  of eligible 
subjects  will complete the 1 -week C-L Dopa  supplementation;  the effect of C- L Dopa 
administration on brain connectivity and mobility measures  will be tested using a repeated 
measures design.  
 
Dat
a safety -monitoring plan :  This study will adhere to a data safety -monitoring plan 
where the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_570793] (at least annual) monitoring of general progress of the study, such as subject recruitment, perform interim statistical 
analysis on the data (only when statistically feasible), review of outcome and adverse event data to determine whether there is any change to the anticipated benefit -to-risk ratio 
(which may require modification or termination of the study protocol), assessment of external scientific or medical developments that may have an impact on the safety of study 
participants or the ethics of the study. [CONTACT_570811], Instructor  of Neurology, w ill 
serve as an independent safety officer and will review twice yearly safety reports. The 
monitoring process will also include a review of study procedures aimed at the protection 
of the privacy of the research subjects and confidentiality of the research data. Adverse events will be reported to the IRB adverse events reporting guidelines. If the protocol 
needs to be modified or there is a change in the level of risk to subjects for this study, a 
modification submission will be prepared for review by [CONTACT_1201]. All data collected on 
research subjects will be kept confidential as detailed above. 
All study staff will be extensively trained in test administration to ensure the integrity of 
collected data. In the event that language differences present a barrier to data collection, 
strategies to ensure proper collection will be employed, including seeking help from other 
team members, slowing down testing pace, or using translaters if necessary . 
Risks (as described in informed consent form):  
The known or expected risks will be defined as: Likely - occurring in more than 25% of 
people (more than 25 out of 100 persons); Common – occurring in 10% - 25% of people 
(in 10 to 25 out of 100 persons); Infrequent - occurring in 1 - 10% of people (1 to 10 out of 
100 people); Rare - occurring in less than 1% of people (fewer than 1 out of 100 persons); 
or Very Rare - occurring in less than 0.1% of people (fewer than 1 in 1,000 persons).  
 
The known or expected risks will be described in normal script.  
The actions that the researchers take to minimize these risks will be described in italic script, as demonstrated in this paragraph.  
 
General risks:  
There is a very rare risk of breach of confidentiality, which may affect privacy, self -esteem, 
social standing, employability, and insurability. 
Section 9.[ADDRESS_749322].  
 There is a rare risk that you may experience some minor anxiety (‘test anxiety’), become 
worried, or have an anxiety reaction in response to any of these tests and procedures. For 
[ADDRESS_749323] all tests and procedures. The staff will be prepared to respond to your anxiety, concerns and behavioral changes, by [CONTACT_570805], breaking up testing sessions into several brief visits if needed, 
and/or answering your questions . During the MRI scans you will be able to talk to 
technologists throughout the scan and indicate right away if you wish to stop the study 
and leave the scanner. At the option of your personal physician, (s)he may prescribe 
sedati on with lorazepam (Ativan) or diazepam (Valium) to be taken before the scan in 
accordance with the prescription directions. 
 None of the test results, including brain images, and procedures in this study will be 
reviewed or interpreted for making a medical diagnosis. Any result or abnormality that would be indicative of current or future disease will most likely not be discovered. However, 
if we do find a clinically relevant result or abnormality that deserves additional medical 
attention,  we will communicate this to you and you will be urged to visit your primary health 
care provider. The research results of the brain images and  genetic testing will NOT be 
communicated back to you.  
You should consult your personal doctor if you have any health concerns  
 
Clinical tests:  
There is a very rare risk of physical fatigue during the clinical examination. 
Trained research staff will conduct all the tests and administer all the questionnaires. The staff will be prepared to respond to your concerns by [CONTACT_570806]/or breaking up testing sessions into several brief visits if needed.  
 There is a common risk that you may have a dry mouth after providing the saliva sample.  
You may drink some water after providing the sample.  
 
Smell and vision tests:  
There is a very rare risk of a mild allergic reaction to the scents of the smell identification 
test. 
Testing will be discontinued if you experience an allergic reaction that prevents you 
from continuing the examination.  
 There is a very rare risk that you may experience some minor eye strain when doing the 
vision tests.  
Rest breaks will be provided if needed. Any minor eye strain will disappear shortly after 
the test.  
 
Motor testing:  
Many of the tests are comparable to normal standing and walking conditions that you may experience in everyday -life. Nonetheless, there is an infrequent risk of falling or near -
falling during these tests which may result in fall -related injuries.  
Trained research staff will remain in close proximity to you at all times, and observe (‘spot’) you to prevent you from falling.  
 There is a very rare risk that the sensors to measure overall movement and balance may 
become detached and that you may trip. You may also trip on the pressure sensitive mat.  
We will regularly check the sensors for appropriate attachment and you will be closely 
monitored.  
20 
Version 2. 6    
Eye movements will be measured with video eye goggles (videonystagmography or VNG) 
while you are making small eye movements. There is rare risk that these protocols may 
cause some eye strain discomfort.  
Rest breaks will be provided if needed. Any minor eye strain will disappear shortly after the test.  
 
Muscle Testing:  
There is a risk of pressure or muscle fatigue when using  the handheld dynamometer and 
Biodex equipment.  
Experienced personnel will assist in muscle testing and stop testing if discomfort 
occurs.  
 
Neuropsychological and neurobehavioral tests:  
There is an infrequent risk of boredom, frustration, and/or mental and physical fatigue during the neuropsychological and neurobehavioral testing.  
Trained research staff will conduct all the tests and administer all the questionnaires. The staff will be prepared to respond to your concerns by [CONTACT_527273]/or breaking up testing sessions into several brief visits if needed.  
 
MRI scan:  
There is a minor risk of discomfort or anxiety from being in the confined space of the MRI scanner.  
We will provide pads and blankets to make you as comfortable as possible. You will 
be able to talk to us throughout the study, and you will be able let us know right away 
if you want to stop the study and get out of the scanner.  
 There is a rare risk of hearing damage or loss due to loud, vibrating noises generated by 
[CONTACT_168525].  
You will be provided  foam earplugs to reduce the loud noises made by [CONTACT_570807]. 
 Some studies, like this one, have the potential to cause "peripheral nerve stimulation" (PNS). PNS is a light touching sensation on the skin surface, lasting only for a few 
seconds. It may cause mild discomfort, but is not harmful to you.  
The MRI machine is operated within FDA guidelines so the potential for inducing PNS is low.  
 
Sometimes, subjects report a temporary, slight dizziness, light -headedness or nausea 
during or immediately after the scanning session. 
If you feel dizzy or light -headed, we will have you get up slowly from the scanner. 
 
Because the strong electromagnetic fields can move metal objects and cause heating, there is a risk that loose objects (jewelry, keys) outside your body could be accelerated by 
[CONTACT_527275], causing you injury. There is also a risk tha t the magnetic 
fields could disturb a metal fragment in your body, interfere with an implanted device, such 
as a pacemaker or neurostimulator, or cause metal (including foil -backed medication 
patches) on or in your body to heat up, causing you harm.  
We keep the environment around the MRI scanner completely free of loose metal 
objects that could be moved by [CONTACT_277518], and we will make sure that you have no metal on your body that could be affected by [CONTACT_168525]. We will also 
[ADDRESS_749324] or tumor. Many such abnormalities are not clinically 
significant, but you may need or want to investigate them further. Such a finding might require additional studies, and maybe even treatment, which would not be paid for by [CONTACT_4520], the sponsor, or the University of Michigan.  
 
PET scans:  
There is an infrequent risk of bruising, bleeding, infection, or soreness associated with 
intravenous catheter placement, similar to the risks associated with routine blood testing. 
Also, you may feel dizzy or lightheaded or may rarely even faint when the tube is put in or 
taken out.  
We will use highly trained personnel for placement and removal of the IV. 
 
 There is a very rare risk that you could experience an allergic reaction to the PET tracer. 
This could involve itching, skin rash or shortness of breath shortly after injection. However, 
because of the very small tracer amounts used in PET imaging, the ri sk is very rare.  
A physician will be available and an emergency cart is located in the PET Facility for treatment of any adverse reactions that may occur.  
 During the course of this study, you may potentially  be exposed to radiation from the DXA 
scan, the PET/CT transmission scans and the PET tracer [
11C]PE2I . 
The biological effect of radiation in humans is measured in terms of Sieverts (Sv) or mSv (1/1000 Sv), which is a unit of uniform whole body exposure. Exposure to a single 
PE2I  PET-CT scan  is 3.8 mSv (which is slightly above the annual level of natural 
background radiation of about 3 mSv).  
 The maximum amount of radiation you will be exposed to from this research project 
will be approximately 3.81 mSv for the PE2I  scan. In the event of a technical failure, 
one (1) of scan may be repeated, which would expose you to a maximum exposure of 7.[ADDRESS_749325] scans per year for this study  The effects on the body 
of this radiation exposure will be added to your overall lifetime radiation risk. The US Federal Government requires that the annual amount of radiation exposure of radiation workers does not exceed 50 mSv per year; the maximum radi ation you will 
be exposed is about  3/10th of this amount.  Exposure to an (optional) DXA scan is less 
than 0.1% of annual background radiation exposure.  Your lifetime radiation risk also 
includes any radiation you may have received in the past for diagnosis  or treatment, 
and any such radiation you may be exposed to in the future. Please inform the 
investigators if you have had any major radiation exposure in the past, particularly in 
the past year, such as medical treatment with X -rays or radioactivity, or diagnostic X -
rays, CT -scans or nuclear medicine scans. No PET scans will be performed on 
pregnant, nursing, or potentially pregnant women. A urine pregnancy test will be performed on all women of childbearing potential within 48 hours prior to the PET/DXA 
scanning session. 
 
 
22 
Version 2. 6  Genetic testing:  
We will be testing for multiple genes that are related to clinical symptom presentation. 
There is a very rare risk that the genetic information we obtain from your samples could 
prove embarrassing to you, if somebody were able to link the genetic information with you.  
We have a system of double- coding the genetic information, so that it is extremely 
unlikely that the genetic information would be connected with you. Most importantly, we will break the link between the genetic information and you once the study is 
complet ed, thus removing this risk entirely.  
 The federal Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA) generally makes it 
illegal for health insurance companies, group health plans, and most employers to discriminate against you based on your genetic information. This law does not protect 
you against genetic discrimination by [CONTACT_55173], disability 
insurance, or long- term care insurance. Under this law:  
- Health insurance companies and group health plans may not request your genetic information that we obtain from this research  
- Health insurance companies and group health plans may not use your genetic information when making decisions regarding your eligibility or premiums  
- Employers with 15 or more employees may not use your genetic information 
that we obtain from this research when making a decision to hire, promote, or 
fire you or when setting the terms of your employment  
-  
GINA does not apply to the following groups; however, these groups have policies in place that provide similar protections against discrimination: 
- Members of the US Military receiving care through Tricare  
- Veterans receiving care through the Veteran’s Administration (VA)  
- The Indian Health Service 
- Federal employees receiving care through the Federal Employees Health Benefits Plans  
 
Assessment of daily life activity: 
There is a very rare risk of the movement monitor(s) (Actigraph or ActivPAL ) detaching, 
which may result in a trip during the daily life monitoring of overall movement (actigraphy). It should be noted that the a ctigraphy only measures overall movement. Neither devices 
record your geographical location or specific activities that you were performing, neither can this be derived at a later point from the data that is stored in the Actigraph or ActivPAL . 
You will receive instruction for proper attachment of the Actigraph and/or ActivPAL  
system. 
 
C-L Dopa- sp
 ecific risks:  
There is a common risk of nausea  and an infrequent risk of vomiting.  
Participants are given the option to come into the lab for their first dosage of C- L Dopa. 
This optional visit would be 60- [ADDRESS_749326] dose of 25/[ADDRESS_749327] dose of 25/[ADDRESS_749328] disappeared . 
There is an infrequent risk orthostatic hypotension when taking C- L Dopa. Participants 
taking antihypertensive medications (e.g. Hydrochlorothiazide,  Atenolol, etc.) may be at 
higher risk of experienc ing symptoms such as dizziness or lightheadedness when 
standing up after sitting.  
Participants are given the option to come into the lab for their first dosage of C- L Dopa. 
This optional visit would be 60- [ADDRESS_749329] dose of 25/[ADDRESS_749330] dose of 25/[ADDRESS_749331] dose of 25/[ADDRESS_749332] study team immediately. 
Medication use may be suspended, and further action taken, including withdrawal from 
study.   
 
There is a rare risk  of psychological changes while taking C -L Dopa. These may include 
the development of depression/suicidal tendencies, libido changes, increased urges to 
gamble, spend money, or practice binge- eating.  
Participants are given the option to come into the lab for their first dosage of C- L Dopa. 
This optional visit would be 60- [ADDRESS_749333] dose of 25/[ADDRESS_749334] study team immediately. 
Medication use may be suspended, and further action taken, including withdrawal from 
study.   
   
Given the very low dose of C -L Dopa we do not anticipate any significant withdrawal  
symptoms when stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_570794] 25/[ADDRESS_749335].  
Biopsy Specific Risks:  
There is a rare  risk of an allergic reaction to local anesthesia.  
Participants will be screened for any allergies to drugs to avoid the possibility of an 
allergic reaction. A physician will be administering the anesthesia and biopsy after 
receiving specialized training.  
 
There is a rare  risk of severe pain or nerve damage during the administration of the biopsy.  
While receiving a biopsy typi[INVESTIGATOR_570795], severe pain is not anticipated. To prevent this, a local anesthesia will be used, and only trained 
research staff will be completing the biopsy visits. Biopsies are frequently 
performed in a clinical setting and are deemed safe. Research staff has been 
trained on the correct positioning and pressure to apply during the biopsy. The procedure itself will be performed by a clinician.  
 There is a rare  risk of excessive bleeding after the biopsy procedure.  
Participants will be screened for bleeding disorders and blood thinning medications. The biopsy will be performed by a clinician who can apply pressure 
25 
Version 2. 6  to the site of biopsy immediately following administration to stop any bleeding.  
Subjects will be instructed that they should report any bleeding or opening of the 
wound immediately for follow up care. Subjects will be supplied with ice and 
pressure bandages after each biopsy to reduce inflammation and any soreness 
after the biopsy. A  member of the research team will follow -up with participants the 
day after each muscle biopsy.  
 There is an infrequent  risk of wound infection after the biopsy.  
Participants will be provided with bandages to keep the punch site dry and covered. Participants will be screened for infection risk factors such as 
immunocompromising conditions. Subjects will be instructed that they should report any bleeding or opening of the wound immediately for follow up care. 
Subjects will be supplied with ice and pressure bandages after each biopsy to 
reduce inflammation and any soreness after the biopsy. A member of the research 
team will follow- up with participants the day after each muscle biopsy.  
 
There is a rare  risk of a stress reaction occurring before, during, or following the biopsy 
for those uncomfortable with blood or the tools used during the procedure, or for those 
with a history of stress reactions.  
This risk is possible for participants who experience a stress reaction in healthcare environments or with procedures involving tools such as needles. Stress 
reactions can include a hypertensive (elevated blood pressure) response, chest 
pains, headaches, or difficulty breathing. Subjects are informed what is involved in the biopsy procedure so they can decide on if they are comfortable completing 
the procedure. Additionally, trained study team members will monitor the 
participants throughout the biopsy to determine if a stress reaction is occurring. 
In the case of a reaction, the study team will monitor vitals, have the participant 
remain seated or lying down, and can provide water as needed. An on- site 
neurologist can also check on the patient if needed.   
   
Blood draw specific risks : 
 
There is an infrequent  risk of bruising,  bleeding,  or soreness at the injection site. There 
is a very rare  risk for infection. There is a rare  risk that you may feel dizzy, lightheaded, 
or faint after the injection.   
 
Bl
ood drawing, iv catheter insertions, and injections will be performed by a 
certified and experienced research technician or other health care professional 
who is also trained in blood borne pathogens control. Aseptic techniques will be 
used in accordance with University of Michigan guidelines. You can lie down if you feel dizzy, lightheaded or faint after an injection. 
 
 Open- label study : S
 ubject compensation (as described in informed consent form):  
You will receive $50 for each completed MRI scan. You will receive $[ADDRESS_749336] 
day will be $100 and $100 for follow -up. You will also receive $[ADDRESS_749337] day and medication phase of the study. Compensation for your time and effort 
after full study completion may total a maximum of $500.  
 
[ADDRESS_749338]. We will discuss with you the need for these accommodations as the 
research appointment(s) are being arranged. If eligible, overnight lodging can be arranged 
through the UMHS Patient and Visitor Accommodations Program either by a study team 
member or by [CONTACT_10825]. However, you may decide to make alternative arrangements. In that 
case, please discuss with the study team first if you are eligible for reimbursement prior to 
making any reservations. We can only reimburse for expenses that have been approved 
in advance by [CONTACT_3476]. You will need to provide receipts to the study team before 
expenses can be reimbursed. You will receive a voucher for valet parking at the University 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. Parking at Domino's Farms is free.  
 
You will be paid after your last study visit or, in case you decide to withdraw from the study, 
you will be paid for the parts that you have completed. You will be paid by [CONTACT_9434], which 
will be sent to your home address. Alternatively, you may request a payment coupon for 
cash payment at the University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. We do not keep cash for immediate payment. 
 
If you receive payment of $[ADDRESS_749339] 
be sent to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).  
 
Placebo- cont r olled study (sub- study 1) : Subject compensation (as described in 
informed consent form):  
You will receive $50 for a completed MRI scan. You will receive $ [ADDRESS_749340] day will be $30 
($10 for screening, $20 for remaining tests). and $30 for follow -up. You will also receive 
$[ADDRESS_749341] day and medication phase of the study. You will 
receive $40 for completion of the optional skin biopsy Compensation for your time and 
effort after full study completion may total a maximum of $240 . You will receive a voucher 
for valet parking at the University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. Parking at Domino's Farms is free.  Participants 
who are consented and then deemed ineligible following the screening will be 
compensated the $[ADDRESS_749342] a payment coupon for 
cash payment at the University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. We do not keep cash for immediate payment. 
 
If you receive payment of $[ADDRESS_749343] 
be sent to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).  
 
Exploratory Muscle Testing Study (sub -stu dy 2) : Subject compensation (as 
described in informed consent form)  
You will receive $50 for a completed MRI scan. You will receive $ [ADDRESS_749344] day will be $30 
($10 for screening, $20 for remaining tests). and $30 for follow -up. You will also receive 
$[ADDRESS_749345] day and medication phase of the study. You will 
receive $50 for each completed muscle biopsy and $25 for each completed blood draw. 
Compensation for your time and effort after full study completion may total a maximum of 
27 
Version 2. 6  $350. You will receive a voucher for valet parking at the University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. Parking at 
Domino's Farms is free.  Participants who are consented and then deemed ineligible 
following the screening will be compensated the $[ADDRESS_749346] a payment coupon for 
cash payment at the University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. We do not keep cash for immediate payment. 
 
If you receive payment of $[ADDRESS_749347] 
be sent to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS).  
your name, address, social security number, payment amount, and related information. 
For tax reporting purposes this information must be sent to the Internal Revenue Service 
(IRS).  
 
Remote consent and remote assessments:  
Data may be collected remotely (using Zoom for Health at U of M) or telephone call if 
feasible for assessment. Remote electronic consent may be obtained using SignNow, this 
is being done to reduce physical interactions between subjects and study staff.  
 
References  
1. Bohnen NI, Muller ML, Kuwabara H, Cham R, Constantine GM, Studenski SA. 
Ag
e-associated striatal dopaminergic denervation and falls in community -dwelling 
subjects. J Rehabil Res Dev. 2009;46(8):1045 -1052.  
2. Goetz CG, Fahn S, Martinez -Martin P, et al. Movement Disorder Society -
sponsored revision of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (MDS -
UPDRS): Process, format, and clinimetric testing plan. Movement disorders : 
official journal of the Movement Disorder Society. 2007;22:[ADDRESS_749348]: the mini -BESTest. J 
Rehabil Med. 2010;42(4):323- 331. 
4. Powell LE, Myers AM. The Activities -specific Balance Confidence (ABC) Scale. J 
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 1995;50A(1):M28 -34. 
5. Shao X, Kilbourn MR. A simple modification of GE tracerlab FX C Pro for rapid sequential preparation of [11C]carfentanil and [11C]raclopride. Appl Radiat Isot. 
2009;67(4):602 -605. 
6. Chan GL, Holden JE, Stoessl AJ, et al. Reproducibility studies with 11C -DTBZ, a 
monoamine vesicular transporter inhibitor in healthy human subjects. J Nucl Med. 
1999;40(2):283 -289. 
7. Koeppe RA, Frey KA, Kuhl DE, Kilbourn MR. Assessment of extrastriatal vesicular monoamine transporter binding site density using stereoisomers of 
[
11C]dihydrotetrabenazine. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1999;19(12):1376- 1384.  
8. Logan J, Fowler JS, Volkow ND, Ding YS, Wang GJ, Alexoff DL. A strategy for 
removing the bias in the graphical analysis method. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 
2001;21:307 -320. 
9. de la Fuente -Fernandez R, Ruth TJ, Sossi V, Schulzer M, Calne DB, Stoessl AJ. 
Expectation and dopamine release: mechanism of the placebo effect in 
Parkinson's disease. Science. 2001;293(5532):1164- 1166.  
28 
Version 2. 6  10. Louis ED, Tang MX, Mayeux R. Parkinsonian signs in older people in a community -
based study: risk of incident dementia. Archives of neurology. 2004;61(8):1273 -
1276.  
11. Bohnen NI, Albin RL, Koeppe RA, et al. Positron emission tomography of 
monoaminergic vesicular binding in aging and Parkinson disease. J Cereb Blood 
Flow Metab. 2006;26:1198- 1212.  
12. Newman RP, LeWitt PA, Jaffe M, Calne DB, Larsen TA. Motor function in the normal aging population: treatment with levodopa. Neurology. 1985;35(4):571- 3. 
13. Goetz, C.G., et al., Movement Disorder Society -sponsored revision of the Unified 
Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (MDS -UPDRS): Process, format, and clinimetric 
testing plan. Mov Disord, 2007. 22(1): p. 41- 7. 
14. Hoehn, M.M. and M.D. Yahr, Parkinsonism: onset, progression and mortality. Neurology, 1967. 17(5): p. 427 -42. 
15. Giladi, N., et al., Gait festination in Parkinson's disease. Parkinsonism Relat 
Disord, 2001. 7(2): p. 135- 138. 
16. Giladi, N., et al., Construction of freezing of gait questionnaire for patients with 
Parkinsonism. Parkinsonism Relat Disord, 2000. 6(3): p. 165 -170. 
17. Giladi, N., et al., Validation of the freezing of gait questionnaire in patients with 
Parkinson's disease. Mov Disord, 2009. 24(5): p. 655- 61. 
18. Folstein, M.F., S.E. Folstein, and P.R. McHugh, "Mini -mental state". A practical 
method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician. J Psychiatr Res, 
1975. 12(3): p. 189 -98. 
19. Nasreddine, Z.S., et al., The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief 
screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. J Am Geriatr Soc, 2005. 53(4): p. 695 -
9. 
20. Delis, D., E. Kaplan, and J. Kramer, Delis -Kaplan Executive Function System (D -
KEFS): Examiner's manual. 2001, San Antonio, TX: The Psychological 
Corporation.  
21. Delis, D., et al., [LOCATION_004] Verbal Learning Test Manual, Adult Version. 2nd ed. 
2000, San Antonio, TX: The Psychological Corporation. 
22. Boeve BF, Molano JR, Ferman TJ, Smith GE, Lin SC, Bieniek K, Haidar W, 
Tippmann- Peikert M, Knopman DS, Graff -Radford NR, Lucas JA, Petersen RC, 
Silber MH. Validation of the Mayo Sleep Questionnaire to screen for REM sleep 
behavior disorder in an aging and dementia cohort. Sleep medicine. 
2011;12(5):445 -53. Epub 2011/02/26. doi: S1389 -9457(11)[ZIP_CODE] -4 [pii]  
23.       Doppler K, Antelmi E, Kuzkina A, et al. Consistent skin α -sy nuclein positivity in 
REM sleep behavior disorder – A two center two -to-four-year follow -up study. 
Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2021;86:108- 113. 
doi:10.1016/j.parkreldis.2021.04.007  
 
24.  The utility of α -synuclein as biofluid marker in neurodegenerative diseases: a 
systematic review of the literature | Biomarkers in Medicine. Accessed October 27, 2023. https://www.futuremedicine.com/doi/full/10.2217/BMM.14.105  
 
29 
Version 2. 6  25.       Gibbons C, Wang N, Rajan S, et al. Cutaneous α- Synuclein Signatures in Patients 
With Multiple System Atrophy and Parkinson Disease. Neurology . 
2023;100(15):e1529 -e1539.  
26.  Rosca EC, Simu M. Parkinson's Disease -Cognitive Rating Scale for Evaluating 
Cognitive Impairment in Parkinson's Disease: A Systematic Review.  Brain Sci. 
2020;10(9):588. Published 2020 Aug 25. doi:10.3390/brainsci10090588  
27.  Ramasamy, R., S.F. Yan, and A.M. Schmidt, The diverse ligand repertoire of the 
receptor for advanced glycation endproducts and pathways to the complications 
of diabetes. Vascul Pharmacol, 2012. 57(5 -6): p. 160- 7. 
28. Feiring, D. C., Ellenbecker, T. S., & Derscheid, G. L. (1990). Test -retest reliability 
of the Biodex isokinetic dynamometer. Journal of Orthopaedic & Sports Physical Therapy, 11(7), 298- 300. 
29. Ogborn, D. I., Bellemare, A., Bruinooge, B., Brown, H., McRae, S., & Leiter, J. (2021). Comparison of common methodologies for the determination of knee flexor 
muscle strength. International Journal of Sports Physical Therapy, 16(2), 350.  
30. Bergstrom, J., Muscle electrolytes in man. Scand. J. Clin. Lab Invest. Suppl., 1962. 68: p. 1 -110. 
31. Haus, J.M., et al., Contractile and connective tissue protein content of human 
skeletal muscle: effects of 35 and 90 days of simulated microgravity and exercise 
countermeasures. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol, 2007. 293(4): p. 
R1722- 7.  
32. Lemoine, J.K., et al., Muscle proteins during 60- day bedrest in women: impact of 
exercise or nutrition. Muscle Nerve, 2009. 39(4): p. 463 -71.  
33. Williamson, D.L., et al., Aberrant REDD1 -mTORC1 responses to insulin in skeletal 
muscle from type 2 diabetics. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol, 2015: p. ajpregu [ZIP_CODE] 2015.  
34. Ramteke A, Ting H, Agarwal C, et al. Exosomes secreted under hypoxia enhance invasiveness and stemness of prostate cancer cells by [CONTACT_570808]. Mol Carcinog 2015;54(7):554- 65. doi: 10.1002/mc.[ZIP_CODE] [published 
Online First: 2013/12 /19] 
35.  Patterson SA, Deep G, Brinkley TE. Detection of the receptor for advanced 
glycation endproducts in neuronally -derived exosomes in plasma. Biochem 
Biophys Res Commun 2018;500(4):892 -96. doi: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2018.04.181 
[published Online First: 2018/04/28]  
 