 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In-Home Technology for Caregivers of People With Dementia and Mild Cognitive 
Impairment: Spanish Language Homes  
 
Unique Protocol ID: 1247267250000 -2 
Secondary IDs: 2SB1AG059458 -04A1  
Identifier s: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date: July 12 , 2023  
 
Pre-Screening  Procedures:  
Spanish Language Homes caregivers may be recruited through caregiver organizations (e.g., 
Alzheimer’s Association, clinics (e.g., Nebraska Healthcare), other locations where caregivers 
gather/visit (e.g., support groups, senior centers), and media (e.g., print, social, digital). We have 
created a flyer/email script for these organizations to use that describes the research study and 
introduces the in -home technology, as well as a physical flyer to be posted in physical locations 
caregivers are likely to frequent. All recruitment materials describe the general nature and goals 
of the research and provide information about what should be expected if they participate . The 
Berkeley research team is listed as the source for additional information and addressing 
questions i n all materials.  
 
Initial  Encounter:  
Interested caregivers will be directed to an online website to learn more about the study and  
complete  a screening  questionnaire  to determine  eligibility.  Caregivers must 1) speak Spanish at 
home, 2) reside in the US and live with the person they are providing care for, 3) primarily use a 
smartphone (iPhone or Android), and 4) have WiFi internet service.  Interested  caregivers  will 
also give their contact  [CONTACT_353421],  as well as complete  the consent  to participate. 
Once  a caregiver  has been determined as eligible and enrolled  through  the website, a member of 
the Berkeley Psychophysiology Laboratory team will assess the capacity of the PWD to give 
consent to be in the study  as a secondary subject . Once PWD consent is obtained either on their 
own, or through surrogate consent, caregiver participants will be sent a link to complete a set of 
questionnaires.  Once PWD  consent is obtained, People Power will mail the Presence Caregiver 
system to the caregivers  for self-installation.  People  Power  will be available  to schedule virtual 
self-installation sessions if caregivers want by [CONTACT_19052]. Additional technical support for 
the system is available by [CONTACT_353422].  
 
Consent:  
Participants will give consent online through the study website. Online consent requires 
participants to click on a box stating, "By [CONTACT_214006], I indicate that I have read the above 
consent  form  and agree  to take part in the research."  Individuals  receiving  care (PWD)  are asked 
to consent to participation as secondary subjects in order for information about them to be used  
for research purposes. In order to assess a patient's ability to consent to participation, a member 
of the research team will conduct a phone conversation with both caregiver and patient. The 
purpose of this conversation is to provide information about the study (e.g., participation 
responsibilities, compensation information, etc.) and to assess the PWDs cognitive capacity to 
consent for themselves using UCLA's "Decision -Making Capacity Assessment Tool.” More 
specifically, a member of the Berkeley research team will determine the PWDs ability to 1) 
understand relevant study information, 2) ability to appreciate the situation and consequences of 
the study, 3) ability to rationalize or reason information presented, and 4) ability to make their 
own decision to participate in the study. If the investigator’s evaluation is that the PWD can 
provide  consent  (i.e., the answer  to questions  8 and 9 on the Assessment  Tool  are both “yes”)  the 
PWD will be asked to complete their own consent form via Qualtrics. If the PWD is judged to 
have  diminished  capacity  (i.e., the answer  to questions  8 or 9 are “no”)  then the caregiver  will be 
asked  to provide  surrogate  consent  if the patient  assents.  Here,  caregivers  will be informed  to the 
nature of their decision during the study including patient’s participation and decision to 
participate in certain procedures for the patient in order to ensure that the caregiver will be 
willing to undertake these on -going responsibilities. In addition, caregivers will be asked to 
identify  a witness  who will be willing  to provide  a by[CONTACT_353423] -Certification of Surrogate Decision Maker Form.  
 
Baseline  Outcome  Assessment : 
Once c onsent procedures are complete, caregivers receive a  Qualtrics link  with their initial 
questionnaire . Identical Qualtrics questionnaires will be sent via email to caregivers in both 
research conditions  at baseline,  [ADDRESS_440017] information form and 
“Information about person receiving care .” 
 
Randomization:  
Sixty caregivers will be randomly assigned to the "active in -home technology" condition of the 
system and the remaining 60 caregivers will be assigned to the "control" condition.  
Randomization  of participants  in each group  will be determined  by [CONTACT_353424].  
 
Outcome  Measures:  
All caregivers –regardless of randomized study condition –complete questionnaires on three 
separate  occasions  during  this study:  baseline,  3-months,  6-months.  The four outcome  measures  
are: (a) Zarit  Burden  Interview -Short  Form,  a questionnaire  measuring  caregiver  burden  (Zarit, 
Reever, & Bach -Peterson, 1980). 12 items are rated on 0 -4 scale. Range: 0 -48. No subscales.  
Higher scores represent worse outcomes; (b) Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_353420] (CES -D), a questionnaire measuring depression (Radloff, 1977). 20 items are rated on a 0 - 
3 scale and summed (range = 0 -60). There are no subscales. Higher scores represent worse 
outcomes.  The clinical  cut-off is usually  set at a score  of 16; (c) Beck  Anxiety  Inventory  (BAI),  a 
questionnaire measuring anxiety (Beck, Epstein, Brown, & Steer, 1988). 20 items are rated on a 
0-3 scale and summed (range= 0 -60). Higher scores indicate worse outcomes. There are no 
subscales. A score greater than 36 is considered to be clinically significant; and (d) Satisfaction 
with Life Scale, a questionnaire measuring overall life satisfaction and well -being (Diener, 
Emmons, Larsen, & Griffin, 1985). 5 items scored on a 1 -7 scale and summed (Range = 5 -35). 
Lower  scores  indicate  worse  outcomes.  A score  of [ADDRESS_440018]  initiated  by [CONTACT_353425] $75 for completing the installation of the system in their homes and $25 for 
each questionnaire they complete (initial questionnaire, 3 -months, and 6 -months). Qualtrics 
questionnaires will be sent via email to caregivers in both research conditions at baseline, [ADDRESS_440019]  the 
caregivers  to let them  know  they are welcome  to uninstall and dispose of the system  (or mail it 
back with costs covered) , or they may choose to keep any sensors, devices, or equipment.  