Use of a Powered Orthotic Exoskeleton to Promote Mobility Through Improved Squat, Knee 
Flexion and Loading of the Paretic Leg in Persons with Chronic Stroke
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Most Recent Update / Human Subjects Protection Review Board Approval: 12/02/2021 
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 1 
MIRB # [ZIP_CODE]  Title:  Use of a Powered Orthotic Exoskeleton to Promote Mobility Through Improved Squat, Knee Flexion and 
Loading of the Paretic Leg in Persons with Chronic Stroke  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_77374]  M Spungen, EdD  
Co-I(s): Stephen K ornfel d, DO; and John Handrakis , EdD  
Protocol : ASS -20-01  MIRB#  [ADDRESS_791649]: 
Veterans who suffer strokes often have disturbances in the ability to walk  that reduces independence and quality 
of life  (QOL) . Alterations in gait combined with general decreased activity are associated w ith redu ced muscle 
strength of the pareti c leg. This leads to cardiova scular deconditioning and reduced QOL . There is a new and 
novel battery powered device (Keeogo powered orthotic exoskeleton) that uses motors that assist knee 
movement whi le walking,  sitting down, and standing up. T he Keeogo mo nitors hip movement to assist the knee, 
making it simple to learn how to use. If successful, this project will show how this device will help improve the ability to walk and provide evidence to suppor t larger  clinica l trials in a home and commu nity setting  to 
improve mobility, increase muscle mass and strength in the legs , as well as improve general health  and QOL . 
Lastly, this device could be used to increase motivation and confidence i n a person to walk for longer periods of 
time a nd distance, providing the ability to walk in places that were previously inaccessible.  
 
Project Summary : 
Ninety percent of stroke survivors have clinically significant gait impairments that lead to secondary  medical 
compl ications , including cardiovascula r deconditioning and reduced QOL . Several rehabilitative interventions 
that increase the level of activity and mobility  have been shown to be beneficial . Challenges posed by [CONTACT_598527] a rehabilitation center. The r ecent 
development of  novel powered exoskeletons offers a potential mechanism for stroke survivors  to improve 
mobility  in the home and community. Although the  predomin ant resear ch using the se devices have been in 
persons with spi[INVESTIGATOR_1828], there are currently two devices  approved by [CONTACT_598528]. The Keeogo powered orthotic exoskeleton is a novel device 
intended for persons with stroke w ho can ambulat e but have  gait impairment. This device consists of a ridged 
orthotic structure placed over clothing on the legs and batteries  to the  power motors that assist both knees  in gait 
movement . The sys tem monitors  hip movement  driven by [CONTACT_598529] a pply the 
appropriate assistance at the knee joint . This unique approach makes learning intuitive , enabling the user only to 
acclimate to the system  rather than learn ing how to co ntrol the devi ce to  initiate  the desired  moveme nt.  
This proposal is a rando mized controlled  pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Fifteen veterans with chronic stroke (>6months)  
and who retain some ability to  take steps but have impaired gait will be  recruited . Ten participants  will be 
random ized into the exoskeleton group and [ADDRESS_791650]. A secon dary a im will b e to assess 
effects of the devi ce during overground ambulation. Outcome measurements to investigate change s of knee 
range of motion and loading of the paretic limb will be accomplished  using an instr umented goniometer; 
changes in limb loadin g will be monit ored using a foot pressure mappi[INVESTIGATOR_598476]; and steppi[INVESTIGATOR_598477].  An exploratory outcome of changes in energy expenditure during 
ambulation with and without the powered exoskeleton will be assesse d from  a 6-minu te walking  test using a 
portable metab olic cart. Another  exploratory outcome measures of  QOL will be determined using the SF -36 and 
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 2 
MIRB # [ZIP_CODE]  the Stroke Specific Quality of Life Scale.  Additional exploratory out come s to measure body composition, bone 
mineral  density changes will be assessed using Dual X -ray Absorptiometry (DXA) . Additional explor atory 
outcomes  include  measur ing changes in  cortical, corticospi[INVESTIGATOR_598478], spi [INVESTIGATOR_598479] (PNS), and brain activation using electroencephalogram (EE G). 
Baseline t esting  for both groups  will be performed  while ambulating  without t he device and prior to  
starting in the training  program . The exoskeleton group w ill repeat testing within  the first [ADDRESS_791651] of ambulation. Any gains observed during this study may not be 
retained, but as this device has the potential  to be used in the home and community environme nt, justifying a 
prescr iption of this device for retention purposes may be warran ted. Use of this device may also lead to 
improvement of QOL.  
 
2. Specific Aim s  
During ambulation, stroke  survivors reduce loadi ng of the paretic lower extremity (LE) by [CONTACT_598530] (1). Alterations in g ait combined with general decreased 
activity are associated with reduced muscle strength of the paretic LE (4). The combination of LE weakness and 
altered gait can lead to cardiovascu lar decon ditioning and reduc ed QOL . In effort to increase mobility to a 
greater extent than that o f amb ulation with use of typi[INVESTIGATOR_598480], powered exoskeletons are being 
developed to enhance or enable persons with stroke to ambul ate thus promoting the use  of their paretic limb.  
These powered devices use motors that power joint rotation to as sist the steppi[INVESTIGATOR_598481]. 
Learning to ambulat e independently in these devices is difficult and lengthy (5, 6) . A new powered orthotic 
exoskeleton, which powers only the knee joint by [CONTACT_598531] a  
simple and intuitive approach to assist with ambulation. The range of  motion (ROM) of the knee can be 
adjusted to assist with k nee flexion during the swing phase and knee extension during the stance phase  of gait. 
The level of assis tance and intuitive act ivation of this device is hypothesized to promote greater use of the 
paretic limb in persons with stroke.  
The purpose of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_598482] a powered orthotic exoskeleton that  provides 
active assistance to the knee joint in pe rsons with impaired gait due to stroke. This pi[INVESTIGATOR_598483] a ssess the 
changes in use of the paretic LE, energy expenditure of walking with and without the powered orthotic exoskeleton, measure longitudinal changes in QOL , bone d ensity, body compos ition, neuronal  excitability, and 
brain activation . Promoting greater  use of the paretic limb in stroke survivors is expected to improve the energy 
cost of walking and QOL. The results of this work are  anticipated to power future investigations of using 
powered orthotic exoskel etons in the home and communi ty environments to improve ambulatory ability,  
functional capacity, and thus further improve QOL. The potential for associated benefits for improved cardiovascular function  will also be explored in  future studies. 
 
Prim ary Aim:  To determine the change in the ability to squa t (LE p ower) as measured by [CONTACT_598532] (5xSTS), while wearing and not wearing the powered exoskeleton.  
The 5xS TS is u sed to determine leg power and an aspe ct of tran sfer skill. Th is test will be used to assess a level 
of improved func tion wh ile wearing the device. It will also be used to determine if any training effect is 
observed after 3 months (36 sessions) of trainin g when not wearing the device.  
 
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 3 
MIRB # [ZIP_CODE]  Second ary Aim:  To determine th e effica cy of ambulation training using a powered ortho tic 
exoskeleton on knee ROM and loading of the paretic LE while ambulating over ground with and without 
the device for 3 months (36 session s). 
Multiple outcome measures will be  used to de termine the effect of the powered exoskeleton on a person’s gait 
biom echanics and functional competency. An instrumented goniometer will record knee joint angles during 
multiple gait cycles to assess c hanges in knee flexion during the swing phas e. Because the powered orthotic 
exoskeleton provides stability during the stance  phase,  steppi[INVESTIGATOR_598484] c limb  has more equitable and sy mmetric al load .  
 
Secondary Aim : To determine the energ y expenditure  of ambul ation with and without the powered 
orthotic exo skeleton at baseline and 3 months (36 sessions)  post training. 
A portable metabolic cart will assess  oxygen consumption during the t wo ambu lation conditions (i.e., with and 
without the de vice) over a 6-minute period. It is anticipated that the baseline com parison test will not show any 
metabolic changes due to the added weight of the device and negate an y metabolic benefit from the motors 
powering the knee joint movement. Howev er, a traini ng effect o ver the 3 m onths (36 sessions)  compared to 
baseline is ant icipated due to the participant becoming more comfortable with the device, thus using the paretic 
LE more effectively.  
 
Exploratory  Aim: To determine the retained function (squ atting, kn ee ROM, p aretic LE loa ding 
and energy expenditure) [ADDRESS_791652] whil e weari ng the 
device, but are not retained, t hen long t erm use m ay be indicat ed. 
 
Exploratory Aim:  To determine differences in  QOL measurements (SF36 and Stroke Specific 
Quality of Life Scale [SS -QOL]) over 3 months (36 sess ions).  
The mobility portions of the SSQ OL and SF36 will be used to deter mine whether ch anges in  ambulation af fect 
QOL in persons post stroke. 
 
Explor atory A im: To determine changes in bone density and body composition (DXA) over 3 
months.  
DXA scans of the total body, both hips, and both knees w ill be used to determine whether any significa nt 
changes o ccur in bone  density and body composition. 
 
Exploratory A im: To de termine changes in cortical, corticospin al and spi[INVESTIGATOR_598485] 3 
months.  
Motor  respons es evoked by [CONTACT_598533] b rain, spi[INVESTIGATOR_28947] l and PNS  will be measured at baseline and after  3 months 
of training to determine if any significant changes occur i n neurona l excitability.  
 
Exploratory A im: To determine change s in brain acti vity (EEG) over 3 months.  
Brain activity will be measured usi ng EEG at baseline and after 3 months of training to determine if any 
significant changes occur in brain activity.  
2a. Research Plan   
 Background and Significance  
In the Unit ed States, 90 percen t of stroke survivors experience long- term disability associa ted with mobility 
impairments (7). Reduced f unctional use of the paretic leg i s associated with reduced  weight bearing and time 
spent on the paretic limb  during ambulation. Impaired control  of the pare tic limb results  in alterations in gait 
mechanics, includ ing reduced knee flexion angle during swing phase and reduced time and load during stance 
phase of ambulation  (1). Difficulty in perf orming a squatting motion translates into an impaired abil ity to 
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 4 
MIRB # [ADDRESS_791653] overal l 
mobil ity and is  correlated with: cardiov ascular deconditioning, impairment  of balance, inhibition of motor 
control, promotion of mus cle wasting and weak ness on the paretic side. Reduced  mobility ma y compound these  
associated complications in this comprom ised population. Therefor e, developi[INVESTIGATOR_598486] a 
powered ex oskeleton to improve ability to stand up and sit down and nor malize gait may b enefit overall health 
status and QOL (8).  
Repeated trai ning of specific ta sks has been shown to produce func tional benefits in persons with stroke 
(9, 10) . Performing lower extre mity exercis es, including di fferent walking tasks and repeated s it-to-stand tasks, 
has contr ibuted to improved walking speed and endurance (10) . A randomized controlle d trial enrolled 61 
stroke patients into a monitored progr am to perform functi onal exercises, i.e. repeated sit -to-stand te sts, for 14 
days. The results indicate that functional exercises  can improve ove rall mobility in stroke patients (p=0.002) 
(11). Progra ms that improve basic mobility are b elieved to t ranslate into improved standard of living (12) . 
Cardiovascular  health  and metabolic  fitness  significantly  declines  in stroke  patients  and is thought  to be 
attributed  to the decli ne in weight -bearing  mobility.  A meta -analysis  reported that one third  of strok e patients  
have  more  than 50% coronary stenosis  and 3% are at risk for the development  of a myocardial  infarctio n within 
the first year following a stroke  event  (13). Existing interventio ns used to combat cardiovasc ular and metabolic  
decline are activity -based  and include treadmill gait training  and robotic -assistive  gait training (14, 15). To our 
knowledge, specif ic studies  published on the effect  of using overground exoskele tal devices  on cardi ovascular  
health  in stroke  patient s do not exist.  Current  reports  are concentrated  to persons  with spi[INVESTIGATOR_29225] (SCI)  
using a device that fully control s all the moveme nt of the legs (2, 3, 5, 16-19). These studies discuss  the activity  
level  necessary  to potentially  improve  cardiovascular  health  (2, 5). In addition, perso ns with stroke, who 
ambulate  witho ut a device,  require  twice  the energy  cost compared  to able bodied controls  (20). Therefore,  
using a powered  exoskeleton  may allow  for longer  and more  frequent  bouts  of walking resulting  in improved 
cardiovascular  conditioni ng, even  if the device reduces  the energy  cost of walking (21 ). 
Currently, there is a diverse  group  of powered  exoskeletons  available,  either  commercial ly or for 
investigat ional purposes, that support  paretic  individuals,  depending on the extent  of gait/functional  
impairments  (5, 17, 18, 22-25). These device s enable a person with hemiparesis  to ambulate  overground by 
[CONTACT_598534]’s  weight  and triggering sensors to initiate  a step. These devices  have  also been  
hypothesize d to have a therapeutic  effect  because  improved coordination  of muscl e activation  patterns  while  
ambulating  with an exoskeleton has been  observed (26). An advantage of these devices  over treadmill training  
is that there is  potential  for use  at home  and in the community.  
A new and novel  type of robotic -device  (Keeogo,  B-temia, Inc.) was developed to provide  powered  
assistance at the knee for persons  with stroke . This device differs  from  other  Food and Drug  Administra tion 
(FDA)  approved devices  for individuals  with stroke  (e.g. Ekso  (23) and Indego (22)) in that it only assists the 
knee  joint.  This device  provi des assistance  for both knee  extension and knee  flexion during ambulation, 
transfers  to standing and sitting,  in addition to ascending and descending stairs.  It is capable  of provi ding up to 
40Nm  of knee  extension  and 20Nm  of knee  flexion which  is only a portion of the 50-70Nm  of knee extension  
and up to 20 Nm of flexion used during ambulation  (27). As this device isn’t able to fully  control  the 
movement, it requires  the ability of the patient  to stand  and initiate  steppi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. The approach the Keeogo uses to 
monitor  the desired  movement  in order  to appropriately provide  assistance  is different  than other  exoskel etons.  
The Keeogo  rapi[INVESTIGATOR_598487], in real-time,  provides  the partial  assistance needed  at 
the knee  to take each step. This promotes  intuitive  learning  for the user,  minimizing  the amount  of instruction  
and practice  needed  to effec tively  ambulate.  Users  have been  able to independently ambulate  within  one 
session.  Other  powered  exoskeletons  require  multiple  training session s for the user to achieve independe nce. 
This device does not restrict  leg movement, so the user can side-step and walk  backwards. However,  it does not 
provide  assistance during these movements.  
Improved ambulation  is the most  frequently mentioned goal of patie nts interviewed  after stroke  (28). 
The Keeogo powere d exoskeleton could potentially  be used in any environme nt including the home  and 
community  to augment  mobility. It also has the potent ial to provide  rehabilitative  treatment as it requi res intent 
to perform  the movement  and only provides  partial  assistanc e. Showing that device that can assist  with 
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 5 
MIRB # [ZIP_CODE]  ambulation  in addition to other challenging tasks  such as sitting  down, stand ing up, squatt ing and other  daily  
activities  has the potential  to greatly improve  the lives  of peop le with residual  paresis  after strok e. The 
Department  of Veterans  Affairs  Rehabilitation  Research  and Develo pment  (RR&D)  in the Small Projects  in 
Rehabilita tion Research  (SPi[INVESTIGATOR_21392])  request  for application s expressed  particul ar interest  in “exoskeleton resear ch, 
including externally -powered  moto rized  orthoses  for stroke…”. The proposed work  will generate data to 
support  future  proposals  focusing on long term use in the home  and community environment  to increase time 
being mobi le, assist  with activities  of daily living (ADLs),  improve  QOL,  improve  cardiometabolic  health,  
reduce muscle atrophy and offer the potential  of preventing bone  demineralization  of the pareti c limb in persons 
with stroke. 
 
Preliminary Studies  
The principal  investigator (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_598488]) and  the co -investigators ( Drs. Ann Spungen , Stephen Kornfeld and 
John Handrakis ) have extensive experience using pow ered exoskeletons, wit h most of the work having been 
accomplished  in persons with SCI. Our group has publis hed and presented the use  of powered exoskeletons on 
the foot-loading pro files, metabolic demand, ambulation ability and body composition i n persons  with SCI; our 
investi gators are recognized as inter national auth orities in the study of exoskeletal devices . Since early 2011, 
our group has trained approximately 200 individuals w ith SCI to walk using a powered exoskeleton (ReWalk, 
Ekso and Indego). The following work publi shed by [CONTACT_598535]-investigators in SCI 
mirrors the proposed investigation in str oke survivors for this application.  
 Outcome measurements for foot pressures during heel 
strike, mid -stance and to e off and e nergy expenditure duri ng 
ambulation were obtained (2, 3) . Measurements of  foot pressures 
were u sed to determine the loading pr ofile during  different phases 
of gait using the F -Scan s ystem (TekScan, Bosto n, MA, [LOCATION_003]) 
from 6 participants wi th SCI and 3 able -bodied controls (3). The 
SCI subjects used in this analysis participated in th e previously 
mentioned pi[INVESTIGATOR_598489]. The 
able-bodied measurements were obtai ned during their nor mal self -
selected pace, free of any assistance.  Three of t he SCI participa nts 
needed some lev el of assistance and three ambu lated 
indepe ndently in the device. Data from a distance wal ked of 10m 
was analyz ed for each step as a percent o f the gait cycle. Foo t 
pressures were then calculated as a percent of body weig ht and 
averag ed throughout the stance phase. Both SCI groups revealed 
diminish ed force during heel strike, followed by a grad ual increase 
in limb loading throughout the remainde r of the stance phase  
where the peak force occurred at toe- off (Figure 1). This  was 
differen t from the able -bodied group that showed the typi[INVESTIGATOR_598490] e with an initial peak force occurring 
during heal strike, follow ed by a dip in limb loading during mid stance and then a second peak force during toe -
off (Figure 1). Through obs ervation, the  altered gait in both SCI groups was hypothesize d to be related t o crutch 
use, where subjects were able to of fload part of their b ody weight onto the crutches. Duri ng heel strike the 
crutches are on the ground to assist with maintaining balanc e. The toe- off period is when the c rutch shift occurs, 
allowing independent pa rticipants to fully load the limb. Those who need assistance, shi ft their crutches earlier 
during double -stance, thereby  [CONTACT_598536].  
Eight partic ipants partic ipated in oxygen uptake (VO 2) measurement after 40 tr aining sessi ons using a 
powered exoskeleton (ReWalk) (2). Each part icipant was asked to wear a mask attached to  a portable metabolic  
system (Oxycon Mobile; Jaeger, Ge rmany) and a 12- lead electrocardiogram that determined VO 2 and heart rate 
(HR) over one -minu te intervals. These measurements were recorded d uring  three phases: 6 -minutes of sitting, 
6-minutes of standi ng and 6 -minutes of w alking. Data within each phase wer e averaged and analyzed to reveal a 
significant increase (p < 0.001) in VO 2 response (Figure  2) during walking (11.2 ± 1.7 mL/kg/min) compar ed to  
 
 
Figure 1:  Vertical ground reaction force 
indexed: heel strike vertical ground re action 
force (vGRG HS), mid -stanc e vertic al ground 
reaction forc e (vGRG MS) and toe -off vertica l 
ground reacti on fo rce (vGRF TOAB and 
vGRF TOSCI) (3) . 
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 6 
MIRB # [ZIP_CODE]  
 
Figure 2: Box plot of oxy gen uptak e (VO2) is 
displayed for ea ch conditi on (SIT,  STAND and 
WAL K) and estimated maximal (Max) predicted VO 2 
using predicted eq uations  from leg a nd arm crank 
exercises. Significant differ ences (p  < 0.001) were 
found b etwe en WALK compared with SIT and 
STAND (2) . sitting (3. 5 ± 0.4 mL/kg/min) and standing (4.3 ± 0.9 
mL/kg/min). A similar res ponse was observed in HR 
values  (Figure 3) with a si gnificant increase (p < 0.001) 
observed during walking (118 ± 21 beats per  min (bpm)) 
compared to sitting (70 ± 10 bpm)  and standing (81 ± 12 
bpm). Prior to this work, many would hypothesize that 
ambul ating with a device providing tota l assistance of leg 
movement would not result in a significant increase in 
energy expenditur e, but this was not the case. Similar  
results ha ve been shown wit h the Indego (5) and the Ekso 
(29) exoskeletons, which support that routine am bulation, 
at this le vel of VO2 and HR has the potenti al to decrease 
adipos ity and other associated health -related 
consequences of pa ralysis.  This work has not been 
performed using the Keeogo, but as  it requires  active user 
input at the knee joint, the use r should also an ele vated 
VO [ADDRESS_791654] participant  (right  hemiparesis),  used 
15Nm  of flexion and 3Nm  for extension on the right leg and no assistance on the left leg. The second  
participant  (right  hemiparesis),  used 11Nm  of flexion and 8Nm  for extension on the right  leg and 9Nm  of 
flexion and 6Nm  for extension on the left leg. The device is able to provide  up to 40Nm  of knee  extension and 
20Nm  of knee flexio n and it is believed  that this is the 
adequate  assistan ce needed  for those  with stroke.  The 
SPi[INVESTIGATOR_598491],  high- risk 
projects  that lack preliminary  data and “develop/refin e 
new intervention  and delivery  (or in a new setting or for a 
new population)”. The pi[INVESTIGATOR_598492]  (RCTs) . One was funded  by [CONTACT_598537] (SC130234)  as a three- site, outpa tient base study 
to investigate  changes  in mobility skills,  body  
composition, bowel  function and several  other  secondary  
and exploratory outcomes. The other  is funded by [CONTACT_598538]  (CSP  #2003)  and is a 15-site 
RCT  to test safety  and efficacy  for QOL  in a four- month 
home  use trial.   
Based  on the success  of our pi[INVESTIGATOR_598493],  we are proposi ng to perform  a parallel  pi[INVESTIGATOR_598494]&D  SPi[INVESTIGATOR_598495].  The result s of 
this investigation  would support  future  proposals  for investigating  benefits  from  using this exoskeleton in their 
home  and community. Successfully  demonstrat ing improved sit-to-stand and stand-to-sit ability,  along with 
decreasing  the metabo lic cost of walking would support  a hypothesis  of using the Keeogo  in a home  and 
community  environment  to improve  mobility  and ease of performing  routine tasks  leading  to improved QOL.  
These results woul d also support  future  investigations  of home  and comm unity  use that may provide therapeutic 
 
Figure 3: B ox plot of heart rate (HR) is d isplayed for 
each condition  (SIT, ST AND and WA LK) and 
estimated maxi mal (Max ) predicted HR. Signifi cant 
differe nces (p < 0.001) w ere found  betwe en WA LK 
compared with SIT and STAND. BPM = beat s per 
minute ( 2). 
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 7 
MIRB # [ZIP_CODE]  
benefit  leading to increased  use of the paretic limb even  while not wearing  the exoskeleton. With long- term use 
of this device,  potentially  this device cou ld be used to combat  muscle  and bone  loss in the paretic limb.  
 
Research  Design and Methods  
Participants, Eligibility an d Recruitment 
Strategies : Fifteen  persons w ith stable, chronic 
stroke (>6 m onths) will be re cruited through the 
various outpatient clini cs that t reat Veteran s 
with stroke at the James J Peters VA Medical Cent er (JJPVAM C). There were approximately 
402 unique Veterans with chronic stroke who obtained services during 2018 at the JJP VAMC. 
This would pro vide ample potentia l participants to pres creen 50 Veterans, as  outlined in Table 1. It is expected 
that a portion (n~40) wi ll express interest in signing informe d consent, after which further screening wi ll be 
performed. Candidacy will be determined bas ed on the following inclusion and exclusion criteria:  age between  
18 and 89; weight under 250lbs , medi cally stable; and able  to stand and initiate steps on their own with walking 
speed between 0.15 -0.75m/s , but with chronic gait impairmen ts such as reduce d knee flexion and reduced time 
spent on the  paretic limb during stance phase.  A detailed list of the inclusion and exclu sion cri teria are 
presented in the Human S ubject’s section of this application. Becaus e the effects of paralysis fro m stroke are 
belie ved to overpower the e ffects of age, gender  or ethnic ity, these demographic characteristics will not be 
restricted. A  total of 15 participants are expected to enrol l in the trial, however , to account for attr ition, it is 
expected that 12 participants will c omplete the trial with in the 2- year period .  
 
Randomi zation:  Eligible participants will be rando mized into either th e exoskeleton group or control 
group. Block randomization will used with a 2 to 1 ratio to result in 10 participants in t he exoskeleton group a nd 
5 participants i n the control group (30) . This ra tio was chosen becau se future prop osals will be focused on home 
and community use of the device, therefore more  pi[INVESTIGATOR_598496]. 
 
Description  of Training Sessions:  All participa nts will visit the JJPVAMC  for 36 training  sessions,  3 
times  per week  for 3 months  and will follow  the recommen dations  of the American  Heart  Association  (AHA)  
and American  Stroke  Assoc iation  (ASA)  (20). Those  in the exoskele ton group will train using  the Keeogo  
power ed exoskeleton  and those  in the control  group will train without  the exoskeleton using their conventional  
assistiv e devices.  Training  sessions will be progressive, with duration to tolerance for a minimum of [ADDRESS_791655]  of mobility  activi ties affecting  daily life including:  walk ing; 
squatting (or getting  in and out of a chair);  bending, kneeling or stoopi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (for pi[INVESTIGATOR_598497]);  and ascending  and descending stairs.  Sessions  will be monitor ed and tailored  to the individ ual, based  on 
their functional  ability  and to ensure  their safety. Exert ion will be maintained  at a level  between  11-14/20 using 
the Borg scale (31), as per recomm ended  by [CONTACT_598539] (20). All participants  will be allowed  to take as 
many  breaks as needed  during each  session. 
 
 Technical  Description  of the Keeogo™ Powered  Orthotic  
Exoskeleton:  Those randomized  into the powere d exoskeleton group will 
be using the Keeogo™ (B-Temia  Inc., Quebec City, QC, Canada)  (32), 
which is a powered  orthotic  exoskele ton, designed  for users  who have 
difficulty  ambulating  and/or  need  assistance  with movement  of the knee  
(Figure 4). This devic e does not restrict  movement  and only provides  
assist ance at the knee  during extension and flexion during ambulation,  
standing up, sitting  down and when  ascending or descending stairs.  It is 
not intended for use in those  who have  complet e paralysis  of their leg as it 
requires  some active  movement  to assist  with. The Keeogo™ weighs  

Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 8 
MIRB # [ZIP_CODE]  ~15lbs  and consists  of a combination of soft material and rigid  structure  that can be adjusted to the person,  
while  attached  to both  legs. 
 The motors  are attached  on the shaft  just above  the knee  and capable of providing various  levels of 
assistance of knee  extension (up to 40Nm)  and of knee flexion (up to 20Nm)  which  can be adjusted for each leg 
independently. This system  can assist  during ambulation  and during concentric and eccentric phases  of 
funct ional  mobility  activ ities (i.e., sit to stand, stand  to sit, squatting, lunging and stoopi[INVESTIGATOR_007]). The device only 
provides  assistance as the user starts  to actively  perform  a movement  and does not completely  control  
movement.  The user is able to stop the move ment,  even  in the middle  of a gait cycle,  by [CONTACT_598540][INVESTIGATOR_598498]. Ther efore,  intent  to perform  the movement  is require d which  will ensure  they remain  
active even  if the effort  level  is diminished  because of  the assistance  provided by [CONTACT_598541]. 
The sys tem is powe red by a lit hium -ion battery that can  be clipped on the  waist b elt, making it  portable 
and usable in the home a nd community. The assistance applied to each leg can be adjusted separately  and in two 
ways.  Gross adjustments can  be changed by [CONTACT_941] u ser at any time using the integrated control unit. The level of 
assistance is indicated by a colored light emitting diode. Fine tuning the assistance level is accomp lished by [CONTACT_598542] a tablet interface with configuration softw are.  
This device s eparates it self from th e other powered exoskele ton devices (e.g., 
Indego, Ekso) because it only provides assistance to the  knee joint and requires the 
user to have s ome ability to ambulate indepe ndent of the device . Therefore, the user 
must be able to initiate the active movemen t, which will then be enhanced by 
[CONTACT_598543] t he Keeogo. The  system assists the knee to enhance user -initiated 
movements by [CONTACT_598544] k nee and 
hip joints to assist in all phases  of the gai t cycle, i.e . knee flexion and extension in 
swing phase, knee extension (both eccentric control and concentric assist) in stance 
phase. In addition to gai t, the device assists during other functional low er extremity 
activitie s, i.e. squatting motions, knee ling, walking, stair climbing and  stand -sit/sit-
stand transfers . Keeogo™ has two essential functions: (1) to pr ovide kinematic 
amplification during the sw ing phase of gait and (2) to provide stability fo r the stance 
phase of gait through knee br acing coupl ed with non- linear spring- like as sistance. 
Keeogo™ is designed to operate int uitively through automatic sensing and 
augmenting the user’s natural walking movement. The eccentric contro l assists 
during the g ait cycle at initia l contact (loading r esponse), s quat (Figure  5), kneel, 
stand to sit and stairs. Th e eccentric control applie s the torque gradually, thus stabi lizing the knee and 
preventing buckling.  
 
Figure 5:   Squatting  in 
the Keeogo  
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 9 
MIRB # [ZIP_CODE]   Outcome  Measurements  
and Testing  sessions:  The 
timeline  for conducting testing  
sessions is outlined in Table  2. 
Screening  participants  and 
obtaining their medical  history  
and demographics  will be 
obtained once,  prior to 
initiating  training. Baseline 
assessments that do not involve  
the exoskeleton will be 
obtained prior  to training  in 
both groups. Baseline 
assessments, which  involve  the 
exoskeleton (for the 
exoskel eton group  only)  will be 
obtained during the first three 
sessions after the participant  
has been  correctly  fitted  and 
acclimated  to the exoske leton. 
Testing  will be repeated  after 
training session  36 (3 months)  
without  the exoske leton  for 
both groups and repeated  with 
the exoskeleton for the 
exoskeleton group. All 
participants  (control  and 
experim ental)  will be asked  to 
return 1-month post cessation 
of training  for a follow -up visit 
where all the outcome  
measu res will be repeated  
without  the exoske leton  for 
both groups  (Tab le 2) to assess 
retention  of func tional  gains. 
The 5xSTS test will be used t o address the primary aim of  improving participa nts’ squatting ability  (LE 
Strength) (33). This test is  performed using a s tandard free -standing chair with a straigh t back, sol id seat and a 
seat height of 17 inches. Participan ts will be instructed with t he following statement “By [CONTACT_598545] 3, please 
stand up and sit down as quickly as possible for [ADDRESS_791656] the chair's backrest at the end of  every repetiti on.” The time 
to complete the test will be recorded and will start once the pe rson back leaves the back re st and stops once the  
back touches the back rest for the 5th time. 
Assessment of gait  changes will be pe rformed using the GaitRite Carp et (CIR Systems  Inc), the F -scan 
foot pressure system (Tekscan)  and the instrumente d goniometer ( bendlabs ). These measurement s will be 
performed w ith and without the device. The GaitRite measur ement  will be obtain ed by [CONTACT_598546] a carpet equipped with sensors, whi ch provide information regar ding cadence, step l ength and time 
spent on each foot. The F -Scan foot pr essure sys tem requires the p articipant to walk with a dis posab le insole, 
whic h is cut to fit inside their shoe.  The disposable insole contains an array of sensors, which provide a 
continuous pressure prof ile of each foot duri ng ambulation. This system will measure t he percentage of t otal 
body weight loaded during the  different segm ents of the stance phase (heel -strike, stance and toe -off) as well as 

Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 10 
MIRB # [ZIP_CODE]  
during t he entire gait cycle for each lower extremity. A n electronic goniomete r will be strapped t o each lower 
extremity for independent and simultaneous measurement and r ecording of kne e ROM.  
Testing sessions to assess energy expenditure will be performed. Parti cipants will be asked to wear a 
face mask attach ed to a portable metab olic cart (Oxycon Mobile, Vyair e Medical Inc.). Measurement s of 
oxygen uptake (VO 2), hea rt ra te (HR) and res pi[INVESTIGATOR_697] (RR) will be assessed and recorded. These 
measurements will be a cquired during 6 minutes of quiet sitting (rest)  followed by [CONTACT_598547] a comfortable, 
self-select ed pace fo r 6 minutes.  
The Fugl-Meyer Assessment Lower E xtrem ity (FMA -LE) wi ll be used as a general score of l ower 
extremity motor and sensory function/post -stroke recovery (34). General changes i n QOL will be assessed using  
the SF36 (35)  and SSQOL  scales ( 36). 
A Dual X- Ray Absorptiometry (DXA) wi ll be used to determ ine changes in body co mposition and bone 
density. A scan of the to tal body will be used to view changes in bone mine ral content  (BMC) , lean mass,  and 
fat mass.  Scans of both hips , and both knees  will be used to compare bone mineral dens ity (BMD) .  
 Motor responses  will be measured using surface el ectrodes placed on the participants skin over key 
muscles  to deter mine ch anges in co rtical, corticospi[INVESTIGATOR_598499] . These responses will be brought  
about using ei ther transcranial magnetic st imulation  (TMS), t ranscutaneous spi[INVESTIGATOR_598500]  (TSCS)  or 
PNS. TMS uses electro magnetic pulses , while TSCS and PNS use a series of electrical pulses . Whether it is 
stimulation over the brain, spi[INVESTIGATOR_598501], stimulation  causes  the targeted  muscles t o twitch. These 
twitches  are then reco rded and compared.  
 EEG will be used to me asure  changes in  brain activation. A [ADDRESS_791657]  brain activity  during a resting state .  
 
Description of  Data and Statistical Analyses  
The loading profil e obtained from  the F-Scan  foot pressure  system will be normalized  over the gait cycle  as 
percentage of gait cycle and percentage of body weight for each foot. The total area under  the curve will be 
calculat ed to obtain a total load on each lower  extremity . Peak  measurements  from  heel strike  and toe-off will 
be calculated  from  the curve  along with mid stance where load is typi[INVESTIGATOR_598502]. Maximum  knee  flexion  
angles from  10 continuous  steps  will be  averag ed for ea ch limb.   
Metabolic measurements (VO 2, HR and RR) will be recorded as averages every  minute. Energy cost of 
distance travelled wil l be calcul ated by [CONTACT_598548] 2 normalized to body weight (ml/kg/min) by [CONTACT_3433] e distance 
traveled (ml/kg/m). The [ADDRESS_791658] the between -group  
differences in outcome s. All outcome  meas urements  will be analyzed  using a mixed  model  ANOVA  to 
determine  significan t main  and interaction  effects  of group 
(control, experimental)  and time (baseline,  session  36, 1-
month follow -up). A similar  mixed  model  ANOVA  will be 
used to determine  signifi cant main  and interaction  effects  of 
the two conditions  (without  [w/o] and with [W] Keeogo  
exoskeleton)  in the experim ental  group for the 3 time points  
(baseline,  session  36, 1-month follow -up). Post hoc analys es 
of signi fican t data will be  performed  using t -tests. 
 
Potential Difficu lties and Limitations  
The greatest  hurdle  in conduc ting investigations  with devices  
is recruiting  participants  and completing  the training as well 
as obtaining regulatory  approval  to conduct  the study. 
Feasibility to enroll  and complete  the 15 participants  is 
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 11 
MIRB # [ZIP_CODE]  presented  in Table 3. We are anticipa ting enrol ling 3-5 participants  each quarter.  Allocating  2 hours  per 
participant  for training  session s (time  for set up, breakdown and 1 hour of ambula tion training  each day), would 
allow for 3 training  sessions  daily. This will provide  15 training  session  time slots per week  and allow  for up to 
5 partic ipants  at one time.  Assuming 4 participants  train simultaneously and require 4 months  each to complete  
the training  (3-mont hs training  + 1-month follow -up), all [ADDRESS_791659] communication  with the 
FDA  stating that the Keeogo devic e is a ‘not a signific ant risk’ (NSR)  device (i.e., it does not have  potential  for 
serious  risk to health, safety,  or welfare  of a subject ). Therefo re, the typi[INVESTIGATOR_598503] (IDE) is already  completed  for research  investigation  with this devic e. 
Another  typi[INVESTIGATOR_598504] s is frequent  travel  to the VA for 1-hour sessions,  
several  times  per week , and for ~4 months. The recruitment  effort  and participant  retenti on are outlined (Table 
1). It is anticip ated that about 30% of particip ants may not be interested  or decide not to finish  the study. Our 
previous  experience with studies  using powered  exoskeletons  is that retention  is not usually an issue.  To defray  
the cost of travel  and compe nsate participants  for their  addit ional  effort,  a stipend will be  paid to the participants  
for each  session.  The testing  sessions do not  pose  any serious  hazard  to participants  or personnel.  
 
 
04. Human Subjects  
 A. Risks to Su bjects  
 Human Subjects Invol vement and Charact eristics.  
This study will recr uit 15 people w ith chronic and stable stroke  (>6 months) who are interested in ambula tion 
training using a powered exoskeleton. This s tudy wil l be conducted at the James J. Peters  VA Medical Center 
(JJPVAMC)  therefore recruit ment training and testing in th is pro ject will require participants to trav el to this 
medical center in the Bronx, N Y. The fol lowing criteria will be  employed for pa rticipation:  
 Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Males and f emales  between 18 and 89 yea rs old;  
2. Hemiplegia or hemipare sis due to stroke (> 6 months);  
3. Able  to walk between 0.15- 0.75m/ s 
4. Self-reported limitations to mobility an d walking activities due to paret ic side knee st iffnes s and loss of 
range of motion;  
5. Weight under 250lbs  
6. Desire to increas e daily activity levels; and  
7. Able and willing to c ommit to participation and follow directions and communicate basic needs.  
Exclusion c riteria:  
1. Neurological paralysis causing an inability to stand, weight bear or take  steppi[INVESTIGATOR_007] m ovements;  
2. Fixed contracture s resulting in limited range o f mot ion in the hip, knees, or ankl es that prevent sitting, 
standing, walking, and/or squatting activitie s; 
3. Modifi ed Ashworth Scale for spasticity greate r than  3 in the lower limbs  
4. Able to  walk at a normal walking speed (1.4 m /s, 3.2 mph) or bet ter during the 6 MWT;  
5. Anthropome tric incompatib ility with the device  
a. Femur length less than 36 cm or greater than 45 cm; 
b. Upper  thigh circumference les s than 55 cm or  great er than 75 cm;  
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 12 
MIRB # [ZIP_CODE]  c. Lower thigh ci rcumference less than 27 cm or greater  than 40 cm;  
d. Calf circumference les s than 33 cm or  greater than 4 9 cm ; 
e. Ankle circumference less than 27 cm or greater than 40 cm;  
f. Shin l ength le ss than 26 cm;  
g. Waist cir cumference less  than 71 cm or greater than 107 cm;  
6. Any medica l complication or co -morbidi ty as judged by [CONTACT_598549] n to be contrai ndicated for 
wearing the device or walking (e.g., cardiovascular disorders, pressure ulcers, o pen wounds, lower 
limb v ascular disorde rs, or  other medical conditions) ; and 
7. Pregnant  or planning to become pregnant (Female participants ). 
 
A subset of participants will have MEP  recordings using as a res ult of PNS , TSCS  and TMS . The inclusion 
criteria is the same as previously de scribed. T he following is the additi onal exclusion criteria.  
Exclus ion criteria : 
1. Histo ry of seizures, brai n tumor, brain surgery, or brain abscess;  
2. Use of medications that signifi cantly lower seizure threshold, such as amphetamines, neuroleptics, 
dalfampridine, and bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_2394];  
3. History of moderate or severe head trauma (loss of consciousness for greater than one  hour or evidence 
of brain contusion, hemorr hage or depressed skull fract ure on prior imaging); Recent (within the last 5 
years) brain injury with definite loss  of consciousness;  
4. History of implanted brain/spi[INVESTIGATOR_050]/nerve stimulators, aneur ysm clips, ferromagn etic metallic implants, or 
cardiac pacemaker /defibrillator; 
5. Significant c oronary artery or cardiac conduction disease;  
6. History of bipolar disorder; Active psychosis;  
7. History of suicide attempt; 
8. History of migraines or reoccurring headac hes; 
9. Heavy alcohol c onsumption (greater than equivalent of 5 oz of liquor) within previous 48 hours;  
10. Open skin lesions over the face, back, legs, or feet;  
11. Unsuitable for study parti cipation as determined by [CONTACT_115158].  
 In this study, special class es of part icipants  such as pregnant women, prisoners, insti tutionalized in dividuals, or 
other populations t hat may be considered vulnerable  will be excluded from this st udy except  for economically 
and educationally disadvantaged persons . The re are Veterans  and milita ry m embe rs who are economically, 
educationally or socially disa dvantaged i ndividuals and the y will be given the opportunity to participate in this 
research pr oject. We will not try to identify those who ar e economically and educat ionally disadva ntaged as t he 
detai ls of this study would not influence the ir decision to participate . These disadvanta ged persons wil l be given 
the same t reatment as individuals who ar e not cons idered to be vulnerable.  
 Recr uitme nt Methods  
Recruitme nt fo r this st udy wi ll comply w ith the standards of VHA Handbook 1200.05 and is planned to be 
performed i n the following ways:  
• Referrals  from primary care physicians.  
• The investi gators have applied for a waiver of HIPAA in order to obta in contact [CONTACT_35827] (name, 
mailing ad dress and p hone  number) to mail ou t study information  and follow up on the m ailing . This is 
request ed be cause th e inve stigators would not be able to achieve the recruitment rate n eeded for this 
study through other re cruitment methods. P articipants will be i dentified using ICD-[ADDRESS_791660] of participants is obtained, r ecruitment letter s/ pamphlets  will be maile d. Obtaining 
this lis t poses no m ore tha n minimal risk to participants  and it will be destroye d upon completion of 
recruitment for this study in order to re duce risk to pa rticipants.  
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 13 
MIRB # [ZIP_CODE]  • Potential participants that have contact[CONTACT_119174] p reviously will b e contact[CONTACT_192086].  
• Phone calls w ill be made to potential participants after initial contact h as been made in person or by 
[CONTACT_478306] a recruitment letter . 
 
 Sources of Mater ials.  
This research study will not have overlap with the participants clin ical procedures  or other rese arch studies , 
therefore no existing specimens, records or data w ill be used . For the purposes of t his investigat ion, all 
information  and materials obtai ned from th e participant will be used solely for research purposes. No blood or 
urine specimens will be collected on the participants.  
The recor ds that contain PH I that is o btain ed through the waiver of HIPAA will b e stored in electronic 
format on the VA Network prot ected by [CONTACT_598550][INVESTIGATOR_193238] t he JJP VAMC in ro om 7A -[ADDRESS_791661] ete 
these records  will be des troyed. 
Other study related material will be s tored in locked cabinet s in locked rooms at the  JJP VAMC in room  
7A-13. Electronic files will be stored on the VA network protected by [CONTACT_49534]. T hese recor ds w ill be 
maintained according to the re quirements for maintainin g Federal records acco rding to the VHA Records 
Control Schedul e (RCS) [ADDRESS_791662] contains potential risks/and o r discomfort relate d to st udy procedures:  
 
The risk of fall ing: This could be caused by [CONTACT_598551][INVESTIGATOR_598505]. The risk of falling will be minimized by  [CONTACT_598552] t the particip ant train ing sessions with assistance as ne eded and 
participa nts will be allowed to use their usua l assistive device (cane,  walker  or other ), if needed, w hen they 
ambulate with and without the Keeogo. The risk of fall ing is  minimized by [CONTACT_598553] s troke 
who cannot stand and ambulat e. 
 Discomfort, skin  pressure/fri ction, bruising, pain, or unusual swelling caus ed by [CONTACT_598554] s the 
potential to lead to skin breakdown or  abrasions. This ris k will be min imized by a thorough skin check 
performed by [CONTACT_598555]. Adjustments to the device fit and 
additional pa dding will be assessed to decr ease the risk of skin breakdown as well.  
 Blood pressure instability during use of the  devic e related to physic al activity during testing and tra ining 
procedures  may occur . This risk will be reduced w ith frequent subjective a ssessment of participan t’s symptom s 
as well as assessment of blood pressur e and heart rate pri or to t rainin g, as necess ary during tra ining and 
following training. Activity will be stopped in the  event of insta bility of vital signs and as recognized by 
[CONTACT_598556]. Medical clearance will be required prior to an y study related acti vities . 
 The device its elf could malfunction. The device has built -in mechanical s tops to limit the de vices ability  to 
move through abnor mal ranges of motion. In addition, the activities  that will be performed with the device will 
be pe rformed by [CONTACT_23872] r esearch  perso nnel to mo nitor device fun ction dur ing use. Participants that use the  
device in the hom e environment w ill have had many hour s of prior training to us e the system and will be train ed 
to handle any device malfunction.  
 
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 14 
MIRB # [ADDRESS_791663] 
x-ray which has an approximate dose of 60 μSv.  In addition, the average person in [LOCATION_001] City receives 
approximately 3000 μSv/year. Therefore , you would have to have all these tests done [ADDRESS_791664] un known effects on an unborn child. For female born participants, the study should not 
be performed during pregnancy (a pregnancy test may be requested). You also agree to avoid becoming pregnant during the study.  There always exists  the potential for loss of private information;  there are procedures in place to minimize this 
risk.   There may also be potential risks that are unknown.  Additional risks  related to the additional pi[INVESTIGATOR_598506], spi[INVESTIGATOR_598507] : 
 TMS carries  several potential risk s. Most of these risks are much greater during application of repetitive TMS, 
or rTMS (defined as pulses given at a frequency of 1 per second or more frequently), whic h will not be 
conducted in this study. There is a small risk of se izure or “convulsive syncope” (fainting with seizure -like 
movements). 
• Before you begin participation in the Study, we will screen you for seizure risk, such as history of prior 
brain injur y, or taking cert ain medications that raise the risk of seizure. I f your seizure risk is too high, you 
will not be able to participate in the Study. • Furthermore, the applied stimulus intensity will be kept below 200% of the motor threshold for each muscl e. This intensity  and pulse frequency fall far within the recommen ded safe guidelines del ineated by 
[CONTACT_598557].  
 All procedures take place within the JJPVAMC, where there is access to all forms of life- support equipment, 
medications, and medical personnel . In the unlikely event of a seizure during this study, you should be aware of 
the implic ations a seizure could have on your future employment, insurance and eligibility to drive. Since such 
an event would be considered a response to the procedure and not an underlying dise ase, a letter documenting 
that this event does not indicate any underlying disease that could affect your employability, driver’s license, or health/life insurability will be provided. If there are any symptoms of dizziness or lightheadedness, which could potentially be warning signs of convulsive syncope, we will halt the pr ocedure immediately, investigate and 
take steps to end the symptoms. If you feel as though you will pass out. We will lie you down and elevate your legs. Those with pr evious history of syncope will be assessed for eligibility.  
 Ther e is a possible but unl ikely risk of TMS triggering psychotic or manic symptoms in participants with 
bipolar depression. This is a very small risk – it is not clearly above the natural rate for these types of symptoms 
to occur in participants with depressi on. You will not be abl e to participate in the study if you have a history of 
bipolar disease, active psychotic symptoms, or history of suicide attempt.  
 TMS pulses generate loud auditory cl icks. Risk of hearing changes due to the ‘click’ of the stimulator  will be 
minimized by u sing earplugs during the experiment. Individuals who complain of hearing loss, ringing in the 
ears (tinnitus), or ear pressure following completion of TMS will be refe rred to the appropri ate medical care. 
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 15 
MIRB # [ZIP_CODE]  While individuals with cochl ear implants will be ex cluded, pre -existing hearing issues will be assessed for 
eligibility.  
 
Other risks including headache (which may include migraine), local pain, neck pain, toothache, a nd facial 
numbness/ti ngling are possible with magnetic stimulation . These symptoms are much less common using single 
or double -pulse TMS than rTMS. TMS may cause scalp tingling sensations, pain and toothache that is almost 
always mild and transient. Neck pain is usually relate d to the maintaining stationary head posture during the 
session. The se symptoms will be minimized with adequate rest breaks, and acetaminophen (Tylenol) if 
necessary. Although not known to occur during the type of TMS used in this prot ocol, we will also mo nitor for 
other potential complications such as uncomfortable visual  changes. Any complication will result in immediate 
cessation of the protocol.  The electro -magnetic field generated by [CONTACT_598558][INVESTIGATOR_598508], deep brain stimulators, vagal ner ve stimulators, cardiac  pacemakers, cochlear implants, or 
aneurysm clips. For safety, anyone with such implants will be excluded. Furthermore, jewelry, glasses, and other potentially conduct ing or magnetic object s worn on the head will be removed during TM S experiments. It 
is wo rth noting that chronic exposure to electro -magnetic fields appears safe at levels even greater than those 
possible with TMS.  
 The research team has delivered TMS extensively in prior and ongoing IRB -approved clinical studies. A 
standardized form to assess  TMS side effects is used at the end of each TMS session. Single and double -pulse 
TMS, as well as other precautions and exclusion criteria that we will follow, far exc eed guidelines establis hed 
by [CONTACT_598557].  Electrical pulses may be transiently irritating or uncomfortable. Stimulation will be reduced or halted, if a subject is too uncomfortable.  
 There is a possible but unlikely risk that magnetic or electrical stimulation could cause a hea rt rhythm problem. 
However, the stimulation procedure used in this study will not cause current to cross over the heart muscle. Nevertheless, to provide further caution against cardiac damage or rhythm problems, participants who ha ve 
significant coronary a rtery disease, cardiac conduction disease, or implanted pacemake r/defibrillators will be 
excluded. To provide further caution, the procedure will be conducted with continuous vital sign monitoring. Any significant change in blood pressure or oxygen level, associated with symptoms such as sudden s hortness 
of breath, che st pain, or sudden sweating, will lead to immediately cessation, further medical evaluation and 
treatment.  
  B. Adequacy of Protection from R isk  
 Recruitment and Informed C onsent.  
 Potential participants  with a his tory of chronic  or stable stroke (>6 mo nths) will be re cruited in accordance wit h 
Health Information Portability a nd Accountability Act (HIPAA) from the M edical Service at the James  J. Pe ters 
VA Medi cal Cent er, Br onx, NY, thru IRB approved advertisements, from those who conta ct the study staff 
from the Clinica lTrials.gov website, and a clinical referral from physician s at this institution that treat persons  
with chronic or stable st roke. Upon initial  contact [CONTACT_4490] a potenti al participant , the PI (or designe e) will ask the 
individual  what t hey k now or have been told about the study prio r to their arrival.  After the  potential subject 
reciprocates, the PI (or designee) will give a brie f detai led non -scientific exp lanation of t he research study 
purposes and obj ectives as well as  an overview of  the study requirement s. Upon completion of this explanation, 
the PI (or des ignee) will ask the potential subject if the y are still interested in partici pating. If t he potentia l 
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 16 
MIRB # [ADDRESS_791665] is  agreeable, a meeting time will be  arranged to further  explain the stu dy, answer question s or address 
concerns pri or to signing the consent form s. During this meeting, the PI (or designee)  will read, verbatim, the 
consent  form to the  potential subject. Aft er the consent form has been read, the PI (or design ee) will ask if  the 
potential subject  has any questions, and t o reiterate details of the pro tocol to insure they fully understand the 
commitments and is aware of t heir r ight to with draw at any  time withou t future prejudice. If there are no further 
questions , the consent  form will be signed b y the subject and the inv estigator. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_598509] d an d 
completed consent form will be entered  in the electronic medical  record  system and a copy given to the subject. 
Every effort will be made, w ithin the constrai nts of the enrollment criteria, to en roll women and persons of  
diverse ethnicities in the pr opos ed research investigations.  
 
Protection  Against Risk.  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_17027] l oversee the conduct of data col lection and will review all aspects of the data’s quality dur ing and 
immedia tely after data collection on a per subject bas is. Efforts to minimize the p reviously described potential 
risks will be done by [CONTACT_2329] a “Clinician  Fitting Checklist”  that will be  provided to all study staff to ensure 
prope r device fitting a nd training of s taff to use the devic e properly. The checklist  verifies placement of the 
device and that the appropriate device settings  are being used.  Completion of the fitting c hecklist will be 
performed prior to each training session; fit will be re -verified prior t o performance of outcome assessments. In 
additi on, the study physician will be av ailable to field any questions that the participants  may  have regar ding the 
study device, its effects, or their experiences. In the event of unexpected or expe cted adverse event, a report to 
the IRB will be completed in a ccordance with local policy. D uring the annual continuing review, the frequency 
and type of adverse events  from the pre ceding year (and study duration) are reviewed. Under spec ial 
circumstances,  the IRB may r equest that the consent  form be modified to refl ect new potential risks or sid e 
effects. During our acute study, no partic ipants  exhibited or expres sed an y sign or sym ptom of an una nticipated 
side effect.  
 All research proto cols, informed conse nt forms, and case report forms are subject to random and/or  planned 
annual audit and cont inuing review by [CONTACT_598559], which  are 
accredited by [CONTACT_598560] n for the Accreditation of Human Research P rotection Programs , Inc. The min imum 
number of procedur es is being performed to effectively address the resear ch objectives  
 Study participation can be te rminated at any point duri ng the  investigatio n at the reques t of the participant or the 
PI. To minimiz e a breach against  privacy after  the time of consent, e ach subject will be assig ned a code (unique 
subject ide ntification number). Any data collected (digital and paper) pertaining  to the study will be referenced 
and stored under this code. Digital data w ill be stored in a  passwo rd-prote cted database on the V A network 
protected by [CONTACT_49534]. This firewall a nd encrypted network is protected by [CONTACT_598561] s oftware 
that is updated daily to prevent loss or compromise of data with malware. No r aw or processed da ta are 
mainta ined on individual computers, or hard drives that  may be lost or stolen. Every  VA facility stores user’s 
data on a local d ata center netwo rk that is  backe d up daily . Paper data will  be stored in a locked file cabinet of 
the respective institu tions. S tudy documents signed by [CONTACT_598562] r. A single digital key containing the name, contact [CONTACT_82753], and study coded number for all 
participants enrolled will exist for study a dministration and mo nitorin g purposes only and be kept in a separate 
password pr otected database on the VA net work  behind the firewall. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_598510] y individuals  to have acces s to the password.  
 In the event of an une xpected adverse ev ent during a study visit, appropriate  medical intervention and care will 
immediately be soug ht in accordance with VA policies. A further  explanation of adverse ev ent re porting is 
provided in the subse quent section.  
 This research does not involve pregnant  women, human f etuses and neonates, prisoners, children or individuals 
with diminished menta l capacity. The possibility exists that economically or soci ally disad vantag ed individual s 
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 17 
MIRB # [ZIP_CODE]  will participate in this study. The economic or social circumstances of an eligible  participant are not relevant to 
our investigation. However, we appreciate that a prop ortion of enrollees may satisfy the crit eria. We will no t ask 
an individual to disclo se this inform ation , but offer the explanation that economically or socially disadvan taged  
individuals will be g iven the same treatment as individuals who are not cons idered to be vulnerable. For all 
participan ts, (a) the stud y will be e xplai ned in its en tirety, (b) th e term s of the consent form will be explained 
prior to obtainin g the individual’s signature, and ( c) individuals will be gi ven the opportunity to ask que stions 
prior to signing the consent form.  
 C. Potential ben efits of r esearch to subjects  and others.  
 It is possible that enrolled participants  may derive no dire ct benefi t as part of their participa tion in this study. 
Howev er, some of the participants m ay experience improvement in their gait and tolerance of overground 
ambulation. Abnorma l clinical fin dings fr om the study will be shared with individual participa nts so they c an 
follow up with their primary care physician. Some participants  may derive perso nal satisfaction knowing that 
their involvement in the p roposed st udy ma y contribute to science and  clinical  care, subsequently helpi[INVESTIGATOR_598511].  
 The anticipated o r potential derived benefits outweigh the percei ved and/or known risks of the study 
procedures. The associated risks for the study are considered g reater  than minimal risk however, they pose  no 
known major long- term health risks. The informa tion derived fr om this study may show  benefits to improved 
gait that may lead to improvements in  body composition and associated improve ments in quality  of life.  
 D. Importance of knowledge to b e gained.  
 Ensuring safety is a high prior ity, therefore, t he following Dat a and Safety Monitoring Plan will be 
implemente d. A dverse events and device m alfunctions  will be monitored  on a session t o session basis.  All 
adver se events for all s tudy participa nts including those that are anticipated or  unanticipated wil l be recorded 
and submitted to the IR B in a timely and complete fashion. This safety informa tion assists study management in 
identifying any untoward me dical occu rrence, thereby [CONTACT_598563]: a) prot ection and safety of study participants, 
b) a greater underst anding of the overall safety profile of the study treatments a nd therapeutic modalities, c) 
impr ovements in study design or procedures, and d) complianc e with reg ulator y requirement s. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_598512] o f all reported events, compliance wit h VA policies 
for reporti ng adverse events (AE), serious ad verse events (SAE), Unanticipated Advers e Device Effects  
(UADE), a nd clo sely monitori ng research participants  at each study visit for any new SAEs. Any serious 
adverse event m ay lead to the change in study procedures to avoid any future occurrence of s imilar type of 
events. If any findings that may affect the participant s’ health or welfar e, their prima ry care ph ysician (PCP) 
will be notified of  these findings . 
 The goals of th is study have been out lined in the r esearch plan. Weekly staff meetings will be  scheduled to 
ensure study timeline and sa fety goals are met  such as : IRB approval, dat abase management and par ticipant 
recruitment goals, parti cipant compliance,  adverse events , scheduling, etc. I n the event ther e are some 
participants that are not reliable and are inconsistent with study appoint ments, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_598513] a nd they will be replaced.  
 The i nclusion of women, m inorities and /or children.  
Every e ffort will be  made, withi n the constructs of the inclus ion and exclusion criteria, to identify and enroll 
women and p ersons of  minority background in the proposed research investigation. Women, although 
comprising 50.7%  of the total p opulation in the Unite d States, rep resent only 10% of V eterans. Under these 
circumstances, we do not anticipate an equal proportion of wome n to enr oll in this investigation and rea listically  
expect a similar proportion of  women to participat e in the projec t. The racial and ethnic background of the 
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 18 
MIRB # [ZIP_CODE]  participants located in the Bronx, NY are predominantly Caucasian, African  Ame rican and Hispanic  and the  
equality of the de mographics may be skewed  to those ethnicities. This study will not include ch ildren and the 
minimum age f or part icipation is 18 years.  
 
Appendix  – List of Abbreviations 
 
5xSTS  Five Times Sit to Stand Test  
ADL  Activities of daily  living  
AHA  American Hear t Association  
ASA  American Stroke Association  
bpm Beats p er minute   
CDMRP  Congre ssionally D irected Medical Research Program  
CSP Cooperat ive Studies Program  
DOD  Depar tmen t of Defense  
DXA  Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry  
EEG  Electroencephalogram  
FDA  Food and Drug Administration  
HR Heart rate  
IDE Investigational Device Exemption  
JJPV AMC James J Peters V A Medical Ce nter  
kg Kilogram  
m Meter  
min Minute  
ml Milliliter  
LE Lower extremity  
NCS Neurol ogical Clinical Specialist  
Nm Newton meter  
NSR  Not a Significa nt Risk  
PNS Peripheral Nerve Stimulatio n 
QOL  Quality of Lif e 
RCTs  Randomi zed clinical trials   
ROM  Range of motion  
RR Respi[INVESTIGATOR_598514]&D  Rehabilitation research and Devel opment  
SPi[INVESTIGATOR_598515]-QOL  Stroke Specific Qualit y of L ife Scal e 
TSCS Transcu taneous Spi[INVESTIGATOR_598516] M agnetic Stimulation  
VO2  Oxygen uptake   
W With  
w/o Without  
 
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 19 
MIRB # [ZIP_CODE]  Bibliography and Ref erences Cited  
1. Raja B, Neptune RR, Kautz SA. Quantifiable patterns of l imb loading and unloading dur ing hemiparetic 
gait: relation to k inetic  and kinematic parameters. J R ehabil Res Dev. 2012;49(9):1293. 
2. Asselin P, Knezevic S, Kornfeld S, Cirn igliaro C, Agranova -Breyter  I, Ba uman WA, Spungen AM. 
Heart rate and oxygen dema nd of  powered exoskeleton- assisted walking in persons with parapl egia. JRRD. 
2015;52(2):147- 58. 
3. Fineberg DB, Asselin  P, Harel NY, Agranova -Breyter I, Kornfeld SD , Bauman WA,  Spungen AM. 
Verti cal ground reaction force -based analysis of powered exoskeleto n-assisted walking in persons with motor -
complete paraplegia. Jou rnal o f Spi[INVESTIGATOR_482676]. 2013;36(4):313- 21. 
4. Gresham GE, Fitz patrick TE, Wolf PA, McNamara P M, Kannel WB , Dawber TR. Resid ual disab ility in 
survivors of stroke —the Framingham study. Ne w England journal of medicine. 1975;293(19):954- 6. 
5. Evans N, Ha rtigan  C, Kandilakis C, Pha ro E, Cle sson I. Acute Cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_598517]- Assisted Walking O verground Among Persons with Chronic Spi[INVESTIGATOR_478320]. Topic s in Spi[INVESTIGATOR_598518]. 2015;21(2):122- 32. 
6. Kolakowsky- Hayner SA, Crew J, Moran S, S hah A. Safety and feasibility o f using the EksoTM bionic 
exoskeleton to ai d ambulation after  spi[INVESTIGATOR_1304] c ord in jury. J Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. 2013;S4.  
7. Stroke Statistics [W eb Pa ge]. Dallas: National Ins titute of Neurological Disorders an d Stro ke; 2019 
[cited 2019 Jan. 29 2019]. Available fr om: http://www.strokecenter.org/patients/about -strok e/stroke-statistics/ . 
8. Kemu MA. Kinetics and kinematics of loa ding r esponse in stroke pat ients (a r eview article). A nnals of 
King Edward Medical University. 2008;14(4):143- . 
9. French B, Thom as L, Lea thley M, Sutton C, McAdam J, Forster A, Langhorne P, P rice C, Walker A, 
Watkins C. Does repetitive task training impro ve functional activity afte r stroke?  A Cochrane system atic review 
and meta -analysis. Journal of reh abilitation medicine. 2010;42( 1):9-15. 
10. Dean CM, Richards CL, Malouin F. Task- related cir cuit training improves perf ormance of locomotor 
tasks in chronic stroke : a randomized, contr olled pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251]. Arch Phy s Med Rehabil.  2000;81(4):409- 17. 
11. Kerr A,  Dawson J, R obertson C, Rowe P , Quinn T J. Sit  to stand activity during stroke rehabilitation. 
Topi[INVESTIGATOR_598519]. 2017;24(8):562- 6. 
12. Logan A, Freem an J, Kent B, Pooler J, Creano r S, Vickery J, Enki D, Barton A , Marsden J. Standing 
Practice In Rehabilit ation Early after St roke (S PI[INVESTIGATOR_152617]) : a functional standing frame programme (prolonged 
standing and repeated s it to stand) to improve function and quality  of life and reduce n euromuscu lar impairment 
in people with se vere sub -acute stroke— a protocol for a feas ibility randomised  controll ed tri al. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_598520]. 2018;4(1):66. 
13. Gunnoo T, Hasan N, Khan MS, Slark J, Bentley P, Sharma P. Q uantif ying the risk of hear t disease  
following acute i schaemic strok e: a meta- analysis of over 50,000 participa nts. BMJ Open. 2016; 6(1):e0 [ZIP_CODE]. 
Epub 2016/01/23. doi: bmjopen- 2015- 009535 [pii ] 
10.1136/bmjopen- 2015- 009535. Pu bMed PMID: 26792217; PMCID: 4735313. 
14. Ivey FM, Hafer -Macko CE, Ma cko RF. Task- orien ted treadmill exercise training in chronic he miparetic 
stroke. J Rehabil Re s Dev. 2008;45( 2):249- 59. Epub 2008/06/21. PubMed PMID: 18566943; P MCID: 2990953. 
15. Stoller O, de Bruin ED, Schindelholz M, S chuste r-Amft C, de Bie RA, Hunt KJ. E fficacy of Feedback -
Controlled Robotics -Assisted Treadmill Exe rcise to Imp rove Cardiovascula r Fitness  Early  After Stroke: A 
Randomized Controlled Pi[INVESTIGATOR_598521]. J Neurol Phys Ther. 2015; 39(3):156- 65. Epub 2015/06/08. doi:  
10.1097/NPT.0000000000000095. PubMe d PMID: 26050073; PMCID: 4484666. 
16. Spungen A, Asselin P, Fineberg D, Har el N, Kornfeld S, Ba uman W.  Benef icial changes in body 
composition after exoskel etal-assisted walking: Implicatio ns for improved metabolic functi on. Top Spi[INVESTIGATOR_598522]. 2013;19(5):8- 9. 
17. Yang A, Asselin P, Knezevic S, Kornfeld S, Spungen A. Asse ssment of In -Hospi [INVESTIGATOR_598523] a Powered Exos kelet on in Persons with Spi [INVESTIGATOR_17751]. Topi[INVESTIGATOR_598524] y Rehabilitation. 2015;21(2):100- 9. 
Prot ocol ASS- 20-01  Page  | 20 
MIRB # [ADDRESS_791666] GF. Neuromecha nical 
adaptat ions during a robotic powered exoskeleton assis ted w alking session. J Spi[INVESTIGATOR_356425] d Med. 2018;41(5):518-
28. 
19. Ramanuja m A, Momeni K, Husain SR, Augus tine J, Garbarini  E, Barrance P , Spungen AM, Asselin PK, 
Knezevic S, Forre st GF, editors. Ce nter of M ass an d Postural Adaptations During Robotic Exoskelet on-Assisted 
Walking for Indivi duals with Spi[INVESTIGATOR_17751]. Inte rnatio nal Symposium on Wear able Robo tics; 2018: 
Springer.  
20. Billin ger SA, Arena R, Bernhardt J, E ng JJ, Franklin BA, Johnson CM , MacKay -Lyons M, Macko RF, 
Mead GE, Roth EJ. Physical activit y and exercise recommendati ons for stroke survivors: a statement for 
healthcare professional s from th e American Heart A ssociation/Ame rican Stroke Association. Stroke. 
2014;45(8):2532- 53. 
21. Pollock ML, Gaesse r GA, Butcher JD, Després J -P, Dishman RK, Fran klin BA, Garber CE. ACSM 
posit ion stand: the recommended quantity and quality of exercise fo r developi [INVESTIGATOR_598525], and  flexibility  in healthy adults . Med Sci  Sport s Exerc. 1998;30(6):975-
91. 22. Swearingen A. K [ZIP_CODE] 0 510(k)  Indego Power ed Exoskeleton Approval 2018. Availabl e from:  
https://www.acce ssdata.fda.g ov/cdrh_docs/pdf17/K 173530.pdf
. 
23. Looby T. K143690 510(k)  Ekso Powered Exoske leton Approval 2016. Availabl e from: 
https: //www.accessdata.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf14/k143690.pdf . 
24. DiPi[INVESTIGATOR_52468] M. K181294 510(k)  Honda Walking Assist Device Approval 2018. Availabl e from:  
https://www.acces sdata.fda.gov/cdrh_docs/pdf18/K181294.pdf . 
25. Hamilton J. K160987 510(k) ReWalk Powered Exo skeleton Approval 2016. Available from: 
https://www. accessdat a.fda.gov/cdrh_doc s/pdf16/K 160987.pdf . 
26. Androwis GJ, Pi [INVESTIGATOR_598526] R, Ramanujam A, Nolan KJ. Electromyogr aphy assessment duri ng gait  in a robotic 
exoskeleton for acute stroke. Frontiers  in Neur ology. 2018;9:630. 
27. Riemer R, Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_2152] A. Biomechanical  energy ha rvesting from hum an motion : theory, state of  the art, 
design guidelines, and future direc tions. Journal of neuroenginee ring and rehabi litation. 2011;8(1):22. 
28. Bohannon RW, Andrew s AW, Sm ith MB. Rehabilitation  goals of patients with hemiplegia.  Internat ional 
Journal of R ehabilita tion Research. 198 8;11(2):181- 4. 
29. Kressler J, Wymer T, Domin go A. Respir atory, cardiovascula r and m etabol ic responses during different 
modes of overground bioni c ambulation in persons wi th motor -incomplete spi[INVESTIGATOR_1828]: A case series. 
Journal of re habilitation medicine. 2018;50( 2):173 -80. 
30. Suresh K. An ove rview of ran domization technique s: an u nbiase d assessment of outcome in clinical 
research. J ournal o f human reproductive s ciences. 2011;4(1):8. 
31. Borg GA. Psychophysical bases of per ceived ex ertion. Med sci sports exerc. 1982;14(5):377- 81. 
32. B-Temia IA , at http://www.b -temia.com/h ome-medi cal-equipment/ .). 
33. Mong Y, Teo TW, Ng SS. 5- repetitio n sit-to-stand test in subj ects with  chronic stroke: r eliability and  
validity. Arch Phys Med Rehabi l. 2010;91(3):407- 13. 
34. Fugl-Meyer AR , Jääs kö L, Leyman I, Olsson S, Steglind S. The post -stroke hemiplegic patient. 1. a 
method for evaluation of physical  performa nce. Scandinavian journal o f rehabilitation medicine. 1975; 7(1):13-
31. 35. Anderson C, Laubscher S, Burns R. Validation of  the Sh ort Fo rm 36 (SF -36) health survey 
questionnaire among stroke patients. Stroke. 1996;27( 10):1812- 6. 
36. Williams LS, We inberger M, Harris LE, Clark DO, Bil ler J. Development  of a stroke -specific quality of 
life scale. Stroke. 1999;30(7):1362- 9. 
 