Use of a Radiofrequency Chip for Localization of 
Non -Palpable Breast Lesions: A Comparison to Wire 
Localization  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
July 9, [ADDRESS_285923] Title: Use of a Radiofrequency Chip for Localization of Non -Palpable Breast Lesions: A Comparison to 
Wire Localization  
IRB Number:  2011684  
Version Number:  1 
Version Date:  6/25/18  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_236077], MD  
Co-Investigator: Emily Albright, MD  
Funding Source:  Educational Grant from Health Beacons; Equipment from Faxitron Bioptics LLC  
 
Clinical Trial Phase: IV:  Post Marketing Study  
Clinicaltrials.gov Number: Pending 
Study Drug/Study Device: LOCalizer  
 
 
 
 
1. Include p rimary, secondary , and exploratory objectives.  
 Part A: Physician Training:  
• Objective 1: To allow the breast radiologists and surgeons to become comfortable with RFID 
chip placement and retrieval.  
• Objective 2: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_236078]. 
 
Part B: Randomized Controlled Trial: 
• Objective 3: Examin e accuracy of RFID localization in comparison to traditional wire 
localization   
• Objective 4: Compare O perating R oom utilization and procedure scheduling between RFID and 
wire localization   
• Objective 5:  Compare satisfaction between RFID and wire localization in patients, surgeons, 
radiologists, and staff  
 
2. Include b ackground and rationale for initi ating the study. I nclude s pre-clinical and clinical data, current 
experiences with procedures, drug, or devic e, and any other relevant information to justify the research.  
 
 With increasing use of screening mammography, more breast lesions are identified prior to being 
clinically palpable. This has led to the increased use of radiologic localization to facilitate surgical 
excision. Localization is typi[INVESTIGATOR_236079]. However, this technique has several limitations and disadvantages. First, the wire must be placed on the same day as the surgical excision. This require s scheduling coordination between radiology and the surgical 
operating room  (OR). Because of scheduling, no wire localization procedures can be scheduled in the 
OR as a first case. This limits the OR utilization. If there are difficulties with wire placement the OR 
start time may be further delayed. For the patient, this is another procedure that needs to be done on the day of surgery which prolongs the time before surgery and can increase anxiety. To further complicate a patient’s surgery day, this wire localization may be done at a different facility than the planned surgical 
excision. This requires the patient to drive across town with a wire protruding from the breast. Wire 
migration, breakage, and dislodgement can occur and may result in inaccurate lesion removal and 
potential need for a second operative procedure. In addition to the disadvantage associated with I. Research Objectives /Background  
Page [ADDRESS_285924] been sought.  
Radioactive seed localization (RSL) was introduced in [ADDRESS_285925] widely used 
alternative to wire localization  in the [LOCATION_002] (Pouw  et al., 2015). This technique involves 
placement of an iodine -[ADDRESS_285926] up to 5 days prior to surgical excision. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_236080]. This is in part due to the regulations regarding using a radioactive seed. Proper handling and disposal require the oversight of a Radiation Safety Officer and specific facility licensing. Training of all personal involved much be perf ormed. This adds layers of 
complexity to the procedure. Also, an improperly placed seed requires re moval (Goudreau et al , 2015).  
In an effort to address the disadvantages of RSL, alternatives have been developed that retain the 
ease of placement similar t o RSL, but without the associated radioactivity.  There are currently three 
approved marketed devices that are alternative s to wire localization : Magseed, Savi Scout, and 
LOCalizer.  
The Magseed device consists of a 5 x 1 mm paramagnetic steel and iron oxi de seed. Using the 
Sentimag probe a magnetic field is generated that transiently magnetizes the iron oxide which is the n 
detected by [CONTACT_32975] (Harvey  et al., 2018). A disadvantage of the Magseed device is the inability to use 
the localization probe intraoperatively in the presence of any metal instruments. As the majority of operating instruments are metal, this creates significant challenges.  
Savi Scout is an infrared and electromagnetic localization system using a radar reflector 
activated with an infra red light. A large multi- site study of Savi Scout demonstrated overall good 
localization with improvement in surgeon satisfaction when compared to wire localization (Cox  et al., 
2016). Like the Magseed, the Savi Scout has its own limitations. Most notably is the ability to disable 
the reflector with contact [CONTACT_236082]. Also, there is the risk of transection of the antenna during dissection.   The most recent addition to the market for the localization of non- palpable breast lesions has 
been the LOC alizer. The LOCalizer device is a radiofrequency identification chip (RFID) which is 
implanted percutaneously in the breast , and then localized by a handheld reader device. Because the chip 
is not visible to the operator, the reader device makes an audible sound that increases in pi[INVESTIGATOR_236081] 's location. There is currently limited data available regarding the use 
of a radiofrequency identification chip  for n on-palpable breast lesions. A study examining proof of 
concept demonstrated that RFID was feasible for lesion identification when implanted < 6 cm deep (Reicher et al,  2008). This was followed by a clinical study involving 20 patients demonstrating no 
localization failures or chip  migration prior to incision (Dauphine  et al., 2015). To date there are no 
larger published series using this technology.  
In order to overcome the limitations of wire localization at our institution, we will evaluate the 
proposed benefits of the LOCalizer system  for successful localization of non- palpable breast lesions in 
patients undergoing breast surgery. We hypothesize that the use of an RFID is non- inferior to the use of 
a guide wire for l ocalization of breast lesions. Further , we hypothesize that the RFID chip will improve 
operating room utilization and efficiency while improving staff and patient satisfaction.  
    
1. Include the p roduct, dose, route, and regimen.  
• LOCalizer by [CONTACT_236083]  - LOCalizer uses a miniature 
radiofrequency chip designed to be implanted into the breast up to 30 days before surgery.  
  
II. Drugs/Biologics/Devices  
Page 3 of 8  2. Include the r ationale for choosing the drug/biologic  and dose , or for choosing the device to be used.  
• The RFID was chosen as a way to improve operating room efficiency and patient satisfaction. Many 
other institutions have transitioned from wire localization to radioactive seed localization. However, radioactive seed  localization requires multiple steps in the regulatory process due to the 
radioactivity. The goal of trialing the RFID was to get the benefits of a radioactive seed localization including ease of scheduling, decreased risk of migration, and improved patie nt comfort while 
avoiding the challenges of using a radioactive implant. 
• Another localization device currently on the market is the MagSeed. The reason the LOCalizer RFID was chosen over the MagSeed is the MagSeed would require purchasing all new instruments for the operating room. The MagSeed is a magnetic chip. The detector device for the MagSeed requires that all instruments nearby [CONTACT_236084]- magnetic. This would translate into needing to replace all retractors 
and other instruments with either a non- magneti c metal or with plastic instruments.  
• Savi Scout is an infrared and electromagnetic localization system using a radar reflector activated with an infrared light. The  Savi Scout reflector can be inactivated by [CONTACT_236085]. 
Also, there is the risk of transection of the antenna during dissection.  
• Due to the limitations of the other localization techniques, the RFID was selected for assessment in 
this study.  
 
3. Include t he standard reference therapy against which the study product is being compare d, or if the 
reference is a placebo.  Include justification for inclusion of a placebo or non- treatment group.  
• No placebo group  
• The reference therapy is wire localization  
 
4. Include j ustification and safety information . 
• LOCalizer  is a wireless radiofrequency identification (RFID) breast lesion localization system. It 
uses a RFID chip and a handheld reader with probe. The RFID is designed to be implanted in the 
lesion up to 30 days before surgery and is free of radioactivity. It wa s awarded 510k clearance by [CONTACT_236086] 5/1/17  
 
5. If an IDE (for investigational devices) or IND ( for investigational drugs) is not necessary, provide 
justification.  
• Not applicable  
 
  
1. Describe the r ecruitment process;  including how  and where recruitment will take place.  
a. Recruitment will occur in the Ellis Fishel Breast Center.  
b. All women with non- palpable breast lesions needing localization prior to excision will be 
screened for participation by [CONTACT_236087] c.  
 
2. Describe any screening/b aseline procedures.  
a. The screening of patients will occur by [CONTACT_236088] a breast lesion requiring radiologic localization. 
 
  
1. Describe the consent process; including who will be approached for  consent and what type of consent 
will be obtained from each subject population, if there is more than one.  
  III. Recruitment Process  
IV. Consent Process  
Page 4 of 8  Consent:  
• Standard of Care Consent:  The localization procedure , excisional breast surgery and follow up post 
surgery are  standard of care and part icipants will sign the standard clinical consents for these  
procedure s.  
• Research Consent: Participants will sign a research consent form for the use of the RFID chip  and/or 
wire for localization and for completion of the surveys. 
 
  
1. List the i nclusion and exclusion criteria.  
a. Inclusion criteria:  
i. Women requiring image guided pre -operative breast lesion localization for any reason 
(i.e. not restricted to cancer patients)  
 
b. Exclusion criteria:  
i. Lesions deeper than 6 cm from the skin surface  
ii. More than one lesion requiring localization  
iii. Lesions requiring bracketing  
iv. Lesions requiring MRI localization  
v. Inability  to complete survey 
vi. Pregnan cy 
 
2. Describe r estrictions on participation and appropriate screening procedures to ensure that the restrictions 
are maintained , including pregnancy testing. 
a. Pregnancy testing:  If participants are post -menopausal or if pregnancy is not possible based on 
medical history, then no pregnancy testing is performed.  In all other cases, a urine  pregnancy 
test will be  performed at the baseline visit in the breast surg ery clinic, or in the radiology 
department prior to undergoing the localization.   
b. Either the PI, Co- Investigator s, or the research staff will ensure  that all enrolled subjects fit 
criteria.  
    
1. Include anticipated enrollment number in this study. Include a break -down in numbers if there is more 
than one subject population. 
• Part A: Nine subjects ([ADDRESS_285927] surgeons) will undergo dual RFID and wire localization prior to breast lesion excision. To account for screen failures, a pproxi mately 12 
subjects may be enrolled . 
• Part B:  Goal recruitment of 60 with 30 each for RFID and wire localization. To account for 
screen failures, approxi mately 72 subjects may be enrolled.  
 
2. Include s tatistical analysis or other justification for the number of subjects enrolled.  
• No sample size calculation was performed as this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  
   
1. Include s tudy procedures/ design/plan;  include  the sequence and timing of study procedures (distinguish 
research procedures from those that are part of routine care).  Include s tudy duration and number of study 
visits required. V. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
VI. Number of Subjects  
VII. Study Procedures/ Design/Treatment Plan  
Page [ADDRESS_285928] of Care:   
• Ultrasound or Mammographic guided localization 
• Excisi onal breast surgery  
• Follow -up visit in breast surgery clinic  
  Research:  
• Use of RFID chip for localization procedure  
• Surveys  
• Urine Pregnancy test  
 
Part A:  Prospective trial to master the  technique of RFID placement and retrieval.   
• On the day of surgery prior to going to the operating room , the RFID placement will be performed 
first to allow radiologists to become familiar with placement of the RFID localizer. Participants will 
then immediately undergo wire localization (either ultrasound or mammogram guided at the discretion of the performing radiologist) . The wire localization procedure is standard of care; the 
RFID device placement is for research and not charged to the patient.  
• Data Collection: The same data that will be collected in the randomized controlled trial of RFID chip 
(Part B) will be collected (as below) . 
 
Part B:  Prospective trial to examine safety, efficacy , OR utilization patterns, and satisfaction with RFID 
versus wire localization  
• Randomization technique: Prior to randomization, subjects will be stratified based on technique of 
localization (either US guidance or mammographic guidance)  
o We will have a series of envelopes containing a card indicating either wire localizat ion or RFID 
localization. We will have three different groups of envelopes to stratify based on the 
localization technique  
 Red envelopes – To be used for the first 20 patients undergoing mammographic localization. 10 will be wire localization and 10 will be RFID  
 Blue envelopes – To be used for the first 20 patients undergoing US localization. 10 will be wire localization and 10 will be RFID  
 White envelopes – To be used for patients undergoing either mammographic or US localization. 10 will be wire loc alization and 10 will be RFID  
 This technique will allow us to ensure that we have [ADDRESS_285929] a minimum of 10 patients unde rgoing mammographic placement 
and 10 patients undergoing US placement.  
• Study Time -line: 
o Breast surgery clinic appointment – Study enrollment  
 Consent  
 Patient Questionnaire #1  
 Radiology Nurse Form  
 Surgery Clinic Nurse Form  
o Radiology procedure appointment  
 Patient Questionnaire #2  
 Radiologist Form  
 Radiology Nurse Pregnancy Test results (if needed)  
o Surgical procedure day  
 Surgeon For m 
Page [ADDRESS_285930]-op visit  
 Study Completion F orm 
 Patient Questionnaire #3  
• Study Duration 
o There will be four visits : one pre -op breast surgery visit in which enrollment will occur  
(approximately one to two hours) , one radiology procedure visit  for localization  (approximately 
one hour) , one OR visit  for surgery  (approximately 6- 8 hours) , and one post -operative visit  
(approximately 30 minutes to one hour). This is the same number of visits  as all patients not 
participating in this trial and standard of care.  
o For each study participant the expected duration is one month from enrollment until the post -
operative visit.   
o Full accrual is expected to take 12 months.  
 
2. Blinding, including justification for blinding or not blinding the trial. Describe un -blinding procedures. 
• No blinding 
3. Justification of why participants will not receive routine care or will have current therapy stopped.  
• n/a: participants will be receiving routine care  
4. Definition of treatment failure or participant removal criteria.  
• If there is a concern for the participant’s health  
• If the participant’s underlying disease gets worse  
• Participant ha s localization performed but does not undergo surgical excision  
• The study is closed for safety, administrative or other reasons   
5. Description of what happens to participants receiving therapy when study ends or if participation in the study ends prematurel y. 
• Participants will continue to receive routine care.  
6. Include sub- studies or banking information (correlative/special studies)  
• n/a 
  
1. Describe r easonably foreseeable risks  or discomforts to the subjects and s teps to  minimize risks .  
 Risks of RFID:  Potential pain  and discomfort , migration or lost functionality of device. Failure of localization.  
 Risks of Survey: The potential exists for breaches of confidentiality for the  survey data collected as part of the 
study. We expect this risk to be minimal. 
 
2. Describe any s toppi[INVESTIGATOR_004]. 
• If there is a concern for the participant’s health  
• If the participant’s underlying disease gets worse  
• The study is closed for safety, administrat ive or other reasons   
 
3. Include the p lan for reporting unanticipated problems or deviations. This plan must include a five -day 
reporting requirement to the IRB once  becoming aware of an event.  
 
All unanticipated problems and deviations will be reported to the IRB within [ADDRESS_285931] learning of the event.  
   VIII.  Potential Risks/Adverse Events  
IX. Anticipated Benefits  
Page [ADDRESS_285932] benefits for either the individual or society.  
a. There are no benefits to the participants.  
b. Potential benefits to society/breast patients include increased efficiency allowing more patients 
to be treated, decreased anxiety about procedures, less surgical complications, easier recovery, 
and improved satisfaction with operative procedure.  
 
  
1. Describe the amount, method, and timing of disbursement.  Compensation can include  checks, cash, 
gifts, extra/course credit, etc.  
• All participants will be compensated a total of $50 once they complete the study, by [CONTACT_9434]. Should a participant not complete all four  visits, the payment will be prorated as follows: Visits 
1, 2 and 3: $10.00 each; Visit 4: $20.00.  
 
 
 
1. Detail costs of study procedures, drugs, biologics, or devices and identify who will cover the cost.  
 
• Costs for the localization procedure, pregnancy test, and excisional surgery  are charged to the 
participant and/or their insurance. There is no charge to the participant for the RF chip .  The chip 
is provided free of charge by [CONTACT_3455] /marke ter.   
 
 
 Describe the plan to monitor the data , if necessary . A plan is required for treatment and/or intervention studies, 
sensitive data are being collected, there is a possibility for subjects to experience adverse events, etc.   
1. Either the PI, Co -Investigators  or the research staff  will ensure that all enrolled subject surveys and data 
are collected and secured prior to patient getting discharged.  
2. If there is a failure of localization (intended purpose of the device ) – this incidence needs to be reported. 
3. PI, Co -Investigat ors or the research staff will monitor the study after every 10 subjects.  
4. University statisticians will be contact[CONTACT_236089]  
5. If patients refuse to the finish the entire study – these subjects and reason why will be collected and not included in the main data and these will be unfinished cases with no comparison available.   
6. If there is more than four incidence of failure of localization with RFID – study will be stopped. 
7. If the case of study termination, IRB will be made aware of the reasons and course of action by [CONTACT_978] , 
Co-Investigators, or research staff .   
  
 1. Specify who is the lead site and describe the roles of each site in the study.  
2. Indicate that all required approvals are already in place or will be in place  at each site prior to project 
implementation. If the study will utilize a reliance agreement or a single IRB, please describe which institution(s) will be relying on another IRB for review , and which institution will be responsible for the 
IRB oversight of the relying IRB(s).  
3. Describe the plan that is in place to manage information obtained from multiple sites tha t may be 
relevant to the protection of human subjects such as reporting unanticipated problems, protocol modifications, and interim results.  
 
• Not applicable – Single site study  
 X. Compen sation  
XII. Data Safety Monitoring Plan  XI. Costs  
XIII.  Multiple Sites  
Page [ADDRESS_285933] be outlined including appropriate detailed 
references to earlier studies and data.  
 References:  
Cox, C.E., Russell, S., Prowler, V., Carter, E., Beard, A., Mehundru, A., Shivers, S.C. (2016). A prospective, single arm, multi- site, clinical evaluation of a nonradioactive surgical guideance technology for the location of 
nonpalpable breast lesions duri ng excision. Ann Surg Onc , 23, 3168- 3174.  
Dauphine, C., Reicher, J.J., Reicher, M.A., Gondusky, C., Khalkhali , I., & Kim, M. (2015). A prospective 
clinical study to evaluate the safety and performance of wireless localization of nonpalpable breast lesions using radiofrequency identification technology. AJR , 204, W720- W723.  
Goudreau, S.H., Joseph, J.P., & Seiler, S.J. (2015). Preoperative radioactive seed localization for nonpalpable breast lesions: Technique, pi[INVESTIGATOR_30207], and solutions. RadioGraphics , 35, 1319- 1334. 
Harvey, J.R., Lim, Y., Murphy, J. et al. Breast Cancer Res Treat (2018) 169: 531. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10549- 018-4709- y
 
Hayes, MK ( 2017). Update on Preoperative Breast Localization .  Radiol Clin North Am.      
            2017 May;55(3):591- 603.   
Pouw , B., De Wit -van der Veen, L.J., Stokkel M.P.M., Loo, C.E., Vrancken Peeters, M.T.F.D., Valdes Olmos, 
R.A. (2015). Heading toward radioactive seed localization in non- palpable breast cancer surgery? A meta-
analysis. J Surg Onc , 111, 185- 191. 
Reicher, J.J., Reicher, M.A., Thomas, M., & Petcavich, R. (2008). Radiofrequency identification tags for preoperative tumor localization: Proof of concept. AJR, 191, 1359- 1365.  
 
2. Additional references to supporting data or additional information may be included in an appendix.  
 
 XIV. References/Appendices  