Encouraging Blood Donation in Patients With a Blood Type in Short Supply  – Part 2  
 
Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
July 3 , 2023  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Protocol  
 
Scientific background  
 
There has been a years -long national shortage of several blood types in the U.S., including in 
the Geisinger community. Previously, the study team collaborated with Miller Keystone, where 
Geisinger refers patients who wish to donate blood and from whom Gei singer receives blood for 
clinical purposes, on an outreach study to encourage blood donation in patients with needed 
blood types. The study demonstrated that, compared with a no-message control group, patient 
portal messages sent to patients with needed b lood types increase patients' likelihood of 
attending donation appointments. However, results were ambiguous with respect to which of 
two message versions was most effective. One version, which stated that the patient had a 
needed blood type (blood -type me ssage), caused a numerically, but not significantly, higher 
number of patients who attended appointments compared to the other version, which did not 
state that the patient had a blood type in need but rather informed the recipi[INVESTIGATOR_22874] a general 
blood short age (no -blood -type message).  
 
Because Miller Keystone particularly values reaching new donors, the team ran a preregistered 
exploratory analysis to test whether the messages were differently effective for new donors 
compared to those who had previously don ated at a Miller Keystone site. There was a 
significant interaction between previous donor status (previous donor, previous non -donor) and 
message type, such that previous non -donors were relatively more responsive to the blood -type 
message, while previous  donors were more responsive to the no -blood -type message. 
However, the groups were uneven with respect to the number of patients that had previously 
donated. Moreover, when the analysis was limited to patients who opened their messages, this 
interaction e ffect disappeared: blood -type messages were still most effective in previous non -
donors, and there was no difference in message effectiveness among previous donors. These 
follow -up analyses, and the unevenness of previous donors across groups, call into qu estion the 
robustness of the interaction effect.  
 
Objectives  
 
The present study again test ed whether the blood -type message is more effective than the no -
blood -type message for patients with needed blood types overall, and separately for previous 
donors an d non -donors. Messages in the present study were  sent via email rather than via 
patient portal. Randomization occur red at the email -address level to one of the two message 
types to ensure everyone using the same email address receive d the same message (alt hough 
each patient was sent an individualized message with their name; there was no no -contact 
[CONTACT_416358]). Email addresses were  excluded if they were  shared by [CONTACT_416359]. Randomization was stratified by [CONTACT_416360] (email addresses shared by [CONTACT_416361] -
donors were  excluded).  
 
 
Design  
 
This study is a randomized controlled trial with 2 study arms.  
 
Methods  
 
Email addresses of patients enrolled in the study were randomized to the following arms:  
 
1. No-blood -type message  – a message that did not mention the patient had a needed 
blood type  
2. Blood-type message  – a message that mentioned the patient had a needed blood type  
 
Randomization was stratified by [CONTACT_416362] . 
 
Power analysis  
 
Our sample includes 40,[ADDRESS_524555] 80% power to detect an increase in the 
primary outcome  from 0.07% (the primary -outcome  rate in previous non-donors  who were sent  
a no-blood -type message in our previous study) to 0.16% , with a two -tailed alpha of .05.  
 
Within the previous donor  group , we will have 80% power to detect  an increase  in the primary 
outcome from 4. 76% (the primary -outcome rate in previous donors who were sent a no -blood -
type message in our previous study) to 9.87%, with a two -tailed alpha of .05.  
 
Note that a portion of the sample  will be excluded from analysis (e.g., those whose emails were 
not sent or bounced; see the Analysis notes section for details).  
 
Project status  
 
All emails have been sent. No outcome data have been extracted . 
 
 
Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
Primary outcome  
 
Number of Participants Who Attended a Donation Appointment  
 
Attended a donation appointment within 6 weeks of their message send date, regardless 
of whether they donated. This outcome includes patients who were unable to donate for 
any rea son (e.g., low hemoglobin) or patients who showed up to the appointment but 
decided to leave before donating.  
 
[Time Frame: Within 6 weeks of the patient’s message send date]  
 
Question  1: Within  patients who are not  previous donors, do more patients attend donation 
appointment s if they are sent the blood -type message compared with those sent the no -blood -
type message?  
 
Analysis  1: We will test the hypothesis that previous non -donors who are sent a blood -type 
message  are more likely to attend a donatio n appointment than those sent a no-blood -type 
message . We will run an OLS regression with a binary predictor variable indicating whether 
patients were sent the blood -type message or the no -blood -type message . 
 
Question 2:  Within  patients who are previous d onors, do more patients attend donation 
appointments if they are sent the blood -type message compared with those sent the no -blood -
type message?  
 
Analysis 2: We will run Analysis 1  including only patients who are previous donors.  
 
 
Analysis notes  
 
Whether or not a patient is a previous donor  was determined by a data pull completed prior to 
randomization. Because the data on previous donors from this pull was used to stratify 
randomization,  we will use this data pull to  determine whether patients sho uld be included in 
Analysis 1  (previous non-donors ) or Analysis 2  (previous donors) , even if we later learn the 
patient had previously donated (e.g., if they donated after the pre-randomization data pull but 
before the intervention began).  
 
Analyses will b e conducted on the email -address level . For each email address, if any 
associate d patient attended a donation appointment , the email address will be “counted” as 
achieving  the primary outcome . To ensure that our findings do not depend on patients who 
share an email address, we will also run the analyses above removing all patients who share an 
email address with another patient in the study.  
 
All analyses will exclude patients who scheduled t heir appointment prior to their message send 
date.   
 
Patients will be excluded from analysis if, according to our records, their emails were not sent 
(e.g., due to being unsubscribed from emails) or for whom our emails bounced.  
 
Timeframes listed refer to the amount of time elapsed from the send date for a given patient. 
For instance, the primary outcome timeframe is 6 weeks; thus, for the purposes of this study, a 
patient will be counted as having donated if they donated blood within 6 weeks of their messa ge 
send date.  
 
As a robustness check, we will rerun  the analyses above  on the subset of patients who open the 
messages, using a time frame of 6 weeks from the date each individual patient opened their 
message  (rather than 6 weeks from the patient’s message  send date) . 
 
We will run an additional robustness check including only patients who scheduled an 
appointment within the 2 weeks following their message send date.  
 
Recent work suggests that OLS regressions are appropriate in randomized experiments with 
binary outcome variables such as ours (Gomila, 2021) . 
 
 
Other prespecified  outcomes  
 
We will use the approaches described in Analyses [ADDRESS_524556] of the 
intervention on the other prespecified  outcome measures listed in the pre -registration:  
 
1. Number of Participants Who Successfully Donated Blood  
 
Attended a donation appointment within [ADDRESS_524557] from or left their 
appointment without donating.  
 
[Time Frame: Within 6 weeks of the patient’s  message send date]  
 
2. Number of Participants Who Scheduled a Blood Donation Appointment  
 
Scheduled an appointment within 2 weeks of their message send date.  
 
[Time Frame: Within 2 weeks of the patient’s message send date]  
 
3. Number of Participants Who Scheduled a Blood Donation Appointment  
 
Scheduled an appointment within 6 weeks of their message s end date.  
 
[Time Frame: Within 6 weeks of the patient’s message send date]  
 
 
 
Additional exploratory analyses  
 
1. Primary outcome in the full sample   
 
We will run an OLS regression to test whether the primary outcome varies as a function 
of experimental group  in the full sample, without dividing the sample by [CONTACT_416363].  
 
2. New donors vs. previous  donors  
 
We will run an OLS regression to test whether the primary outcome  varies as a function 
of experimental group, a bivariate indicator for whether or n ot the patient previously 
donated blood, and the interaction between these variables.  
 
3. Time to donation  
 
We will run regression models to test whether either intervention message influenced the 
timing (time elapsed since the message was sent) of donations.  
 
4. Type of donation  
 
We will test whether there are differences in donation type (particularly whole blood and 
red blood cell donations) as a function of experimental group.  
 
5. Demographics  
 
We will run regression models to test for main effects of several demographic factors on 
donation behavior, along with interactions between these factors and message group. 
These demographic factors  may include binned age  (18–24, 25 –34, 35 –44,45 –54, 55–
64, and  65+), sex, race, ethnicity, line of insurance (as a p roxy for socioeconomic 
status), and Charlson Comorbidity.  
 
 
References  
 
Gomila, R. (2021). Logistic or linear? Estimating causal effects of experimental treatments on 
binary outcomes using regression analysis. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General , 
150(4), 700 –709. https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000920  
 