 Study Title: Effects of Low -calorie Sweetened Beverage Restriction in 
Youth with Type 1  Diabetes  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Protocol Version: March 2 5, 2021  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Table of Contents  
SECTION 1  KEY ROLES   
SECTION 2  INTRODUCTION, BACKGROUND INFORMATION AND SCIENTIFIC 
RATIONALE  
 2.1 Background Information and Relevant Literature  
 2.2 Scientific Rationale   
 2.3 Potential Risks   
 2.4 Potential Benefits  
SECTION 3  OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS   
 3.1 Primary Objective(s)   
 3.2 Secondary Objective(s)   
 3.3 Primary Outcome Measure(s)   
 3.4 Secondary Outcome Measure(s)  
SECTION 4  STUDY DESIGN  
SECTION 5  STUDY ENROLLMENT AND WITHDRAWAL  
 5.1 Study Population, Recruitment Retention   
 5.2 Inclusion Criteria  
 5.3 Exclusion Criteria  
 5.4 Inclusion of Children    
 5.5 Recruitment  
 5.6 Retention  
 5.7 End of Participation Criteria and Procedure   
SECTION 6  STUDY PROCEDURES  
 6.1 Informed Consent/Assent  
 6.2 Screening Process  
  6.3 Study Interventions and Follow -Up 
 6.4 Description of Study Procedures/Evaluations  
 6.[ADDRESS_85010] (IRB)   
 9.[ADDRESS_85011]  
CITI Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Protocol Summary  
 
Title:  
 
 
Brief Summary:  Effects of Low -calorie Sweetened Beverage Restriction in 
Youth with Type 1 Diabetes  
 
This study will investigate whether low -calorie sweetened 
beverages (LCSBs) are helpful or harmful for preventing 
diabetes complications among children with Type 1 
Diabetes (T1D).  
Study Population:  The study population will consist of children (ages 5-14 
years ) with T1D, who report consumption of ≥ 12 oz. of a 
LCSB with sucralose (+/ - ace-K) or aspartame+ace -K per 
day and their parent/guardian . The study population will 
also consist of up to 40 additional parent/guardians of 
children 5 -14 with type 1 diabetes, who will participate in 
the qualitative interview about the impacts of the COVID -19 
pandemic on their child’s type 1 diabetes management.   
Study Site:  
 
 
Number of 
Participants:  Sheik Zayed Campus —Childhood and Adolescent 
Diabetes Program at Children’s National.  
 
 
60 Children (120 participants including parent/guardian)  for 
RCT; up to 40 additional parents for COVID -19 interviews  
Accrual Ceiling:  
 
Study Duration:  60 children (120 parents including parent/guardian)  for 
RCT, [ADDRESS_85012] Duration:  The total duration of subject participation  for the RCT  will 
be 14 weeks.  The total duration of participation for the 
COVID -19 interviews will be approximately 30 -45 minutes 
on a single day.  
Objective(s):  
 
 
 
Methodology:  To conduct a 12 -week pi[INVESTIGATOR_52393] (involving a two -
week run -in period prior to the intervention) to investigate 
the effects of LCSB consumption on children with T1D.  To 
better understand the impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic 
on management of type 1 diabetes in childhood.  
 
 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_77936] (e.g. still 
or sparkling water) compared to control  (continuation of 
  
 
 usual LCSB consumption) and assessing glycemic 
variability using continuous glucose monitoring, as well as 
body composition and inflammatory cytokines before and 
after the intervention.  Conduct of qualitative interviews 
about impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic on T1D 
management in a separate sample of parents (some of 
whom will have a child participating in the RCT).   
Outcome Measures:  HbA1c, CRP, IL -6, TNF-α, LDL, HDL, triglycerides, and 
free fatty acids (FFA) measured in  blood samples. 
Sucralose and ace -K concentrations in biological fluids, 
including urine. Visceral fat  area from DXA or BodPod . 
Continuous blood glucose  to assess glycemic variability , 
photo -assisted food records to assess adherence to LCSB 
restriction  and any changes in diet throughout study , 
beverage log to assess adherence, satisfaction survey, 
Diabetes Self -Care Inventory (SCI), physical activity 
questionnaire (PROMI S), COVID -19 diabetes 
management questionnaire, Eating Attitudes (EAT) 
questionnaire, and an in -depth interview.  Additional, in -
depth interview about COVID -19 impacts on T1D 
management (for those who screen ineligible for full study 
andthose who participate in DRINK and are interested in 
also participating in this additional interview)  
Study Intervention/  
Procedures:  
 
 
 
Statistical Analysis:   
Children will be randomly assigned to either replace their 
LCSB consumption with still or seltzer water or to continue 
their usual  LCSB consumption for [ADDRESS_85013] ANOVA will be used to 
assess group differences in glycemic variability and other 
metabolic outcomes pre/post intervention. Bivariate 
associations will be examined using odds ratios, chi -
squared, boxplots, mean differences, a nd ANOVA, as 
appropriate.   Qualitative data collected during interviews 
will be transcribed verbatim and thematically coded.  
  
SECTION  1 Key Ro les 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Randi Streisand  
Address: [ADDRESS_85014] NW #1200, Washington, DC [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone: 202 -476-2730  
Email: [EMAIL_1578]  
 
SECTION  2 Introduction, Background Information , and Scientific Rationale  
 
2.1 Background Information and Relevant Literature  
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) is a lifelong metabolic disorder that affects [ADDRESS_85015] 
notably, 31 times higher risk of coronary heart disease and myocardial infarction 
compared to similar -aged children without T1D. Furthermore, cardiometabolic 
perturbations, including abnormalities in circulating inflammatory cytokines, are 
observable  in children with T1D despi[INVESTIGATOR_77937]. As demonstrated in the 
SEARCH cohort, a common strategy for T1D management and prevention of 
cardiovascular complications is replacement of added sugars with low -calorie 
sweetener s (LCS s), which provide sweetness without calories and at a reduced 
glycemic load. However, effects of LCS s on glycemic control and cardiometabolic health 
are controversial. In cellular models, incubation of mesenchymal stem cells with 
sucralose at physiologic concentrations upregulates expression of genes involved in 
adipogenesis and inflammation. In rodents, prolonged sucralose consumption induces 
glucose intolerance, disturbs the gut microbiota, increases visceral adiposity , and 
promotes metabolic abnormalities. And, in humans,  prospective cohort studies in adults 
without diabetes consistently report positive associations between LCS consumption, 
weight, metabolic syndrome, and cardiovascular disease (CVD). Furthermore, acute 
studies of LCS’s  effects in adults demonstrate elevated post -prandial glucose and 
insulin responses when LCSs  are ingested prior to an oral glucose tolerance test 
(OGTT). Meanwhile, little is known about effects of LCSs  in children, and low -calorie 
sweetened beverage (LCSB) consumption specifically in childr en with T1D is severely 
understudied. This is particularly concerning because hyperglycemia and inflammation 
play a key role in accelerated CVD onset in T1D and visceral adiposity is strongly linked 
to hypertension and dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_035], further promoting CVD d evelopment.  In this study,  
children with T1D are randomly assigned to either replace LCSBs with still or seltzer 
water for 12 weeks or continue usual LCSB consumption (control).  
 
2.[ADDRESS_85016] of added 
sugars reduces the calorie and sugar content of foods and beverages, this replacement 
may not improve and may even paradoxically worsen glycemic variability and 
exacerbate cardiometabolic health among already at -risk children with T1D. G iven that 
LCSB use, particularly LCSBs  with sucralose or aspartame+acesulfame -potassium 
(ace-K), is widespread in children with T1D and even modest metabolic perturbations 
predict future CVD onset, there is tremendous significance in investigating the extent to 
 which replacement of usual LCSB consumption with still or seltzer water (hereafter 
referred to as LCS restriction) improves glycemic variability, visceral adiposity, lipid 
profiles, inflammation, and other CVD risk factors.  The scientific premise for conducting 
qualitative interviews about the impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic on children’s type [ADDRESS_85017] of 60 children with T1D, ages 5-14 years old (and their 
parent (s)/guardian (s), n=120 including parent/guardian and child), who report habitual 
consumption of greater than or equal to 12 ounces of LCSBs  with sucralose (+/ - ace-K) 
or aspartame+ace -K per day.  We will also a separate sample of up to 40 parents of 
children 5 -14 years of age with type 1 diabetes to participate in interviews about the 
impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic on their child’s type [ADDRESS_85018] LCSBs with still or seltzer water or to continue usual LCSB consumption 
(control) in order to determine whether LCSB restriction impacts glycemic variaiblity and 
cardiometabolic risk factors in 5-14-year-old children with T1D.  
 
2.3 Potential Risks  
It is possible that other participants and individuals external to the study may find out 
that a participant took part in the research, in which case, information derived may be 
conveyed to others external to the group.  
 
Blood Draws: Although blood draws are a standard medical procedure, there is a risk of 
discomfort at the site of the needle entry or bruising at the site.  There is also a remote 
risk of fainting or local infection associated with drawing blood. To address this, only 
skilled and well -trained phlebotomists will carry out these procedures.  
 
Continuous glucose monitoring  (CGM):  The use of CGM for measurement of glycemic 
variability and ‘time in range’ may be challenging for some children and their parents. 
Although CGM is commonly used in children with T1D, some children may be fearful of 
the insertion  or embarrassed to share their blood glucose levels . We will work with the 
child and parent to ensure the child is comfortable.  We will also discontinue  CGM if this 
becomes painful or problematic to the child or parent.   
 
 Dual energy X -ray absorptiometry ( DXA): This instrument is used to measure body fat 
using low dose x -ray. This scan does give a small amount of radiation. Using the 
standard way of describing radiation exposure, subjects will receive an effective dose of 
less than one thousandth of one rem fr om each DXA scan. By [CONTACT_2163], the average 
person in the [LOCATION_002] receives approximately this much radiation every day from 
natural background sources, such as the sun and from radioactive materials that are 
found naturally in the earth’s air and soil.  
  
Spot urine sample: We are not aware of any known risks from providing a spot urine 
sample. However, collecting the sample may be uncomfortable, burdensome, or 
embarrassing for some individuals. We have minimized this risk by [CONTACT_77944] a private space and de -identifying the data collected to 
ensure that urine samples are not directly linked to the subject’s identity.  
 
BodPod: Children may experience  ear poppi[INVESTIGATOR_77938]. We have 
minimized this risk by [CONTACT_77945] 
(including those with ear or sinus infections) and working with the child and parent to 
ensure the child is comfortable  prior to the BodPod . Furthermore,  only trained staff in 
the Clinical Research Unit will conduct the BodPod assessments.  
 
Qualitative interviews: Completing interviews may be uncomfortable, burdensome, or 
embarrassing for some individuals. We have minimized this risk by [INVESTIGATOR_5328] -identifying the 
data collected to ensure that responses to the questions are not directly linked to the 
subject’s identity.  Participants will not have to answer questions if they do not wish to 
do so.  
 
Food Records: We are not aware of any known risks from completing food records. 
However, completing food records may be uncomfortable, burdensome, or 
embarrassing for some individuals. We have minimized this risk by [INVESTIGATOR_5328] -identifying the 
data collected to ens ure that beverage logs are not directly linked to the subject’s 
identity.  
 
Questionnaires: We are not aware of any known risks from completing questionnaires. 
However, completing the EAT assessment , satisfaction survey , PROMIS physical 
activity questionnaire, or COVID -[ADDRESS_85019]’s identity.  
 
Beverage logs: We are not aware of any known risks from completing beverage logs. 
However, completing beverage logs may be uncomfortable, burdensome, or 
embarrassing for some individuals. We have minimized this risk by [CONTACT_77946] e logs via text message  or email  and de -identifying the data collected 
to ensure that beverage logs are not directly linked to the subject’s identity.  
 
 We do not anticipate any long -term risks to participants from participation in this study. 
However, there is always the possibility of risks currently unknown and the potential 
breach of privacy. To minimize the risk of breach of confidentiality, all data will be 
immediately de -identified following collection. Data will initially be associated with an 
alphanumeric code and a copy of the key to this code will be kept in a locked filing 
cabinet. All computers used for analysis of this data are password protec ted and kept in 
locked offices and/or laboratories.  
 
All participants will be made aware that study participation is entirely voluntary and will 
have the opportunity to choose not to participate. Subjects will have the opportunity to 
drop out of the study at any time. The potential benefits outweigh the risk s because the 
study is minimal risk and procedures do not exceed the risks encountered in routine 
medical procedures. Furthermore, what we learn about LCSB consumption among 
children with T1D will be critical to informing the design of future interventions . 
 
2.[ADDRESS_85020] future CVD onset, there is tremendous significance in investigating the extent to 
which replacement of LCSB consumption improves glycemia, visceral adiposity , lipid 
profiles, inflammation, and other CVD risk factors.  
 
SECTION  3 Objectives and Endpoints  
 
3.1 Primary Objective(s)  
To examine the effects of replacement of usual LCSB consumption with unsweetened 
still or seltzer water for 12 weeks on glycemic variability using continuous glucose 
monitoring (CGM) compared to control (continuation of usual LCSB consumption).  
 
3.2 Secondary Objective(s)  
To examine the effects of replacement of usual LCSB consumption with unsweetened 
still or seltzer water for 12 weeks on visceral adiposity, lipid profiles, and systemic 
inflammation compared to control (continuation of usual LCSB consumption).  To 
examine the impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic on pediatric type 1 diabetes 
management.  
 
3.3 Primary Outcome Measure(s)  
Glycemic variability and HbA1c  
  
3.4 Secondary Outcome Measure(s)  
Visceral adiposity, lipid profiles, and systemic inflammation , impacts of COVID -[ADDRESS_85021] will be identified prior to or during their routine clinical 
visit in the Childhood and Adolescent Diabetes Program (CADP) at Children’s National 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_77939] a member of 
the research team  either via mail (if prior to visit) , email, phone and/or  or in person 
(recruitment letter and flyer enclosed) , or will be reached out to via social media and 
word of mouth.  The parent will complete a brief phone screening to determine initial 
study eligibility.  If their child is eligible  for the RCT , they will be scheduled for a 
screening/enrollment visit via Zoom  Telehealth  and will also have the option of 
participating in a separate interview about the impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic on 
their child’s diabetes management (separate consent form , survey,  and interview guide 
enclosed).   
 
If their child is ineligible  for the RCT , the parent will be invited to participate in the 
qualitative interview about impacts of the COVID -[ADDRESS_85022] one year,  will be eligible to participate in the Zoom 
Telehealth intervie w. The interview will be conducted at a date/time convenient for the 
parent and will take place remotely via Zoom  Telehealth . Participation in the interview 
about impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic on diabetes management will involve 1) 
providing informed consent via Re dcap 2) answering questions about the parent's sex 
and race/ethnicity and the child's age and duration of diabetes, 3) answering brief 
survey questions about diabetes management during the COVID -19 pandemic and 
whether they are vaccinated (enclosed), and 4 ) participating in a 20 -30 qualitative 
interview about the impacts of COVID -19 on their child's diabetes management, 
conducted by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Meni.  
 
For those determined to be initially eligible for the RCT, the screening/enrollment 
procedures will proceed as follows: a fter obtaining informed consent ( from the 
parent/guardian(s)) and assent ( from the child) the research team  will guide the 
participant through the SCI , PROMIS physical activity, COVID -19 diabetes management 
questionnaire, and EAT assessments , and a Dexcom ™ sensor will be placed  on the 
child’s abdomen. The sensor will remain in place for [ADDRESS_85023] the sensor (provided by [CONTACT_77947]) to allow for [ADDRESS_85024] study 
meeting remotely via Zoom  Telehealth . If the participant attends the visit via Zoom  
Telehealth , the participant and their parent will  provide informed consent using the 
recently approved RedCap e -consent platform.  At the end of the screening, participants 
 will be provided with low -calorie sweetened beverages, matched as closely as possible 
to the brands that they usually consume, to encourage continuation of usual beverage 
intake between until the baseline visit. During the week prior  to the baseline visit (Week 
0), they will be instructed to continue their usual dietary habits and complete an online 
photo -assisted 7-day food record (instructions enclosed), with parental assistance. 
While we recognize that parents are unlikely to accurately report all of the ir child’s 
intake because they are not always with them (e.g., during school), dietary data for 
children under [ADDRESS_85025] accurately reported when provided by [CONTACT_77948].  
 
Eligible participants will be scheduled for a baseline visit in the Clinical  Research Unit 
(CRU) at CNMC. One group will replace their usual LCSB consumption with 
unsweetened still or seltzer water (LCSB restriction) for 12 weeks. The other group will 
continue their usual LCSB use (control) for [ADDRESS_85026] 
in the CRU, where height and weight will be measured, a spot urine sample will be 
collected  (for measurements of sucralose and ace -k concentrations),  and a blood draw 
will be performed. Participants will be provided with a copy of their laboratory (blood) 
results from the baseline visit and will be encouraged to discuss them with their 
physician. Participants will have the DEXCOM G6 ™ sensor removed and CGM data 
downloaded . In a subset of participants (n=30 ), a DXA scan or BodPod will also be 
performed, as R21 budget constraints preclude DXA or BodPod  on all 60 subjects .  
 
Subjects will be randomized to either: 1) LCSB restriction or 2) continuation of usual 
LCSB intake (control). All participants (both LCSB restriction  group and control group ) 
and their parent (s) or guardian(s)  will undergo a brief, 20 -minute orientation where the 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_77940], instructions on completing 
food records , education on CGM and placement of the DEXCOM G6 ™ sensor , and 
counseling on healthy eating strategies. For children not already using CGM, parents 
will also receive 3 additional sensors (replacement in Week 1, placement in Week 11, 
and replacement in Week 12 for 14 days wear time), written instructions and additional 
resources (YouTube video) for placing (or replacing) the glucose sensors . Participants 
in the intervention group will be counseled on avoidin g LCSBs . Participants and their 
parent will also be given a brochure (enclosed) on avoiding LCSs  to take home which 
will include a list of specific foods and beverages containing LCSs to avoid during the 
study. Parents will also receive information on strategies to encourage study adherence 
(enclosed). Participants in the control group will be counseled on healthy eating as 
those in the intervention group (in accordance with standard dietary guidance for T1D 
management), with the exception of information and resources for avoiding LCSBs .  
Participants in both groups will be provided with sample bevera ges (LCSBs or 
unsweetened still and seltzer water), per their randomization.  
 
In both groups, text messages will be sent to parents 3 times per week with reminders 
that their child should avoid LCSBs  or continue usual intake, per randomization. 
Adherence will be monitored through daily text message beverage logs completed by 
[CONTACT_77949] -assisted food records with parent assistance in Weeks 0, 6, and 
12, as well as spot -urine samples (to measure sucralose and ace -K concentrations 
 (baseline , week 6, and follow -up visit).  During Week 6, participants and their parent will 
attend a mid -intervention telemedicine booster visit, during which the PI [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or study 
RA will reinforce the intervention and remind participants to mail back a spot urine 
sample using materials provided b y the study team at baseline. Participants will be 
reminded of the study instructions, including the importance of inserting the DEXCOM 
G6 sensor (provided by [CONTACT_15328]) at the beginning of Week 11. Parents will rec eive a 
phone reminder to insert the sensor at the end of Week [ADDRESS_85027] their DEXCOM G6 ™ sensor removed and CGM data downloaded 
using DEXCOM Clarity ™ software. Height and weight will be measured and a second 
blood draw performed. Participants will again be provided with a copy of their laboratory 
(blood) results and encouraged to discuss them with their physician. Those who had an 
DXA at the baseline visit (n=30) will undergo a second DXA or BodPod  scan after which 
these participants and their parent will receive a consultation on the DXA or BodPod  
results. Those randomized to the intervention will be purposefully sampled and asked to 
complete a ~20 -minute qualitative interview and ~[ADDRESS_85028] information from individuals with a range of perspectives and 
varying degrees of intervention adherence. Sampling will continue until  saturation of 
ideas is reached or until all subjects in the intervention group are invited to be 
interviewed.  
 
SECTION 5  STUDY ENROLLMENT AND WITHDRAWAL  
 
5.1 Study Population, Recruitment and Retention  
Potentially eligible participants will be identified through CNMC ’s medical records prior 
to routine clinic visits . The study will also  be advertised to T1D patients in  the CADP 
through a trained research assistant (RA) in clinic waiting rooms  at the time of their 
routine clinic visits . If a participant expresses interest and meets eligibility criteria, a 
screening visit will be scheduled for directly before or after the patient’s routinely 
scheduled clinic  visit. Participants will also be recruited via word of mouth and social 
media, recruiting children with T1D and their parents willing to travel to Children’s 
National for the in person components.  During the screening visit  the child and their 
parent/guardian (referred to as parent) will complete a LCSB screener questionnaire 
and brief eligibility checklist, including the Eating Attitude Test (EAT) administered by 
[CONTACT_77950] (which will be confirmed by [INVESTIGATOR_124].  Cogen) . Eligible 
participants and their parent will provide assent and consent, respectivel y. 
 
 To encourage adherence and retention, we will provide $ 340 for study participation  (this 
includes $1 20 for the baseline visit , $120 for the follow -up visit,  $30 for booster session, 
$40 for 4 food records, $30 for the screening visit ). The subset of participants who 
undergo DXA or BodPod  will receive an additional $ 50 per visit, for a total of up to $[ADDRESS_85029] of parking (parking voucher) or transportation (equivalent up to $10) to 
Children’s for study visits. We will also encourage retention by [CONTACT_77951]/email reminders and the 6 -week 
telemedicine booster  session.   
 
5.2 Inclusion Criteria  (RCT)  
• Child is between 5 to 14 years old  
• Child consumes ≥ 12 oz. of a LCSB with sucralose (+/ - ace-K) or aspartame+ace -
K per day  
• Child has had a diagnosis of T1D for at least one year  
• Parent/guardian has reliable phone and internet access  
• Parent/guardian and child both speak English  
 
Inclusion Criteria (COVID -19 interviews)  
 
• Parent of child with T1D between 5 to 14 years old  
• Parent of child who has had a diagnosis of T1D for at least one year  
• Parent/guardian has reliable phone and internet access  
• Parent/guardian speaks English fluently  
• Parent of child enrolled in the Childhood and Adolescent Diabetes Program 
(CADP ) at Children’s National  
 
 
5.3 Exclusion Criteria  (RCT)  
• Child consumes foods with low -calorie sweeteners (e.g. , sugar -free ice cream, 
light yogurt, sugar -free oatmeal) more than 3 times per week  
• Child consumes condiments with low -calorie sweeteners (e.g. , sugar -free 
pancake syrup, sugar -free jam, reduced sugar ketchup) more than 3 times per 
week  
• Child has  a poorly managed chronic disease other than T1D, acute illness, current 
or prior eating disorder as assessed by [CONTACT_77952] (COVID -19 interviews)  
 
• Not applicable.  
 
5.4 Inclusion of Children  
We will study children 5-14 years, rather than older adolescents, because children of 
this age are more often monitored by [CONTACT_77953], enabling us to 
more effectively engage parents to maximize intervention adherence.  Children 4 years 
 and younger will be excluded because LCSB consumption is relatively low in this age 
group.  
 
5.5 Recruitment  
The study (both the RCT and the COVID -19 interviews) will be advertised to the clinic 
patient populations  and their parents  through on -site recruitment  in clinic waiting rooms 
and through searching CNMC medical records prior to their routine  clinic  visits , as well 
as via social media, list servs, and word of mouth. Potentially eligible patients will be 
provided with study information by [INVESTIGATOR_2993]-person, via email , postal mail  or by [CONTACT_648]  
(recruitment letter  for RCT  enclosed) .  
 
For the COVID -[ADDRESS_85030] and meets eligibility criteria, 
they will be scheduled for a Zoom  Telehealth  interview at a day/time convenient for 
them.  
 
For the RCT, i f a participant expresses interest and meets initial eligibility criteria  
(assessed in person or via phone) , a screening visit will be scheduled immediately 
before or after the patient’s upcoming clinic visit to ensure  minimal disturbance to clinic 
flow. If the patient is already using CGM, the participant will have the option to complete 
this screening visit remotely via Zoom  Telehealth  rather than in person. Given the large 
volume of children served by [CONTACT_77954], we do not anticipate any problems 
recruiting and retaining a diverse sample of children. If the potential participant has 
questions that the research assis tant (RA)/clinical study coordinator (CRC) cannot 
answer, the RA/CRC will immediately contact [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Streisand.  
 
5.[ADDRESS_85031] participants through 
text message/email reminders throughout the study. This will help us to develop rapport 
with the subjects. In addition,  we will provide a total of $3 40 for participating in the 
study.  The subset of participants who undergo DXA or BodPod  will receive an additional 
$50 per visit, $ 440 total.  Compensation will be provided using the Forte payment 
system (analogous to ClinCard) at GW . For parents who participate in the COVID -19 
interviews, compensation of $[ADDRESS_85032]. An investigator may terminate study participation if:  
• The participant meets an exclusion criterion (either newly developed or not 
previously recognized) that precludes further study participation.  
• The participant is unwilling or unable to comply with the study procedures.  
 
This study may be temporarily suspended or prematurely terminated if there is sufficient 
reasonable cause. Written notification documenting the reason for study suspension or 
termination will be provided by [CONTACT_77955], site 
investigators, the funding agency and regulatory authorities (e.g. , OHRP). If the study is 
 prematurely terminated or suspended, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_77941](s) for the termination or suspension.  
 
Circumstances that may warrant study termination or suspension include, but are not 
limited to:  
• Determination of unexpected, significant, or unacceptable risk to participants  
• Insufficient study team or site participant compliance to protocol requirements  
• Data that are not sufficiently complete and/or evaluable  
• Determination of futility  
 
The study may resume once any concerns about safety, protocol compliance, data 
quality or funding are addressed and satisfy the sponsor, IRB and OHRP.  
 
  
SECTION 6  STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
6.1 Informed Consent/Assent  
Informed consent is a process that is initiated prior to the individual’s agreeing to 
participate in the study. It continues throughout the individual’s study participation. 
Consent and assent forms will be IRB -approved. The parent and participant will be 
asked to read and review the consent and assent document(s), respectively. Extensive 
discussion of risks and possible benefits of participation will be provided to the 
participants and their families. The investigator will explain the research study to the  
participant and answer any questions that may arise. All participants will receive a 
verbal lay explanation of the purposes, procedures, and potential risks of the study and 
of their rights as research participants. Participants and their parent/guardian will have 
the opportunity to carefully review the consent and assent form and to ask questions 
prior to signing. Documentation of parent informed consent  (written or using RedCap e -
consent platform)  and child assent is required for all participants prior t o enrolling in the 
study of undergoing any procedures.  
 
The parent and their child will sign the informed consent and assent, respectively, prior 
to beginning any study procedures. The participants may withdraw consent/assent at 
any time throughout the course of the study. A copy of the informed consent 
documen t(s) will be given to the participant/LAR for their records. The rights and welfare 
of the participants will be protected by [CONTACT_77956].  
 
If the participant has questions that the research assistant (RA)/clinical study 
coordinator (CRC) cannot answer, the RA/CRC will immediately contact [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Streisand to 
provide clarification.  The above described process for obtaining informed consent will 
also apply for obtaining consent from parents participating in the separate, qualitative 
interview about impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic on T1D management. No assent is 
needed for the qualita tive interviews pertaining to impacts of the COVID -19 pandemic 
on T1D management because only the parent will participate.  
 
  
6.2 Screening Process  
Subjects will be screened in-person or via Zoom  Telehealth  or phone  before or after 
patient’s upcoming clinic visit. Participants will be asked about each of the 
inclusion/exclusion criteria using the eligibility screener questionnaire , and the EAT , and 
will be asked to answer a brief prompt (“ The COVID -19 pandemic has impacted  
management of my/my child’s type 1 diabetes by….”) about the impact of the COVID -[ADDRESS_85033] their DEXCOM G6 ™ sensor removed and CGM data downloaded 
using DEXCOM Clarity ™ software. Height and weight will be measured and another 
urine sample and  blood draw performed. Those who had a DXA scan  or BodPod  at the 
baseline visit (n=30) will undergo a second DXA scan  or BodPod , after which these 
participants and their parent will receive a consultation on  the results. Those 
randomized to the in tervention will be purposefully sampled and asked to complete a 
~20-minute qualitative interview and ~[ADDRESS_85034] information from individuals with a range of perspectives and var ying 
degrees of intervention adherence. Sampling will continue until saturation of ideas is 
reached or until all subjects in the intervention group are invited to be interviewed.  
There is no follow -up for participants in the COVID -19 interviews.  
 
6.4 Description of Study Procedures/Evaluations   
We propose a two -arm randomized controlled trial (RCT) during which [ADDRESS_85035] usual LCSB consumption with unsweetened still or seltzer water 
(LCSB restriction) or continue usual LCSB use (control) for 12 weeks . This will provide 
ample time to evaluate intervention feasibility and acceptability, while enabling us to 
generate preliminary evidence of whether LCSB restriction may improve 
cardiometabolic health.  
 
Eligible participants will be scheduled for a baseline visit in the Clinical Research Unit 
(CRU) at CNMC. During the week prior, they will be instructed to continue usual dietary 
habits and complete an online photo -assisted 7-day food record, with parental 
assistance. While we recognize that parents are unlikely to accurately report all of their 
child’s intake because they are not always with them (e.g. , during school), dietary data 
for children under [ADDRESS_85036] the DEXCOM G6 ™ sensor removed and  their CGM data downloaded . In a 
subset of participants (n=30 ) a DXA scan  or BodPod  will also be performed, as R21 
budget constraints preclude DXA or BodPod  on all 60 subjects. Subjects will be 
 randomized (Section C.6)  to 1) LCSB restriction or 2) usual LCSB intake (control). All 
participants (both control and LCSB restriction ) and their parent will undergo a brief, 20 -
minute orientation where the PI [INVESTIGATOR_77942], instructions on completing food records , additional education on CGM and 
placement of the DEXCOM G6 ™ sensor , and counseling on healthy eating strategies. 
Parents will also receive 3 additional sensors (replacement in Week 1, placement in 
Week 11, and replacement in Week 12 for 14 days wear time), written instructions and 
additional resources (YouTube video) for placing (or replacing) the glucose sensors. 
Those in both groups  will be given sample study beverages at baseline (several 
varieties of still and seltzer water  for intervention group or LCSBs matched as possible 
to those typi[INVESTIGATOR_77943] ) to encourage adherence . Those in the 
intervention group  will be counseled on avoiding LCSB. Participants  and their parent will 
also be given a brochure on avoiding LCSBs  to take home , which will include a list of 
specific foods and beverages containing LCSBs  to avoid during the study. Participants 
in the control group will be counseled by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Meni  or a research assistant,  and will 
receive identical counseling on healthy eating as those in the intervention group (in 
accordance with standard dietary guidance for T1D management), with the exception of 
information and resources for avoiding LCSB.  
 
In both groups, text messages will be sent to parents 3X/week with reminders that their 
child should avoid LCSBs  or continue usual intake, per randomization. Adherence will 
be monitored through collection of spot -urine samples for measurement of sucralose 
and ace -K concentrations ( baseline , week 6, week 12), daily text message beverage 
logs completed by [CONTACT_7071], and photo -assisted food records with parent assistance in 
Weeks 0, 6, and 12. During Week 6, participants and their parent will attend a mid -
intervention telemedicine booster visit, during which the PI [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or study RA will 
reinforce the intervention and remind participants to mail back a spot urine sample using 
materials provided by [CONTACT_77957]  (instructions enclosed) . Participants 
will be reminded of the study instructions, including the importance of inserting  the 
DEXCOM G6 sensor (provided by [CONTACT_15328]) at the beginning of Week 11. Parents will 
receive a phone reminder to insert the sensor at the end of Week [ADDRESS_85037] their DEXCOM G6 ™ sensor removed and CGM data downloaded 
using DEXCOM Clarity ™ software. Height and weight will be measured  and a  urine 
sample and blood draw performed. Those who had a  DXA or BodPod at the baseline 
visit (n=30) will undergo a second DXA or BodPod , after which these participants and 
their parent will receive a consultation on the DXA or BodPod  results. Those 
randomized to the intervention will be purposefully sampled and asked to complete a 
~20-minute qualitative interview and ~[ADDRESS_85038] information from individuals with a range of perspectives and varying 
degrees of intervention adherence. Sampling will continue until saturation of ideas is 
reached or until all subjects in the intervention group are invited to be inter viewed. Study 
procedures are detailed below.  
 
Table 1. Timing of Study Procedures  
Time -point  Location  Assessments  Procedures  
Interview 
about 
COVID -19 
impacts on 
T1D 
management  
(separate 
from rest of 
trial) Home  Qualitative interview  Consent, questionnaire, 
qualitative interview  
Screening 
Visit Clinic  or 
Home  Eligibility Determination, 
Enrollment , Questionnaires  Screener, consent, assent, 
EAT, self -care (SCI) , 
COVID -[ADDRESS_85039], CGM , 
beverage log  
Baseline 
Visit CRU  Glycemic control (HbA1c), 
lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], inflammation, visceral 
adiposity, anthropometrics  Height /weight, spot urine , 
blood draw, CGM  
download , DXA or BodPod  
(subset)  
Weeks [ADDRESS_85040], CGM, 
beverage log  
Follow -up 
Visit  CRU  Glycemic control (HbA1c), 
lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], inflammation, visceral 
adiposity, anthropometrics, 
acceptability, feasibility  Height /weight, spot urine, 
blood draw, SCI, 
satisfaction survey, 
qualitative interview, CGM  
download (for weeks 11 
and 12) , DXA or BodPod  
 
 Laboratory analyses: All blood assays will be run by [CONTACT_77958] .  Urine analyses will be 
performed by [CONTACT_77959].  Blood and ur ine samples will be shipped by [CONTACT_77960] -CN 
PCI at Children’s National.  
 
Additional blood and urine specimens will be stored in the CTSI -CN PCI at Children’s 
National for up to three years after completion of data collection for future analyses.  All 
samples will be stored deidentified.  Depending on the future analyses perform ed, 
deidentified samples may be shipped to external commercial or academic laboratories 
in the future.  
 
6.[ADDRESS_85041] 
powered our study using changes before and after LCS consumption. Suez et al., 
reported a 1564 ± 1852 (mg·dL·120 mins)-[ADDRESS_85042]-LCS versus 
baseline, in 7 volunteers consuming saccharin ( equivalent to 4 -5 diet sodas per day) for [ADDRESS_85043] size, 13 subjects per group will provide 80% power to detect 
differences in glycemic control before and after LCS restriction versus control (G*Power; 
V3). Because 60% (4 of 7) of participants were considered LCS -responders by [CONTACT_77961] , 
we will randomize 20 participants to the intervention and control, respectively (n=40). 48 
subjects (24 per group) will account for 20% attrition. However, because prior studies 
conducted by [CONTACT_6283]. Streisand and Cogen in this patient population have generated 70 -
80% usable CGM data, we  will conservatively enroll 60 subjects (n=30 per group). We 
will use 1:1 block randomization stratified by [CONTACT_77962] (sucralose or aspartame + ace -
K) to lay the groundwork for evaluating potential differences in effects of sucralose 
versus aspartame in future studies.  
 
Univariate analyses will be performed using an intention to treat approach. The 
maximum number of days of glycemic data will be used without imputations for 
missingness. Bivariate associations will be examined using cross tabulations, odds 
ratios, and chi -squared tests; boxplots, mean differences, and ANOVA, and 
correlations, as appropriate. We will identify and validate outliers and non -parametric 
tests will be used in the case of non -normal data. By [CONTACT_77963], descriptive analyses will be a reference for 
more complex models. Changes in glycemic variability and other metabolic outcomes 
pre/post intervention will be compared between the groups using ANOVA. Hypothesis 
 testing will be two -sided with a type I error of 0.05. Analyses will be summarized using 
regression estimates, p -values, and 95% CI and performed using SAS 9.4.  
 
Study recruitment, enrollment, and rates of data completion will be used to examine 
feasibility. To assess acceptability, attrition rates will be examined, and qualitative 
interviews will be conducted using [ADDRESS_85044] challenging. 
Adherence to beverage assignments will be operationalized as  any consumption of 
LCSBs  in violation of the study protocol. Data collected during qualitative interviews (for 
both interviews at end of full trial and for the separate interview on COVID -19 impacts 
on T1D management) will be transcribed and coded using standard methods and 
analyzed using content analysis. The codebook will include descriptive categories 
based on a priori research questions as well as data -driven categories to identify 
emergent themes. Streisand, and a trained RA will code the first [ADDRESS_85045]  developed  a quality  assurance  and data management  plan to ensure  that 
compliance  with our protocol  is maintained  throughout  the study.  This will facilitate  the 
collection  of reliable  data,  leading  to credible  research  findings  with the potential  to 
advance  the field.  The plan outlined  below  will also ensure  that the safety  and rights  of 
our human  subjects  are protected.       
Quality control (QC) and quality assurance (QA) will be ongoing throughout the study 
and will primarily by [CONTACT_77964] [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Streisand, who will 
also be responsible for quality management, including oversight of the infor med consent 
process. [CONTACT_77969] will oversee the day -to-day quality control activities (e.g. , 
potential errors in data entry).   
 
In addition  to the required  Human  Subjects  Training,  all study  team  members  will 
receive  additional  training  on all aspects  of the protocol.  Training  will be administered  by 
[INVESTIGATOR_124]. Streisand.  This will include  specific  instruction  on the following  components:  
 
1. Study  Objectives:   All study  team  members  will be required  to read the study  
protocol  in its entirely  and have  a thorough  understanding  of the rationale  and 
significance  of the study.  All study  team  members  will be required  to explain  the 
study  outcomes  of interest  and how they are related  to the study  objectives  set 
forth in the protocol.   
2. Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria:  All study  team  members  will be asked  to make  
eligibility  determinations  using  test screener  questionnaires.  
3. Protocol  Deviations:  All study  members  will be provided  with a detailed  SOP  for 
detection  and reporting  of protocol  deviations.   
 
 SECTION [ADDRESS_85046]  
The study team will ensure that this study is conducted in full conformity with the 
Regulations for the Protection of Human Subjects of Research codified in 45 Part 46 of 
the Code of Federal Regulations, Children’s National Policies and Procedures and 
Good  Clinical Practices.    
 
9.[ADDRESS_85047] (IRB)  
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all participant 
materials will be submitted to the Children’s National IRB for review and approval. 
Approval of both the protocol and the consent form will be obtained before any 
participan t is consented. Any change to the protocol, consent, recruitment materials and 
participant information sheets or letters will require IRB approval before implementation 
and use. The IRB will determine whether previously consented participants need to be 
re-consented and whether consent of more than one parent is required for minors.   
The IRB will be notified of study team updates via an amendment. Other study events 
(e.g., protocol deviations, data monitoring reports) will be submitted per the Children’s 
National IRB Reportable Events Module.  
 
9.[ADDRESS_85048] in a private room to ensure the participant’s privacy. 
The study participant’s contact [CONTACT_77965]. At the end of the study, all research reco rds will be stored 
in a secure location for the time period dictated by [CONTACT_77966]. The research data will not include the participant’s identifying information. 
PHI including name, phone number, and email address will be col lected for the clinical 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]; however, all data will be de -identified and PHI will not be disclosed. The 
study data entry and study management systems used by [CONTACT_77967].  
 
9.[ADDRESS_85049] party without prior written 
approval of the sponsor.  
  
The sponsor representatives and regulatory authorities (e.g., IRB, OHRP) may inspect 
all documents and records required to be maintained by [CONTACT_093].    The clinical 
study site will permit access to such records.  
 
9.[ADDRESS_85050]  
REDCap® support is provided by [CONTACT_77968] (CTSI) 
at Children’ s National.  All key study personnel will follow the Human Research 
Protections Program Investigator, Study Staff, and Family Member Conflicts of Interest 
(COI) Policy.  
 
SECTION [ADDRESS_85051] be ‘YES’ for study eligibility.  
• Has your child been diagnosed with Type  1 Diabetes  (T1D)?   
• Has your child had a diagnosis of T1D for at least one year?   
• Is your child between  5 to 14 years  old?  
• Does your child consume at least [ADDRESS_85052] days (e.g ., diet soda, light fruit juice, reduced sugar sports drink, diet iced 
tea?  
• If so, what is the brand of the beverage and does it contain sucralose and/or 
aspartame+ace -K?  
 
• Do you have reliable phone and internet  access ? 
• Do you and your child both speak English?   
• Are you enrolled in the Childhood and Adolescent Diabetes Program at Children’s 
National?   
 
All answers must be ‘NO’ for study eligibility.  
• Does your child consume foods with low -calorie sweeteners (e.g. , sugar -free ice 
cream, light yogurt, sugar -free oatmeal) more than 3 times per week?  
• Does your child consume condiments with low -calorie sweeteners ( e.g., sugar -free 
pancake syrup, sugar -free jam, reduced sugar ketchup) more than 3 times per 
week?  
• Are you currently participating in any other studies?  
 
 
 