  
USING INTERACTIVE VIRTUAL PRESENCE TO 
REMOTELY ASSIST PARENTS WITH CHILD RESTRAINT 
INSTALLATIONS 
 
Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_10086] C. Schwebel, Ph.D.  
National Clinical Trial (NCT) Identified Number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Document Date: June 10, 2024  
  
<Protocol Short Title>  Version 1.0 
 <DD MMM YYYY>  
  1 STATEMENT OF COMPLIANCE  
The trial will be conducted in accordance with I nternational Conference on Harmonisation  Good Clinical 
Practice (ICH GCP)  and applicable  [LOCATION_002] (US) Code of Federal Regulations  (CFR). The Principal 
Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_407355], or changes to , the protocol will take place without prior 
documented approval from the Institutional Review Board ( IRB), except where necessary to eliminate an 
immediate hazard(s) to the trial participant s. All personnel involved in t he conduct of this study have 
completed Human Subjects Protection and ICH GCP Training.  
 
The protocol, informed consent form(s), recruitment materials, and all participant  materials will be 
submitted to the local Institutional Review Board (IRB)  for review  and approval. Approval of both the 
protocol and the consent form must be obtained before any participant  is enrolled. Any amendment to 
the protocol will require review and approval by [CONTACT_7460]. All changes to  the consent form will be IRB approved; a determination will be made regarding 
whether  a new consent needs to be obtained from participant s who provided consent, using a 
previously  approved consent form.  
 
1  PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
1.1 SYNOPSIS   
Title:  Using Interactive Virtual Presence to Remotely Assist Parents with Child Restraint 
Installations  
Study Background : 
Motor vehicle crashes are the third -leading cause of death to American child ren 
ages 1 -5. When installed correctly, child restraints  (car seats ) reduce risk of 
serious injury and death. However , most restraints are installed incorrectly. The 
current gold standard for correct installation is systematic  car seat checks, where 
certified technicians help parents , but  car seat checks are highly underutilized due 
to barriers in acces s, scheduling, and resources.  
The present study evaluate s use of interactive virtual presence technology 
(interactive merged reality) –  joint , simultaneous remote verbal and visual 
interaction and exposure to the same 3D stimuli –  to assist remotely -located 
parents install ing child restraints. If effective, this technology could supplement or 
replace in-person checks and revolutionize h ow government, industry, and non-
profit s help parents install child restraints  properly . 
Objectives:  
 This protocol describes a randomized non -inferiority trial to evaluate whether 
parents who install child restraints while communicating with remo te expert 
technician s via interactive virtual presence on their smartphones achieve 
installations and learning not inferior in safety to parents who install restraints 
with on-site technician s.  
 
Study Popul ation:  Caregivers of children who have child restraints in a vehicle  
Phase:  III 
Description of Study  
Intervention : Remote ass istance with installation of child restrain ts in vehicles  
<Protocol Short Title>  Version 1.0 
 <DD MMM YYYY>  
  [ADDRESS_513688] parents with installation of child restraints, offering a 
means to reach caregivers efficient ly and broadly with valuable assistance to install child restraints 
correctly.  
 
2.2 BACKGROUND   
 
Child restraint systems  
Child restraint systems (also called “restraints” and “car seats”) reduce risk of serious injury and death to 
infants and young children roughly threefold, but are most effective when installed correctly.  
Unfortunately, multiple studies suggest a large portion of child restraints  are installed incorrectly.  It is 
unclear exactly why child restraints are installed incorrectly with such frequency.  One factor may be that 
manufactu rer instruction manuals are difficult to comprehend or are not reviewed carefully by [CONTACT_3654]. 
Another explanation is the physical demands required to complete the task of installing a child restraint. 
Ergonomic research documents the fact that proper installation of child restraints requires some degree 
of strength and agility, especially if the installer is unfamiliar with optimal installation strategies . A third 
factor is that installation is simply very difficult . Correct installation often requires assistance from an 
expert.  
Increasing the r ate of c orrectly -installed child restraints  
Individualized one -on-one installation of child restraints is considered the gold standard  for child safety,  
but available evidence concerning incorrect installation rates and appointments at certified car- seat 
inspection stations and car seat checks (also called check- up events) suggest it is practiced infrequently.  
There are several barriers to use of car s eat checks . One is convenience . Many families with young 
children live busy, chaotic, and/or stressful lives and the task of obtaining, remembering, and attending 
an appointment for a car seat check may fall low in the list of household priorities. Another is access. 
Organizing and staffing car seat checks with certified technicians is expensive for government or non -
profit agencies to administer. Demand greatly outpaces supply  in most locations , and access is 
particularly poor in rural areas of the country. The present study will evaluate whether we might 
overcome barriers through use of mobile interactive virtual presence that permits remotely -located 
certified technicians to interact with parents to install child restraints in their vehicles at convenient times and  places using a mobile smartphone.  
Interactive virtual presence  
Recent technological advances in interactive virtual presence –  technology that integrates augmented 
and merged virtual reality to permit remote experts to train lay or professional individuals – suggests it 
<Protocol Short Title>  Version 1.0 
 <DD MMM YYYY>  
  [ADDRESS_513689](s) of interest. For example, a remotely located machinist can help a laborer repair the electrical circu it on a complex pi[INVESTIGATOR_407356] -
site for repairs.   
In technical language, interactive virtual presence refers to the opportunity for users to simultaneously engage in interactive visual, nonverbal and aural communication. It provides merged reality and 
concurrent virtual interaction. Users can instantly an d simultaneously view and merge two real- time 
perspectives, offering opportunity for remote collaboration while interactively examining, pointing to, 
graspi[INVESTIGATOR_007], illustrating and discussing a video stream. Images can be frozen, drawn upon, animated, and 
view ed live. Interactive virtual presence can be delivered through a range of hardware platforms, 
including tablets and mobile smartphones.  
In lay language, interactive virtual presence implies that users requiring help –  in the case of our 
research , pare nts – may place their smartphone over a targeted area to allow the expert – in our case , a 
remotely -located certified technician – to “freeze” that image and then point to or grasp particular areas 
with their hands and/or with telestration tools like arrows and pointers located within the software  
while speaking. Thus, for example, if a parent was unsure where to connect a child restraint anchor, she could use her smartphone to sh ow the technician the back seat of the car and request that the 
technician point with her finger to the location of the anchor. Similarly, a parent could direct his phone’s camera toward a child restraint to verify it is installed well and the technician m ight notice a loose strap, 
draw a circle around that strap, and request that the parent tighten it. Interactive virtual presence 
extends beyond traditional telemedicine and video chat, instead provid ing the opportunity to engage  
immersively  in all ta sks and activities that a live certified technician provides , but  using technology from 
a remote location . 
The cognitive and behavioral bases  of child restraint installation  
Installing a child restraint properly is a challenging task that requires complex cognitive processing and logical thinking, some degree of physical strength and dexterity, patience and persistence, and practice and training. Empi[INVESTIGATOR_407357] y demonstrates that parents are poor at the task when they 
engage in it without any resources or with only the manufacturer’s instruction manual . 
The best  alternative strategy to self -installation , and the recommendation of both pediatricians and 
traffic safety experts, is use of individualized instruction, education and assistance from a currently 
certified technician.  Recent evidence from a study of 291 parents , some  of who m had recently worked 
with certified technicians to install their restraint , showed that parents who worked with technicians 
had 90% fewer critical misuse errors than parents who had not worked with technicians.  Interactions 
with technicians ma y also have some lasting effect over time. Among one sample of 47 parents , 
interaction with a certified technician yielded a significant drop in any misuse of the restraint upon a 4 -
month follow -up (from 80% to 66%), as well as a significant drop in “critical” misuse (from 52% to 40% ). 
2.3 RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT    
 
2.3.1  KNOWN POTENTIAL RISKS  
 
Physical risk includes (a) minor risk of discomfort or injury while installing a c hild restraint and (b) minor 
risk of discomfort  from heat while installing a car seat in an o utdoor se tting during hot weather .  
<Protocol Short Title>  Version 1.0 
 <DD MMM YYYY>  
  4 Psychological risks include (a) embarrassment from engaging in the r esearch protocol , which involves 
physical movement in the back seat of a vehicle , and (b) embarrassment to answer questionnaires that 
are mildly invasive , such as household income .  
There is minimal social risk from participating in this study.  The primary risk results from the possibility 
for a breach of confidentiality.  No data we collect will be highly personal, but we will collect information 
that participants may wish to keep private (such as household income), and the risk of a confidentiality 
breach is a social risk.  
Participants will use their own smartphone to participate in  the study and in some cas es may incur small 
costs  to use their phone. There are no known legal risks involved in study participation.  
2.3.[ADDRESS_513690] their child restraints installed with assistance from certified technicians . 
 
3 STUDY DESIGN  
 
3.1 OVERALL DESIGN  
  
A non-inferiority randomized controlled trial will be conducted.  
  
4 STUDY POPULATION  
 
4.1 INCLUSION CRITERIA  
 
• Individuals  who frequently drive children in their vehicles  
• Live in broad geographic footprint  of participating Safe Kids Worldwide data collection center : 
Safe Kids Alabama/Children’s Health System (based in Birmingham,  AL); Safe Kids [LOCATION_004], Los 
Angeles/Los Angeles Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (based in Los Angeles, CA); Safe Kids Charlotte/Mecklenburg/Carolinas Medical Center (based in Charlotte, NC); Safe Kids 
Oklahoma/The Children’s Center Reha bilitation Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (based in Oklahoma City, OK) ; Safe Kids 
Greater Houston (based in Houston, TX); Safe Kids Vermont/University of Vermont Children’s 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (based in Burlington, VT); and Safe Kids Lower Columbia/Cowlitz County EMS and Trauma Care Counc il (based in Kelso, WA)  
• Access to smartphone or other internet -based device (e.g., tablet)  
 
4.2 EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
 
• Inability to communicate in English  or Spanish 
• Physical or mental disability that prohibit s valid participation in the study  
 
<Protocol Short Title>  Version 1.0 
 <DD MMM YYYY>  
  5  
5 STUDY INTERVENTION  
 
5.1 STUDY INTERVENTION(S)  ADMINISTRATION  
 
5.1.1  STUDY INTERVENTION DESCRIPTION  
 
All visits will be conducted by [CONTACT_189132], a researcher (who is also certified as a CPS technician) 
and a technician.  Following baseline activities, the researcher will inform the participant of their random 
assignment to a condition, either installation with a  certified technician via interactive virtual presence or 
installation via the traditional live technician interaction. In cases where there is more than one restraint in 
the vehicle, the researcher will use a random number generator to select one of the r estraints as the target 
for the research.  
 
Those parents randomly assigned to the interactive virtual presence condition will be instructed how to 
connect to the interactive virtual presence program  using t heir personal smartphone . Participants  will 
connect to the interactive virtual presence program , view  a brief online  instructional video on using it, and 
then connect remotely to a certified technician.  
 
Ensuring ecological validity and pragmatic trial practice, the researcher  and local technician  will 
purposely “stay away” through th e remote installation process, allowing the parent and remote technician 
to engage via interactive virtual presence to install the restraint correctly in the vehicle. Remote 
technicians will guide the interaction follo wing standard Safe Kids Worldwide practice for live in -person 
installations and participants will physically install and adjust the restraint into their own vehicle.  
 Those parents assigned to the control condition, installation by a live technician, will engage in standard 
procedures at Safe Kids Worldwide car seat checks to install the target restraint into the vehicle. The live 
technician will not be the same individual as the researcher, although they will both be present at the same location during the research protocol.  
 
5.2 MEASURES TO MINIMIZE BIAS: RANDOMIZATION  
 
Randomization lists will be generated  by [CONTACT_407359]. A separate 
randomization list will be generated for each site and all will u tilize a randomly permuted block design to 
allow for balance among intervention arms as the research study progresses and to limit the ability of any research staff member from definitively knowing/predicting future assignment. Block sizes will range over all even numbers from 8 to 16 inclusive.  
 
6 STUDY INTERVENTION DISCONTINUATION AND PARTICIPANT 
DISCONTINUATION/WITHDRAWAL  
 
6.[ADDRESS_513691].  
 
<Protocol Short Title>  Version 1.0 
 <DD MMM YYYY>  
  6 6.2 PARTICIPANT  DISCONTINUATION/WITHDRAWAL FROM THE STUDY 
Participant s are free to withdraw from participation in the study at any time upon request.  An 
investigat or may discontinue  or withdraw a participant  from  the study for the following reasons : 
 
• Non-compliance to study protocol  
• If any clinical adverse event (AE), laboratory abnormality, or other medical condition or situation 
occurs such that continued participation in the study would not be in the best interest of the 
participant  
 
6.[ADDRESS_513692] to follow -up if they fail to attend scheduled visits and /or are unable 
to be contact[CONTACT_126457].  
 
7 STUDY ASSESSMENTS AND PROCEDURES  
 
7.1 STUDY  ASSESSMENTS  
 
We will consider two primary outcomes, both derived from inspections  of child restraint installations 
using objective coding sheets: (a) total number of inspection points that are correctly installed, translated 
into a percentage to account for different points for different (e.g., rear -facing vs forward- facing; seat belt 
vs LATCH) installations, and (b) dichotomous measure of whether the restraint was installed correctly vs. 
not correctly . Examples of inspection points include whether tether straps are twisted, whether the seat 
moves more than 1 inch to the l eft/right, whether seat belts are routed through the correct belt pathway, 
and whether the carrying handle is in the correct position.  
 
Both outcomes will be collected at four time points: at baseline prior to any intervention, at post, 
immediately followin g the initial installation in both groups, at the start of the follow -up visit following 4 
months of no active intervention by [CONTACT_5051], and at follow -up after parent installation without 
technician assistance.  
 
We also will consider results from a brief knowledge questionnaire , which was  adopted from a n existing  
instrument. Secondary and covariate measures considered will include demographic traits  of the 
participant (e.g., gender, race, ethnicity, SES, research site) and restraint (e.g., forward vs rear facing, 
LATCH vs seat belt installation) , attitudes  and beliefs about child restraints , perceived efficacy of the 
interventions , and reported behav iors using restraints.  
 
7.2 ADVERSE EVENTS AND SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS  
   
7.2.1  DEFINITION  OF ADVERSE EVENTS  (AE)  
Adverse event means any untoward medical occurren ce associated with the use of an intervention in 
humans, whether or not considered intervention -related (21 CFR 312.32 (a)).  
 
7.2.2  DEFINITION OF SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS  (SAE)  
An adverse ev ent (AE) is considered “ serious ” if, in the view of either the investigator or sponsor, it 
results in any of the following outcomes:  
 
<Protocol Short Title>  Version 1.0 
 <DD MMM YYYY>  
  7 • Death  
• A life-threatening adverse event  (of note, the term “life- threatening” refers to an event in which 
the participant  was at risk of death at the time of the event , rather than to an event which 
hypothetically might have caused death if it were more severe ) 
• inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081]  
• a persistent or significant incapacity or subst antial disruption of the ability to conduct normal 
life functions  
• or a congenital anomaly/birth defect . 
 
Important medical events that may not result in death, be life -threatening, or require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6721], based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the participant  and may require medical or surgical interven tion to prevent one of the outcomes listed in 
this definition. Examples of such medical events include allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in an emergency room or at home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient hosp italization, or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse.  
 
7.2.3  CLASSIFICATION OF AN ADVERSE EVENT  
[IP_ADDRESS]  SEVERITY OF EVENT  
For adverse events (AE s), the following guidelines will be used to describe severi ty:  
 
• Mild  – Events require minimal or no treatment and do not interfere with the participant ’s daily 
activities.   
• Moderate  – Events result in a low level of inconvenience or concern with the therapeutic 
measures. Moderate events may cause some interference with functio ning.  
• Severe  – Events interrupt a participant ’s usual daily activity and may require systemic drug 
therapy or other treatment. Severe events are usually potentially life -threatening or 
incapacitating.   Of note, the term “severe” does not necessarily equate to “serious .” 
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  RELATIONSHIP TO STUDY INTERVENTION  
All adverse events ( AEs) must have their relationship to study intervention  assessed  by [CONTACT_407360]/her clinical judgment. 
The degree of certainty about causality will be graded using the categories below. In a clinical trial, the 
study product must always be suspect.  
 
• Related  – The AE is known to occur with the study intervention , there is a reasonable possibility 
that the study intervention  caused the AE , or there is a temporal relationship between the study 
intervention  and event. Reasonable possibility means that there is evidence to suggest a causal 
relationship between the study intervention  and the AE. 
• Not Related  – There is not a reasonable possibility that the administration of the study 
intervention  caused the event, there is no temporal relationship between the study intervention  
and event onset,  or an alt ernate etiology has been established.  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  EXPECTEDNESS  
<Protocol Short Title>  Version 1.0 
 <DD MMM YYYY>  
  8 The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_21190] ( AE) is expected 
or unexpected.  An AE  will be considered unexpected if the nature, severity, or frequency of the event is 
not consistent with the risk information previously described for the study intervention . 
7.2.4  TIME PERIOD AND FREQUENCY FOR EVENT ASSESSMENT AND FOLLOW -UP 
The occurrence of an  adverse event ( AE) or serious adverse event ( SAE) may come to the attention of 
study personnel during study visits and interviews of a study participant , or upon review by a study 
monitor.  
 
All AEs including local and systemic reactions not meeting the criteria for SAE s will be captured on the 
appropriate  case report form  (CRF). Information to be collected includes event description, time of 
onset, assessment of severity, relation ship to study activities , and time of resolution/stabilization of the 
event. All AEs occurring while on study will be documented appropriately regardless of relationship. All 
AEs wil l be followed to adequate resolution.  
 
7.2.5  ADVERSE AND SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING  
All serious adverse events will be reported to the IRB according to regulatory requirements.  The 
Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_407358] a timely manner . All 
serious adverse events ( SAEs ) will be followed until satisfactory resolution.  
 
7.3 UNANTICIPATED PROBLEMS  
 
7.3.1  DEFINITION OF UNANTICIPATED PROBLEMS (UP) 
The Office for Human Research Pro tections ( OHRP ) considers unanticipated problems involving risks to 
participant s or others to include, in general, any incident, experience, or outcome that meets all  of the 
following criteria:  
 
• Unexpected in terms of nature, severity, or frequency given ( a) the research procedures that are 
described in the protocol -related documents, such as the Institutional Review Board ( IRB)-
approved research protocol and informed consent document; and (b) the characteristics of the 
participant  population being studied;  
• Related or possibly related to participation in the research (“possibly related” means there is a reasonable possibility that the incident, experience, or outcome may have been caused by [CONTACT_3459]); and  
• Suggests that the research places participant s or others at a greater risk of harm (including 
physical, psychological, economic, or social harm) than was previously known or recognized.  
 
7.3.2   UNANTICIPATED PROBLEM REPORTING  
The investigator will report unanticipated problems (UP s) to the reviewing Institutional Review Board 
(IRB). The UP  report will include the following information:  
 
• Protocol identifying information: protocol title and number, PI’s name, and the IRB project 
number;  
• A detailed description of the event, incident, experience, or outcome;  
• An explanation of the basis for determining that the event, incident, experience, or outcome 
represents an UP ;  
<Protocol Short Title>  Version 1.0 
 <DD MMM YYYY>  
  9 • A description of any changes to the protocol or other corrective actions that have been taken or 
are propos ed in response to the UP . 
 
To satisfy the requirement for prompt reporting, UP s will be reported using the following timeline:   
 
• UPs that are serious adverse events (SAE s) will be reported to the IRB within 10 working days  of 
the investigator becoming aware of the event.  
• Any other UP  will be reported to the IRB within 10 working days  of the investigator becoming 
aware of the problem.   
 
8 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
8.1 STATISTICAL HYPOTHESES  
 
• Primary Endpoint(s):  
 
(a) total number of inspection points that are correctly installed, translated into a percentage to account for 
different points for different (e.g., rear -facing vs forward -facing; seat belt vs LATCH) installations, and 
(b) dichotomous measure of whether the restraint was installed correctly vs. not correctly  
 
• Secondary Efficacy Endpoint(s):  
 
results from a brief knowledge questionnaire  
 
8.2 SAMPLE SIZE  DETERMINATION  
 
To conclude non- inferiority of the interactive remote presence condition with ≥80% power, Type I error 
rate of .025, a non- inferiority margin of 0.025, and assuming a common SD of 0.10 (similar to that 
observed previously ), we propose a sample size of 1476. This estimate conservatively assumes 10% 
attrition based on a two- sample test of non -inferiority difference in means.  
 
The t able below  presents statistical power to declare non -inferiority between two means, as def ined by [CONTACT_407361], assuming a common standard deviation of 0.10, a Type I error rate of 0.025, a 
sample size per group of 664, the non- inferiority margin (Δ) specified in the row, and the different 
combinations of intervention means (µ1, µ2) specified by [CONTACT_407362]. As long as the difference between the two means is less than the assumed non -inferiority margin, the definition of non- inferiority is met and 
power can be calculated. However, as can be seen by [CONTACT_407363], as the dif ference in 
intervention means grows, statistical power will decrease.  
 
To illustrate interpretation of the table, if the mean installation accuracy of in -person instruction is 0.90 
and the mean installation accuracy of remote instruction is 0.90 (i.e., the two groups achieve equal 
accuracy), then 664 persons randomized to each group provides 99.5% power to declare non- inferiority of 
remote instruction to in -person instruction using a Type I error rate of .025, a non- inferiority margin of 
0.025, an d a common standard deviation of 0.10. Similarly, if the mean installation accuracy of in- person 
instruction is 0.90 and the mean installation accuracy of remote instruction is 0.89, the two means are not 
equal but the difference in means (0.90- 0.89 = 0.01) remains less than the declared non- inferiority margin 
(0.025). Under this scenario, 664 persons randomized to each group provides 78% power to declare non-
<Protocol Short Title>  Version 1.0 
 <DD MMM YYYY>  
  [ADDRESS_513693] deviation of 0.10.  
 
Table. Statistical Power assuming 664 persons randomized per group (total N = 1476 with 
conservatively -estimated 10% attrition).  
 
 Combination of mean accuracy scores for intervention groups  
Δ µ1 = 0.90  
µ2 = 0.90  µ1 = 0.90  
µ2 = 0.8975  µ1 = 0.90  
µ2 = 0.895  µ1 = 0.90  
µ2 = 0.8925  µ1 = 0.90  
µ2 = 0.8900  
0.020  0.954  0.890  0.780  0.625  0.445  
0.025  0.995  0.984  0.954  0.890  0.780  
0.030  0.999  0.999  0.995  0.984  0.954  
 
 
 
8.3 STATISTICAL ANALYSES  
 
Descriptive Statistics and Covariates. Descriptive statistics for participants randomized to each 
intervention will be summarized for each outcome using measures of central tendency (mean, median, 
proportion) and variability (variance, standard deviation, range). Several covariates may impact t he 
relation between the intervention and the outcome measures of interest, and they will be similarly 
summarized descriptively. These include demographics (age, gender, target child birth order, race , 
ethnicity, SES ); study site; type of vehicle; type of c hild restraint (including forward-  vs. rear -facing) ; and 
attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors surrounding child restraints. Because parents will be randomized to the 
interventions, we expect covariates to be balanced across intervention groups. We will assess balance 
across intervention groups  and utilize covariates in the primary analyses if appropriate . We also will 
estimate interaction effects to determine whether the intervention is more or less effective among 
particular subgroups  that are adequately represented in the sample.  
 
Primary Analyses. We have three specific aims. Specific Aim [ADDRESS_513694] to 
find over 90% or greater of restraints are installed correctly in all respects. We also will investigate 
individual components of installation and expect over 90% of components, across participants, will be 
installed correctly. 95% confidence inter vals for all of these outcomes will be calculated and presented 
graphically as a Forrest Plot with a reference line set at 0.90. Identical analyses will be conducted for the 
group randomized to in- person installation.  
 
Specific Aim [ADDRESS_513695] whether chil d restraint installation by [CONTACT_407364] a rate not inferior to installation with a live technician. Two models will be computed, one with a measure of installation accuracy (proportion of all child res traint installation 
components performed correctly) as the dependent variable and the other with the dichotomous outcome 
of correct (100% correct installation across all components) vs. incorrect installation (<100% correct installation) as the dependent variable. A ssuming that improvement is reflected by a positive value (that 
is, a higher post -training value is better), our primary model, based upon installation accuracy, is:  
 
H
o: ΔLIVE – Δ IVP ≥ δ vs. H A: ΔLIVE – Δ IVP < δ 
 
where δ is the non- inferiority margin  and IVP stand s for interactive virtual presence. We will assume a 
non-inferiority margin of 0.025 for the primary analysis (see power analysis ) and perform Analysis of 
<Protocol Short Title>  Version 1.0 
 <DD MMM YYYY>  
  11 Covariance (ANCOVA) to determine if the difference of mean installation accuracy scores between the 
two groups falls below the non- inferiority margin of 0.025, after adjustment for the baseline measure of 
installation accuracy and other relevant covariates. Based on previous work,  we do not  anticipate non -
normality of the continuous outcome variable of installation accuracy. However, we will assess normality 
using graphical techniques (normal probability plot, histograms) prior to analysis and will transform 
outcomes if appropriate. The one -sided non- inferiority test will be conducted using a Type I error of 
0.025.  
 
Specific Aim [ADDRESS_513696] parent learning and retention , both through measures of installation accuracy 
(after the intervention , at start of follow -up visit, and after parent re -installation during follow -up visit ) 
and through the  brief knowledge questionnaire  administered at post and at follow -up. Six  models will be 
computed using strategies identical to those for Aim 2 and predicting the following dependent variables: 
(a) installa tion accuracy (proportion of restraint components performed correctly at start of 4- month 
follow -up visit ); (b) dichotomous outcome of correct vs incorrect installation at start of follow -up visit ; 
(c) installation accuracy after parental re-installation during follow -up visit; ( d) dichotomous outcome of 
correct vs incorrect installation after parental re -installation during follow -up visit; (e) knowledge 
questionnaire during post visit; and (f) knowledge questionnaire during follow -up visit.  
 
9 SUPPORTING DOCUMENTATION AND OPERATIONAL CONSIDERATIONS 
 
9.1 REGUL ATORY, ETHICAL, AND STUDY OVERSIGHT CONSIDERATIONS  
 
9.1.1  INFORMED CONSENT PROCESS  
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  CONSENT/ASSENT AND OTHER INFORMATIONAL DOCUMENTS PROVIDED TO 
PARTICIPANT S 
 
Consent forms describing in detail the study intervention , study procedures, and risks are given to 
participants  parents and documentation of informed consent is required prior to conducting study 
activities . 
  
[IP_ADDRESS]  CONSENT PROCEDURES AND DOCUMENTATION  
 
Informed consent is a process that is initiated prior to the individual’s agreeing to participate in the study and continues throughout the individual’s study participation.
 Consent forms will be Institutional 
Review Board ( IRB)-approved and participant s will be asked to read and review the document. The 
investigator will answer any questions that arise  in terms suited to the  participant ’s comprehension .  
Participant s will have the opportunity to carefully review the written consent form and ask questions 
prior to signing.  The participant  will sign the informed consent document prior to engaging in any study 
procedures.  Participant s will be informed that participation is voluntary and that they may withdraw 
from the study at any time, without prejudice.  The informed consent process will be conducted and  
documented in the source document (including the date) . 
9.1.2  STUDY DISCONTINUATION AND CLOSURE  
 
<Protocol Short Title>  Version 1.0 
 <DD MMM YYYY>  
  12 This study may be temporarily suspended or prematurely terminated if there is sufficient reasonable 
cause.  Written notification, documenting the reason for study suspension or termination, will be provided by [CONTACT_391333].  If the study is prematurely terminated or suspended, the  Principal Inve stigator ( PI) will promptly inform study participant s and the 
Institutional Review Board ( IRB), will provide the reason(s) for the termination or suspension.  Study 
participant s will be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530], as applicable, and be informed of changes to study visit sc hedule.  
  
Circumstances that may warrant termination or suspension include, but are not limited to:  
• Determination of unexpected, significant, or unacceptable risk to participant s 
• Demonstration of efficacy that would warrant stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007]    
• Insufficient compliance to protocol requirements  
• Data that are not sufficiently complete and/or evaluable  
• Determination of futility  
 
The s tudy may resume once concerns about safety, protocol compliance, and data quality are 
addressed , and satisfy the IRB . 
 
9.1.[ADDRESS_513697] ( IRB) may inspect all documents and records required 
to be maintained by [CONTACT_093].  
 Study participant s’ contact [CONTACT_9168]. At the 
end of the study, all records will continue to be kept in a  secure location for as long a period as dictated 
by [CONTACT_139461]/or  Institutional policies . 
 Study participant  research data, which is used for purposes of statistical analysis and scientific reporting, 
will be stored securely . Individual participant  research data will be identified by a unique study 
identification number.   
 
9.1.[ADDRESS_513698]  KEEPI[INVESTIGATOR_1645]   
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  DATA COLLECTION AND  MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITIES  
 
Data collection is the responsibility of the research team under the supervision of the Lab Manager, 
Study Biostatistician,  and Principal Investigator. The Principal I nvestigator is responsible for ensuring the 
accuracy, completeness, legibility, and timeliness of the data reported . 
 
[IP_ADDRESS]  STUDY RECORDS RETENTION  
 
Study documents will be retained for a minimum of 3  years after the completion of the study  or longer if 
required by [CONTACT_427].  
<Protocol Short Title>  Version 1.0 
 <DD MMM YYYY>  
  13  
9.1.5  PROTOCOL DEVIATIONS  
 
A protocol deviation is any noncompliance with the clinical trial protocol  requirements. The 
noncompliance may be either on th e part of the participant , the investigator, or the study site staff. As a 
result of deviations, corrective actions will developed and implemented.  
 These practices are consistent with ICH GCP :  
• 4.5 Compliance with Protocol, sections 4.5.1, 4.5.2, and 4.5.3  
• 5.1 Quality Assurance and Quality Control, section 5.1.1  
• 5.[ADDRESS_513699] (IRB)  per their policies.  The Principal Investig ator is 
responsible for knowing and adhering to the  reviewing IRB requirements.  
  
<Protocol Short Title>  Version 1.0 
 <DD MMM YYYY>  
  [ADDRESS_513700] Operating Procedure  
UP Unanticipated Problem  
US [LOCATION_002]  
 
10 REFERENCES  
 
Much of this protocol was published in the following study protocol:  
 
Schwebel, D. C., Mackay, J. M., & Redden, D. ( 2020). Study protocol: A randomized non- inferiority trial using 
interactive virtual presence to remotely assist parents with child restraint installations. Injury Prevention , 26, 289 -
294. 
 
Other aspects are included in the study IRB protocol . 