Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  1 Study Title : QuitFast: Evaluating transcranial magnetic stimulation as a tool to reduce smoking 
directly following a quit attempt  
 
Principal Investigator , Co-investigator(s) : Colleen Hanlon, PhD; Eric Donny, PhD; Heather Douglas, 
MD 
 
Sponsor or funding source: NIH/NIDA  
 
Background , Rationale  and Context  
Significance [ADDRESS_928291] 2 weeks after a smoking quit attempt.  
Smoking is the leading preventable cause of mortality and morbidity in the [LOCATION_002], contributing to  
approximately 443,000 deaths annually -  more than the deaths attributable to alcohol, illicit -drug use, 
homicide, AIDS, and suicide combined (14). The combined health and loss -of-productivity costs associated 
with smoking are substantial, exceeding 300 billion dollars per yea r, or nearly 10 times NIH’s entire 2016 
budget  (14, 15) . In 2015, approximately 36.5 million Ameri cans (15%) were regular smokers (“at least [ADDRESS_928292] days of the week”). Of regular smokers 68% would like to quit 
smoking, and 43% had initiated a smoking quit attempt in the 
previous year (15.7 million Americans). Wh ile these  numbers  
suggest that individuals are motivated to quit smoking, only 6% 
of smokers who attempt to quit without assistance maintain 
abstinence for 30 days (14). A Cochrane Review of 
demonstrated that current smoking cessation treatments (e.g., 
nicotine replacement therapy, cognitive behavioral therapy 
[CBT], non -nicotine medications) are 2 -3 times more effective 
than quitting without assistance, however their aggregate 
success rate is only 30% (70% failure rate) (16).   
The most critical period for long-term success of smoking 
cessation appears to be in the first [ADDRESS_928293] predictor 
of 6-month treatment outcomes (n=1649; Odds ratio: 1.4, P 
<0.0001; Ashare et al. 2013 (110)). High  relapse rates during this 
first week of smoking cessation are likely facilitated by 
[CONTACT_685017] -
associated craving and loss of executive control. This statement 
is backed by [CONTACT_46431] [ADDRESS_928294] this vulnerable period for relapse.  Our long term vision is that this 
early brain stimulation intervention would improve long term outcomes of other pharmacotherapeutic and  
behavioral training approaches – a topic we will be prepared to explore in a subsequent renewal of this R01 
proposal.  The goal of the present proposal is to evaluate [ADDRESS_928295] an increasingly sophisticated understanding of the neural circuitry of substance 
Figure 1. A representation showing the 
separation and unique targets of the fronto -
striatal loops in the non -human primate, 
adapted from Haber and Knutson, 2010, 
Neuropsychopharmacology (1) 
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  2 dependence. Through optogenetics (17, 18)  and designer receptors exclusively activated by [CONTACT_685018] 
(DREADDs; (19)) it is possible to change drug taking behavior through direct stimulation of frontal -striatal 
circuits.  Specifically, stimulation o f the prelimbic cortex (PL) leads to an increase in drug taking, whereas, 
stimulation of the infralimbic cortex (IL) will decrease drug taking (20). The PL is functionally and 
anatomically similar to the ventral medial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) (Fig1. Red), whereas the IL is 
functionally similar the human dorsal lateral prefrontal corte x (dlPFC) (Fig. 1, yellow) (21, 22) .  
Given these promising preclinical data, there is strong momentum to develop a neural circui t-based 
treatment  for clinical substance abuse.   Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) allows researchers to 
selectively activate or inhibit populations of neurons in humans. Through electromagnetic induction, 
repetitive pulses of TMS to the scalp will i nduce long -term potentiation -like (LTP -like) or long -term 
depression -like (LTD -like) effects in the cortical area beneath the coil in a frequency -dependent manner.  
Repetitive TMS to the frontal cortex induces a change in dopamine binding (23, 24)  in monosyna ptic striatal 
targets.   By [CONTACT_685019] a single high 
frequency (> 10 Hz) or 
intermittent bursting 
frequency (intermittent 
theta burst stimulation; 
iTBS) to the cortex, it is 
possible to in duce an 
LTP-like effect on both  
behavior and neural 
activity  (23,25) (26). 
By [CONTACT_685020] a 
single low frequency 
(1-5 Hz) or continuous 
bursting frequency 
(cTBS), it is possible 
to induce an  LTD like 
effect  on behavior and 
neural activity (3). In 
2013 our group 
differentially  activated 
these two frontal -
striatal  circuits in healthy adults using TMS (10). In 2016 this was replicated and extended to cocaine users 
all of whom were also tobacco users) (27).  
 
We have recently demonstrated the LTD -like effects  of cTBS  on the vmPFC, striatum, and insula in cocaine 
users (63,111), alcohol users (111), and smokers (Figure 5).  As a significant conceptual advance in the 
field, this proposal will parametrically evalu ate [ADDRESS_928296] for the systematic development of these neural -circuit  
based strategies as treatments for our participants .  
 
Significance 3  – Using an established conceptual  model in addiction  as a foundation for brain stimulation 
treatmen t development.  Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is an FDA -approved treatment fo r 
depression which is now used in over 650 clinics in all 50 states (Neuronetics Company data), and covered 
by [CONTACT_351237] 48 states (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Local Coverage Determinations). 
The evolving availability of clinical devices and trained staff represents a latent public health resource with 
incredible potential. Through this network of devices, evidence based TMS protocols for substance 
Figure 2 . Adapted from Hanlon et al 2015, A) The competing neurobehavioral decision 
systems (CNDS) theory posits that in addiction, choice  results from imbalance between 
2 decision systems (impulsive and executive), which are functionally linked to limbic 
and executive control circuits in the brain (Bickel et al 2016). B) It follows then, by 
[CONTACT_685021]  (e.g. either dampening the 
limbic/impulsive system or amplifying the executive control system), we may be able to 
induce a sustainable change in smoking behavior.  
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/[ADDRESS_928297] suited for changing smoking behavior.  As of June 2016, there were 12 
published studies (including our own) which evaluate d TMS as a tool to decrease craving for cigarettes. Of 
the 12 studies, 9 applied high frequency stimulation (10hz, 20Hz, iTBS) to the left dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex (dlPFC) (Strategy 2 in this proposal), the same target used in depression. While this may be valuable, 
as both diseases share common deficits in executive control (which is largely modulated by [CONTACT_685022]), 
scientifically, it is not obvious that the standard treatments for depression (e.g. 10Hz and iTBS to the 
left dlPFC) will be the optimal  target sites for tobacco use . The neurobiological basis for these diseases 
are not identical. While these early studies are  promising, without a cohesive scientific framework, it 
is very difficult to reconcile these small studies with one another. To make  significant progress in 
TMS treatment development for tobacco use, we have proposed a large, rigorous, evidence -based 
study which will prospectively evaluate 2 TMS treatment strategies that logically flow from the 
Competing Neurobehavioral Decision System  (CNDS) theory – an established conceptual model of 
addiction which unites both behavioral and brain systems involved in tobacco dependence (28-30).   
 
The CNDS specifies th at the frontal -striatal circuits involved in limbic reward and impulsive action are 
relatively hyperactive, while the executive control circuits are relatively hypoactive. Intervention efforts 
could be therefore be directed at either decreasing impulsive r eward circuit activity to cues or increasing 
the executive control circuit activity to cues. The primary goal of this proposal is to parametrically evaluate 
the efficacy of two promising new circuit -
based interventions for the treatment of 
cigarette smokin g. Aim [ADDRESS_928298] system (responsible for 
reward valuation and craving, Figure 2). 
Aim 2 will evaluate the efficacy of 
amplifying activity in the executive 
control system (responsible for cogni tive 
control, Figure 2). For both interventions 
we will evaluate the relative efficacy of 5, 
10, and 15 sessions of prefrontal cortex 
(PFC) theta burst stimulation (TBS), as a 
tool to change cigarette valuation, 
preference for immediate rewards (delay 
discounting), cigarette self -
administration, and the brain’s response 
to smoking cues.  
Significance 4. Logical, outcome -
centered investigation of the TMS 
parameter space on smoking behavior and brain reactivity to cues.  Despi[INVESTIGATOR_684993] -invasive brain stimulation treatment protocols for tobacco dependence, many unanswered 
questions remain. Prominent gaps in our knowledge include 1) the optimal target location [e.g. medial PFC 
(mPFC) or dlPFC], and 2) the durability of TMS  treatment on smoking behavior. Arguably,  these 
methodologic issues need to be resolved in a reasoned, parametric manner before launching large, 
expensive, multi -site studies.  We have previously demonstrated that the 2 components of the CNDS theory 
(Impulsive/Limbic (mPFC & Executive control (dlPFC))) can be differentially stimulated with TMS [ (10), 
Figure 3].  Moreover, activity in these circuits can be attenuated or amplified with human theta burst 
stimulation (TBS), a biologically -based form of TMS. Continuous TBS (cTBS) results in long -term 
depression (LTD) of cort ical excitability and intermittent TBS (iTBS) results in long term potentiation 
Figure 3 . Using interleaved TMS/BOLD imaging, we demonstrated that it 
is possible to differentiate medial and lateral frontal striatal circuits (pi[INVESTIGATOR_684994]) by [CONTACT_685023]: FP1 & F3 
of the EEG 10 -20 system (activating MPFC and dlPFC) (Hanlon et al 
PlosOne 2013).  
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  4 (LTP) (3). The overarching goal of this proposal is to fill these gaps in our knowledge through a 5 -
year parametric study investigating effects of LT P-like stimulation to the mPFC (Aim 1) and LTP -
like stimulation  of dlPFC (Aim 2). The significance of this proposal is underscored not only by [CONTACT_685024] -circuit based approach to treatment development, but also by [CONTACT_685025], 
parametric methods we will use to evaluate the efficacy of these two potential i nterventions, which 
will inform future treatment studies.  
Significance 5. Use of evidence -based behavioral markers as dependent measures.  Delay discounting, 
cigarette demand, self -administration, and cigare tte craving each measure key independent processes 
related to daily smoking. First, in both cross -sectional and longitudinal studies, excessive discounting of 
delayed rewards is strongly associated with cigarette smoking and other substance use (31-35); for meta -
analys es see  (36, 37) . In fact, excessive delay discounting is a candidate marker for addiction processes 
which can be used to identify and predict addiction and its severity, and predict failure in smoking cessation 
treatment severity (38-40). Moreover, emerging evidence suggests that experimental reductions in delay 
discounting in the laborato ry are associated with reduced cigarette self -administration (41). Second, 
behavioral economic demand for a commodity, such as cigarettes, is an important indicator for potential 
harm (42). The interaction of two demand parameters, intensity of demand (i.e., total consumption when 
the commodity is free) and elasticity (i.e., the sensitivit y of consumption to price increases) gleaned from 
a demand analysis, are measures of the value of cigarettes (43). Importantly, greater demand for cigarettes 
is associated with greater dependence severity (44) and is predictive of treatment outcome among smokers 
(greater discounting has worse outcomes) (39). Third, self -adminis tration of cigarettes in the laboratory 
provides a detailed examination of experiment variables on smoking behavior in controlled environment 
(41). Fourth, state craving for cigarettes c an be measured using the Questionnaire of Smoking Urges -Brief 
(QSU -Brief). Two factors derived from this questionnaire, relief from smoking and intention to smoke, are 
validated measures to assess momentary craving (45). These 
state measures allow for a comparison between self -reported 
craving and neural responsivity to the MRI cue reactivity 
task.  
Preliminary data demonstrating the systematic Development 
of Non -Invasive Brain Stimulation for Addiction.  
Over the last 4 years our laboratories at the Medical 
University of South Carolina (MUSC) and Virginia Tech 
Carillion Research Institute (VTCRI) have performed [ADDRESS_928299] germane studies are 
summarized below:  
In Study 1, we demonstrated that the frontal -striatal circuits 
involved in limbic drive and in executive control can be 
differentially activated  through T MS in healthy, non -
smokers. In this study TMS was applied to a cortical node of 
the limbic circuit (frontal pole/vmPFC) and to the executive 
control circuit (dlPFC) while participants were in the MRI 
environment [ (10) Figure 3]. Thus, demonstrating that TMS 
can selectively modulate limbic regions.  
In Study 2, we demonstrated that 6 sessions of LTD -like TMS (cTBS) to the vmPFC  (Strategy 1 in the 
present proposal) delivered  in a singl e day caused a specific decrease in orbitofrontal cortex and ventral 
Figure  5. In a pi[INVESTIGATOR_684995]. Hanlon & Bickel, after 5 
days of vmPFC cTBS (Strategy 1), individuals that 
received real TMS had a significant decrease in mPFC, 
insula and cingulate response to cigarette cues. This was 
not present in the Sham group. (Data shown are within 
group contrasts Visit 1 vs Visit 6, Factorial design, k = 25, 
voxel level p<0.05, uncorrected).  
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  5 striatal/accumbens BOLD signal in cocaine users (all of whom smoked cigarettes) relative to sham 
stimulation (Hanlon et al 2015). At the time, this was the first study to apply multiple d oses of cTBS to the 
vmPFC.  
In Study 3, through a NIDA R21 [CONTACT_55209] (a co -investigator on this application), has evaluated the effect of 
10 sessions (10 days) of LTP-like TMS to the dlPFC  (Strategy 2 in the present proposal, cigarette 
smokers)  (10Hz rTMS) on  46 smokers randomized to receive real or sham TMS. These methods built on 
prior published work demonstrating single session effects on craving (7). The preliminary results of this 
study suggested that 10 days/[ADDRESS_928300] demonstrated the power of 
intermittent TBS (iTBS). iTBS is a biologically based treatment protocol, in which similar effect sizes can 
be achieved 20x faster relative to standard single frequency stimulation. Moreover, iTBS is as effective as 
10 Hz in depression (46), and multiple sessions per day are feasible)  
In Study 4, in a collaborative effort with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_392134] (Hanlon) and [CONTACT_685061] of Virginia 
Tech, we performed a sham -controlled randomized study evaluating the effects of 5 sessions of LTD -like 
cTBS TMS to the vmPFC  on cigarette demand, delay discounting, and brain reactivity to cues in a cohort 
of 18 cigarette smokers. We demonstrated that this protocol decreased: (1) cigarette valuation as measured 
by [CONTACT_685026] (Figure 4), (2) delay discounting for  monetary rewards, (3) the neural 
response to nicotine cues in the PFC, striatum, and insula (Figure 5), compared to a sham group. As we 
noted above, the current treatments available to smokers, although somewhat efficacious, are not robust. 
The 70% failur e rate of treatment -as-usual highlights the necessity of exploring novel therapeutic 
interventions. Through a systematic and parametric exploration of the effect sizes and durability of 
two promising TMS treatment strategies, the experiments proposed in th is 5-year R01 have the 
opportunity to begin a new chapter in the development of efficacious treatments for tobacco 
dependence.   
INNOVATION.   
Systematic Development of Non -Invasive Brain Stimulation for Addiction.  The development of brain 
stimulation treat ments for addiction has garnered significant attention from both the NIH (i.e. recent 
RFAs) and in the literature [see reviews: (47-51)]. In humans, TMS is the only  non-invasive tool 
currently available in human clinical research which can selectively inhibit limbic reward or potentiate 
executive control circuits that contribute to addiction. A single pulse of TMS applied over a cortical target 
induces significant ch anges in neural activity in the area directly under the coil as well as measurable 
changes in BOLD signal and dopamine levels in regions monosynaptically connected to the target (24, 
25, 52 -56). Therefore, a series of repetitive TMS pulses can induce a sustainable potentiation or 
attenuation in those regions.  
Frequency.  Nearly all brain stimulation studies published to date in addiction have used a single continuous 
frequency (often 10 Hz or 1 Hz) of stimulation (rather than a biologically relevant rhythm) in an attempt to 
modulate craving. While [ADDRESS_928301] emerged (3) and appear 
to produce comparable effects, but in a more efficient manner than single frequency stimulation  (46). The 
most commonly used form of patterned brain stimulation is TBS. A single session of TBS stimulation ([ADDRESS_928302] frequency) has effects that last up 
to an hour (3, 57) . Modeled from basic science methods (58, 59) , human TBS induces a potentiation and 
depression of cortical excitability when given in an intermittent (LTP -like) and continuous (LTD -like) 
manner, respectively (3). Given the role of LTP in the acquisition and mainte nance of drug use behaviors, 
and the clinical reality that a more efficient treatment (2 minutes versus 20 minutes) would likely be more 
manageable for addiction treatment programs, in preliminary studies we have been using cTBS (rather than 
rTMS at 1 Hz) to induce an LTD -like state in limbic circuitry while nicotine users are viewing nicotine 
cues (see Figure 3 & 4).  
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/[ADDRESS_928303] focused on the 
executive control circuit (dlPFC). Although several of these studies have found mixed results for nicotine 
(4, 6 -8), the scientific rationale for targeting the dlPFC in addiction is sound and is typi[INVESTIGATOR_684996] (likely necessary to resist drug cues). However, targeting the limbic 
reward system may be a more direct and efficacious approach to dampening cigarette valuation and cue -
reactivity given that nicotine directly affects dopamine reuptake in the mesolimbic dopamine system (60-
62). A recent sham -controlled crossover study in non -treatment seeking nicotine users by [CONTACT_685027] a single session of frontal pole/vmPFC cTBS led to a significant decrease in evoked 
BOLD signal in the orbital prefrontal cortex and the  ventral striatum (Figure 3, (63)). All participants 
received real cTBS on one visit and sham cTBS on another visit (randomized) with functional MRI data 
collected immediatel y before and after the cTBS stimulation (given that single session effects likely abate 
after 1 hr). These data have guided this revised R01 proposal design.  
Other areas of innovation which have been mentioned include: the conceptual focus on developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a tool 
to target the first week after a quit attempt which could ultimately be used in conjunction with a 
comprehensive pharmacotherapy and cognitive behavioral therapy program (Significance 1), and the use 
of an established conceptual model (CNDS theory) to  parametrically explore [ADDRESS_928304] 
predictor of 6 month outcomes (n=1649; Odds ratio: 1.4, P <0.0001; Ashare et al. 2013). Prodigious relapse 
rates during this first week of smoking cessation are likely due to behav ioral and neurobiological factors 
that contribute to high cue -associated craving and low executive control over smoking. The long term goal 
of the research is to develop evidence -based transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) protocols to 
facilitate abstine nce during this critical period.  
The competing  neurobehavioral decision systems  (CNDS) theory posits that in addiction, choice  results 
from a regulatory imbalance between two decision systems (impulsive and executive). These behavioral 
systems are functio nally linked to two discrete frontal -striatal circuits which regulate limbic and executive 
control (2). Modulating these competing neural circuits (e.g. either dampening the limbic/impulsive 
system or amplifying the executive control system), may render smokers less vulnerable to factors 
associated with relapse. The scientific premise for the propo sed research is that direct modulation of these 
neural circuits will induce changes in cigarette valuation and brain reactivity to smoking cues. However, 
the relative efficacy of targeting one or the other systems is unknown. To address this gap we will ta rget 
the two components derived from the CNDS.  
These two frontal -striatal neural circuits - the limbic loop (ventromedial prefrontal cortex (vmPFC) -ventral 
striatum), and executive control loop (dorsolateral PFC (dlPFC) -dorsal striatum) can be differentia lly 
stimulated by [CONTACT_685028] (TBS), a patterned form of transcranial magnetic stimulation. 
Continuous TBS (cTBS) results in long term depression (LTD) of cortical excitability and intermittent TBS 
(iTBS) results in potentiation (LTP) (3). Recent studies by [CONTACT_685029] -like 
cTBS to the vmPFC (Aim 1)  attenuates brain activity in the nucleus accumbens (Hanlon et al. 2015) and 
salience network (2017). In a collaborative MUSC/VTCRI study, 5 days of vmPFC cTBS reduced the value 
of cigarettes, preference for imme diate gratification, and smoking cue -evoked brain activity (see 
Preliminary data). Alternatively, other groups have demonstrated that LTP -like stimulation to the dlPFC 
(Aim 2)  decreases cigarette craving and cigarette use (4,5) . These studies support the targets specified by 
[CONTACT_685030]. We will evaluate the relative efficacy of these 2 strategies a s novel tools to change smoking -related 
behaviors and dampen brain reactivity to cues in two double -blind, sham -controlled neuroimaging studies. 
Our long -term vision is that TBS would be used as an acute intervention enabling individuals to get through 
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/[ADDRESS_928305] week after a smoking quit attempt without relapsing, and transition to more sustainable mechanisms 
of behavioral change (e.g., medication, cognitive behavioral therapy).   
Aim 1 (Strategy 1): Modulating the limbic system as an approach to treatment:  mPFC iTBS. Cigarette 
smokers will be randomized to receive 10 days of real iTBS or sham iTBS directed to the mPFC. 
Intermittently the desire to smoke, cigarette value using behavioral economic demand, preference for 
immediate gratification (delay discount ing), and cigarette self -administration will be assessed. Smoking 
cue-evoked brain activity will also be measured when individuals are asked to ‘crave’ (passive limbic 
engagement) versus ‘resist’ the craving (executive engagement) (7,11 -13). We hypothesize that iTBS will: 
1) decrease the behavioral smoking measures described above, which will be explained by a selective 2) 
decrease in the neural response to cues when individuals ‘allow’ themselves to crave, and 3) sustain these 
changes over a time period sufficien t to overcome the initial quit attempt (~7 -14 days).  
Aim 2 (Strategy 2): Modulating the executive system as an approach to treatment: dlPFC iTBS. Aim 
2 will follow the design of Aim 1. The procedures will be identical, except iTBS will be delivered to the  
left dlPFC. We hypothesize that iTBS will: 1) decrease the behavioral smoking measures described above, 
which will be explained by a selective 2) increase in the neural response to cues when individuals attempt 
to ‘resist’ the cues, and again 3) sustain t hese changes over a similar period as specified in Aim 1.  
Exploratory Aim -  Evaluate baseline frontal striatal connectivity and discounting rate as factors to 
predict an individual's likelihood of responding to Strategy [ADDRESS_928306] t he 
hypotheses that individuals with a higher ratio of (mPFC -striatal)/(dlPFC -striatal) connectivity will be more 
likely to have a behavioral change after Strategy 1. Various demographics (e.g. gender, smoking history, 
socioeconomic status, subclinical depr essive symptoms, self -efficacy, & motivation to quit will be 
evaluated as explanatory variables.  
The outcomes of the present aims will resolve a critical gap in our knowledge regarding the relative efficacy 
of [ADDRESS_928307] predictor of 6 -month 
treatment outcomes with traditional pharmacotherapeutic and behavioral interventions . The next step in 
pursuit of that goal is to systematically and parametrically evaluate the efficacy of two promising TMS 
treatment strategies (LT P-like stimulation to the mPFC (Aim 1), LTP -like stimulation to the dlPFC (Aim 
2)) as tools to change smoking  behavior and brain reactivity to smoking cues. These aims will be addressed 
in serial (Aim 1 Years 1 -3, Aim 2 Years 3 -5). A randomized, double -blind, sham -controlled design will be 
used f or each aim. In total, 138 smokers will be recruited from the tri -county area surrounding Winston -
Salem, NC .  Current cigarette smokers seeking to quit smoking and willing to set a quit date will be recruited 
from the tri -county area using digital and print advertising in diverse media outlets. Following informed 
consent a nd screening, participants will be randomized to receive real or sham TMS to the mPFC (Aim 1, 
Years 1 -3) or the dlPFC (Aim 2, Years 3 -5) (see Table 1 and TMS Procedures below for more details 
regarding sham controls and double blinding procedure). During t he Treatment Phase, participants will 
receive 10 sequential days of TMS (with additional behavioral and MRI scanning (see Table 1). Participants 
will receive TMS at least [ADDRESS_928308] 4 weeks (see Table 2), and daily EMA 
will be acquired.  Consistent with the CNDS model, the primary  hypotheses are that LT P-like 
stimulation to the mPFC and LTP -like stimulation to the dlPFC will both lead to a decrease in 
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  8 smoking cue -reactivity in the salience network (neuroimaging outcome), and cigarette value 
(behavioral outcome) but that directly ta rgeting the value circuit (mPFC) will be more efficacious.   
Additionally, we will test the hypothesis that individuals with higher discounting rates and cigarette 
valuation at baseline will respond more to the stimulation strategies compared to those with  lower 
baseline discounting and valuation (Exploratory Aim).   
 
 
Setting  
All study activities will take place at Wake Forest University of Health Sciences  (WFUHS) . 
 
[CONTACT_351258]’s  primary office and research laboratory is located in the Clinical Neuromodulation 
Laboratory in the Department of Cancer Biology. [CONTACT_351258]’s lab space will include a room dedicated 
for all research related activities including a space for screening part icipants and a space dedicated for 
TMS stimulation. It will contain a computer and desk for participant  interviewing and a TMS system.  
 
The MRI portion of the study will take place at the MRI center located on Medical Center Boulevard. 
This will utilize th e Siemens  3T scanner in the MRI center.  
 
Finally, recruitment efforts will come from the local community using flyers as well as traditional and 
social media outlets (radio, television, Facebook, Craigslist, local newspapers). Collaborative efforts will 
be maximized in order to recruit subjects from the associated Wake Forest University smoking programs.  
 
Subjects selection criteria  
We anticipate that we will be able to recruit 138 eligible individuals from the communities surrounding 
WFUHS . We anticipate that 56% of subjects will be male and 44% female, and that approximately 14% of 
subjects will be racial and ethnic minorities. The risks of MRI and TMS to the unborn fetus are not well 
understood. Therefore, to be included, females must not be pregnant as determined by a urine pregnancy 
test and must be utilizing reliable birth control during the course of the study.  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
1. Age 18 -75 (to maximize participation, and minimize effects of cortical atrophy on neuroimaging 
data)  
2. Current cigarette sm oker (at least 10 cigarettes per day)  
3. Able to read and understand questionnaires and informed consent.  
4. Has accommodations within 50 miles of the study site.  
5. Is not at elevated risk of seizure (i.e., does not have a history of seizures, is not currently prescribed 
medications known to lower seizure threshold)  

Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/[ADDRESS_928309] metal objects in the head/neck.  
7. Does not have a history of traumatic brain injury, incl uding a head injury that resulted in 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], loss of consciousness for more than [ADDRESS_928310] a history of claustrophobia leading to signi ficant clinical anxiety symptoms.  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
1. Any psychoactive illicit substance use (except marijuana, alcohol, and nicotine) within the last [ADDRESS_928311] seven days by [CONTACT_685031] (or decreasing) urine THC levels. Participation will be discontinued if participants use 
psychoactive illicit substances (except nicotine and alcohol) after study initiation.  
2. Meets DSM -V criteria for current axis I disorders of major d epression, panic disorder, obsessive -
compulsive disorder, post -traumatic stress syndrome, bipolar affective disorder, schizophrenia, dissociate 
disorders, eating disorders, and any other psychotic disorder or organic mental disorder.   
3. Has current suicidal  ideation or homicidal ideation.  
4. Has the need for acute treatment with any psychoactive medication including anti -seizure 
medications and medications for ADHD.  
5. Females of childbearing potential who are pregnant (by [CONTACT_94984]), nursing, or who are not using  
a reliable form of birth control.  
6. Has current charges pending for a violent crime (not including DUI related offenses).  
7. Does not have a stable living situation.  
8. Suffers from chronic migraines.  
9. Does not have a stable phone number for contact [CONTACT_685032] g and/or texting.  
10. Does not have a stable means of using WebEx  (e.g. personal computer, Internet)  for interaction 
with study personnel during COVID -19. 
 
Sample Size  
Power. Aims 1& [ADDRESS_928312] a quantifiable and clinically meaningful difference in several 
primary outcome measures (neuroimaging and behavioral). The hypothesis for the sample size calculations 
corresponded to the treatment phase for the behavioral ou tcomes. Based on data from our preliminary 
study of cTBS to the vm PFC (see Significance) and our previously published study on dlPFC TMS a 
sample size of 28 individuals per group will yield at 80% power will be adequate to detect a minimum 
effect size d=0. 8. For all sample size calculations, we used a repeated measures design with 4 time points 
using the observed AR (1) correlations. Aim 2 will be  evaluated in a manner  identical to Aim  1.  Retention . 
Based on published data (5) and prior studies in this population (NIH R21 PI: [CONTACT_85444]), we anticipate an overall 
retention rate of 78% for the treatment phase, wherein the dropout rate declines as the study progresses 
(retention: first week (0.80 V1 -V6), 2nd week (0.85 V6 -V10; (0.89 V11 -4wk follow up). Allowing for a 
10% data loss associated with excessive movement during neuroimaging, this recruitment protocol will 
lead to a final sampl e size of 36 individuals that received mPFC TMS (Aim 1), dlPFC TMS (Aim 2), and 
Sham TMS to each site (Aim 1&2).  We do not expect a difference in attrition between the real and sham 
groups, nor the mPFC (Aim 1) versus dlPFC (Aim 2) location. Thus an initi al sample of 138 individuals, 
randomized to 4 groups, will yield a final sample of 108 usable data sets at V11 providing 80% power 
with a type 1 error rate of 5% to detect a minimum effect size of d=0.8 in the Behavioral and Brain 
Measures.   Primary data a nalysis will be done on the Intent to Treat sample (n=138; 69 per Aim: 46 
active, 23 sham).   
 
In our experience retention rates do not differ during [ADDRESS_928313]. Hanlon’s laboratory and [CONTACT_55209]’s laboratory in which 
individuals with cocaine, alcohol, and/or nicotine dependence are receiving 10 days of TMS (R21 
(Hanlon); (R21 (Li)).  All individuals will be enrolled at WFUHS.  
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/[ADDRESS_928314] our total enrollment goals, nor compromise the 
scientifi c integrity of the study.  Moreover, it will lower the risk associated with MRIs to these 
participants.  
 
Intervention s and Interactions  
Participants and Procedure.  A total of 138 non -treatment -seeking nicotine -dependent men and women, 
18-75 years old will be recruited from the local community using flyers, as well as traditional and social 
media outlets (radio, television, Facebook, Craigslist, local newspapers). Following initial contact, and 
informed consent, participants will be scheduled for a screening  visit at WFUHS  (inclusio n/exclusion 
criteria described above ). Participants must be motivated to quit and willing to make a quit attempt with the 
use of TMS and educational booklets  for smoking alone (“Forever Free – A Guide To Remaining Smoke 
Free” Tobac co Research and Intervention Program).  {Note: In the interest of experimental rigor, in this 
study we wanted to directly evaluate the efficacy of these [ADDRESS_928315] the opportunity 
to receive additional pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_277652]}.  Eligible participants will work with the 
clinical research team to set a quit date (within 2 weeks of the screening visit). They will be encouraged to 
set “Monday” as their quit date given prior studies that have shown higher motivation to quit on Mondays 
(120). They will be introduced to the Forever Free booklets at the first TMS visit . One aspect of thes e 
educational booklets will be discussed with the participants on each TMS visit. Although this program has 
low to moderate efficacy on its own (especially in the first 7 days), it is unlikely that TMS alone will be 
sufficient for smoking cessation. Theref ore, all participants will also be exposed to these booklets by [CONTACT_685033].  
Study Visit 1 (Behavior, MRI, TMS) will begin 1 week prior to the quit date .  Inclusion/Exclusion criteria:  
To participate in the present study, participants must: 1) be 18 -75 years of age, (2) smoke at least 10 
cigarettes a day (on average; as measured by 1 month timeline follow -back (TLFB), (3) not have a history 
of or current psychiatric or neurologic diseas e, or traumatic brain injury (4) not be pregnant, , (5) not 
currently use psychoactive substances other than alcohol, nicotine, or marijuana; nor have current or recent 
(e.g. within the past 5 years) moderate/severe substance use disorder (DSM -V) (6) not h ave any barriers to 
making contact [CONTACT_685034] (e.g. braids that cannot be removed), and 7) meet all 
criteria on a standardized MRI/TMS safety screen  (TASS)  (including but not limited to implanted electronic 
devices, bullets or metall ic fragments, hair clips and pi[INVESTIGATOR_124971]). These 
inclusion/exclusion criteria are those used in Study 4 described in Preliminary Research. Randomization. 
Participants will be individually randomized and assigned to treatment or control  conditions using stratified 
block randomization (with blocks of randomly varying sizes) prior to the study.  
Experimental Procedure (Aim 1 and 2):  Screening Visit – Consent.  Participants will receive a series of 
assessments designed to evaluate nicotine d ependence and use, psychiatric conditions, and mood. These 
include a standard clinical intake evaluation screen for research (used  in other studies by [CONTACT_978]), MINI 
International Neuropsychiatric Interview  (MINI 5 P)  (88), Timeline Follow -Back  (TLFB ) (89), Beck 
Depression Inventory II  (BDI)  (90), State -Trait Anxiety Inventory  (STAI)  (91) and Profile of Mood States  
(POMS)  (92). Data will be collected using REDCap™, and entered directly into the online portal to ensure 
security and prevent data loss.  
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/[ADDRESS_928316] Health 
(WFBH) institutional WebEx videoconference software as necessary .  Participants will remotely sign and 
date the informed cons ent document.  
Study Visit Procedures: At all visits, individuals will provide a urine screen to detect recent use of drugs 
of abuse and pregnancy, a breath carbon monoxide (CO) sample to detect recent cigarette smoking, and a 
breath sample to test for rece nt alcohol use.  During the consent visit, visits 1, 6, 10 and follow up visits 
samples will be collected to determine cotinine  (nicotine m etabolites)  levels in the urine . Samples will be 
taken from the urine sample provided for the drugs of abuse screen, n o additional samples will be required 
from the participant . At visits 1, 6, 10 and follow up visits (Assessment visits), participants will complete 
a battery of behavioral assessments following active TMS or sham (see Table 2). MRI scanning (at visits 1 
and 10) will occur prior to TMS in order to isolate cumulative, rather than acute, effects of TMS. At all 
visits participants will be required to provide a CO reading at least 50% of their baseline CO measure to 
ensure they are at least 6 hours deprived from  cigarettes. Cigarette deprivation will be use to increase 
craving and responding for cigarettes. Short term cigarette deprivation has known amplification effects on 
the brain response to smoking cues (93, 94) . Moreover, we have extensive experience with successfully 
using this deprivation procedure (33, 41) . 
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  12 1. Brain Reactivity to Smoking Cues (**PRIMARY DEPENDENT MEASURE)  
Functional MRI 
Smoking Cue 
Reactivity Task  
(acquired after 
behavioral 
assessments)  15 1, 10  This task has been used in 4 original research publications by [CONTACT_685035] (7, 11 -
13). We will give participants an unlit cigarette to hold in their hand while 
they are in the MRI scanner. They will receive two 12m runs of the task 
(fixed within subject, counterba lanced within groups). During one run 
they will be instructed to ‘allow’ themselves to crave (passive limbic 
engagement) and in the other run they will be told to ‘resist’ the cues 
(executive engagement). When the task begins participants are shown 
pseudor andomly interspersed blocks of images: 1) cigarette images (e.g., 
cigarettes, lighters, people smoking) (CIG), 2) neutral images, Table 2  
1. Biochemical and self -report assessment of tobacco use and dependence  
Measure  Time 
(Min.)  Visits  Description  
Carbon 
monoxide (CO  
Level ) 1 1-10, and 
follow -ups Breath CO provides an accurate measure of recent exposure to CO , 
including from smoking combustible tobacco products (95). The CO 
measurement will be used to determine recency of smoking.  
Timeline 
Follow -Back 
(TLFB) 
interview  [ADDRESS_928317] use interview asks participants to 
retrospectively estimate the number of tobacco products they’ve used 
each day for the past 30 days or since the previous assessment, 
whichever is fewer (89). 
Fagerström 
(FTND)  3 1, 6, 10, 
and 
follow -ups This 6 -item questionnaire quickly assesses degree of cigarette 
dependence  (96, 97) . Test for Cigarette Dependence.  
2. Measures of to bacco product value and sensitivity (**PRIMARY DEPENDENT MEASURES)  
Questionnaire 
on Smoking 
Urges -Brief  
(QSU)  
 2 1 - 10 and 
follow -ups This 10 -item questionnaire assesses cigarette craving . Participants will 
be asked to rate from 1 (strongly disagree) to 100 (strongly agree) their 
agreement with several statements (e.g., "I have a desire for a cigarette 
right now," and "Nothing would be better than smoking a cigarette right 
now."). Factor a nalyses support two factors: one that reflects a strong 
desire and intention to smoke and one that reflects relief from negative 
affect associated with an urgent desire to smoke (45). 
Hypothetical 
Purchase Task  
(**Demand 
Alpha, Q0)  
(HPT 
Cigarettes)  5 1, 6, 10, 
and 
follow -ups The hypothetical purchase task (HPT), a validated measure for cigarette 
demand, (98, 99)  will assess cigarette purchases at various price 
conditions. Participants will hypothetically purchase quantities of 
cigarettes to use over a 24 -hour period across ascending prices (e.g., $0, 
0.12, $0.25, $0.50, $1.00, and $2.00 per cigarette). The HPT ha s been 
shown to be predictive of treatment outcomes (100) . 
3. Cognitive/behavioral task (** PRIMARY DEPENDENT MEASURE)  
Delay -
discounting 
tasks  
(*discounting 
rate, $1K)  5 1, 6, 10, 
and 
follow -ups Participants will be asked to choose between two conditions in which 
varying amounts and delays to behavioral outcomes (e.g., $50 now or 
$100 later) are presented. We will use magnitudes of $100 and $[ADDRESS_928318] thoroughly documented among the literature (101) . 
Across consecutive choices, the delay to the larger outcome will be 
titrated un til reaching the participant’s indifference delay (i.e., the delay 
at which s/he equally values both options). This indifference delay 
indexes individual participants’ rates of delay discounting.  [61]. 
Monetary delay discounting has been documented to be predictive to 
treatment success for smokers (39). 
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  13 chromatically matched to the CIG images (NEU), and 3) blurry non -
images (BLUR).  Stimuli are presented in six 120 -s epochs, eac h 
consisting of four 24 -s blocks of an image type (one block each of CIG, 
NEU, BLUR). Each block is followed by a 6 -s washout period, allowing 
the hemodynamic response from the previous block to decline before the 
next is presented. Scanning parameters: Mu ltislice gradient -echo echo 
planar imaging (TR=2200, TE=35 msec, field of view of 192 mm, voxel 
size 3.0 x 3.0 x 3.0 mm, 36 slices, 3 mm thickness, no skip).  
2. Other Assessments  
Confidence in 
Active or 
Sham TMS 
Assignment 
(Active vs 
Sham)  1 1, 6, 10  Participants will complete a form indicating their confidence (scale 1 -10) 
in whether they are receiving active or sham treatment. Pooled accuracy 
from prior work in our collaborator’s laboratory was 47.6% suggesting that 
individuals were not aware of the stimulation being received.  
Minnesota 
Nicotine 
Withdrawal 
Scale (MNWS)  2 1 - 10 and 
follow -ups Participants will be asked to rate a variety of mood and physiological 
symptoms associated with nicotine withdrawal  (e.g., anxiety, attention, 
hunger). Total withdrawal scores will be measured using the 8 -item MNWS 
originally adapted from Hughes and Hatsukami 1986 (102)  and Hughes 
1992 (103) . The [ADDRESS_928319] frequently 
used (104, 105) . 
Beck Depression 
Inventory  (BDI)  
 10 1,6,10,and 
follow -ups Given that iTBS to the left dlPFC improves depression scores, we will 
perform a mediation analysis to determine if any effects observed on 
smoking behavior and the brain response to smoking cues is related to 
changes in depression  
Generalized 
Self-efficacy 
scale  (GSF)  10 1,6,10,and 
follow ups  This scale was designed to assess self -efficacy, i.e., the belief that one’s 
actions are responsible for successful outcomes. The scaled score for each 
question ranges from 1 to 4. Higher scores indicate s tronger participant ’s 
belief in self -efficacy. Previous studies have demonstrated predictive 
validity of self -efficacy as baseline predictor of smoking treatment 
outcome (112).  
3. Other neuroimaging sequences  
T1 MPRAGE  5 1,10 High -resolution structural scans will be obtained using an inversion 
recovery 3D spoiled gradient echo (3DSPGR) sequence, 192 slices, voxel 
size: 1.0 x 1.0 x 1.0, field of view: 256 mm, section thickness:1.[ADDRESS_928320] -processing. Field map configurations will include: flip angle 
(FA)= 60 degrees, field of view (FOV) = 192 mm; voxel size = 3.0 x 3.0 x 
3.0 mm, 36 contiguous slices 3.0 mm  thick.  
 
 
  
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  14 TMS Treatment – 10 days  (Experiment 1/Strategy 1: iTBS to the mPFC; Experiment 2/Strategy 2: 
iTBS to the dlPFC)  
After the MRI scanning visits  participants will be escorted into the Brain Stimulation Research Laboratory 
([CONTACT_351258]’s research suite)  where scalp localization will be performed for the TMS procedure. The 
Cartesian position of the coil (X,Y,Z) will be determined by [CONTACT_685036] 10 -20 
system: 1)  AFZ will be used for the mPFC stimulation (Aim 1), 2) F3 will be  used for the left dlPFC 
stimulation (Aim 2). The angular position of the coil (pi[INVESTIGATOR_23025], yaw, roll) will be determined by [CONTACT_39359]’s 
cortical geography using the individual’s T1 scan for guidance. The locations and coil orientation will be 
indicated on  a nylon cap which will be worn during the TMS sessions. We will then determine the 
participant’s resting motor threshold (RMT, the minimal amount of stimulation required over the hand area 
of the primary motor cortex to induce contraction of the APB muscl e of the hand 50% of the time) via the 
standardized PEST procedure (106, 107). The procedures for acquiring the motor threshold, performing 
cortical localization, standardized procedures, blinding, establishing standardized paradigms and training 
regimens for all staff, as well as safety and ring the experimental procedures are consistent with our prior 
publications (7,27, 54, 63, 69, 78, 111). We will also publish a Standard Operating Procedure document 
and video file as supplementary material with any pub lications that arise from this project (as in 111, 
supplement).   
For Aim1 (Strategy 1) stimulation will be over mPFC. For Aim 2 (Strategy 2) stimulation will be over the 
left dlPFC. The Aims will be pursued in serial, with a 2:1 active versus sham randomiz ation for each Aim. 
Participants will receive 20 trains of stimulation (1200 pulses total; each train: 3 pulse bursts presented at 
5Hz, 15 pulses/sec for [ADDRESS_928321], 10 pulses/train; 110% RMT, MagPro) using a figure 8 coil (Coil 
Cool -B65 A/P). This is the iTBS sequence initially published (3) which has been used in clinical depression 
treatment (46). During each real and sham TBS session each day the amplifier output will be escalated 
(“rampi[INVESTIGATOR_007]” in 5% increments over 30 sec onds) up to  80% to 110% RMT to enhance tolerability. The time 
between the end of the TBS procedures and the beginning of the behavioral assessments will be compi[INVESTIGATOR_684997].  
TMS ACTIVE SHAM system  and stra tegies to promote  rigor of the blind: : The MagVenture MagPro 
system has an integrated active sham that used two surface electrodes placed on the scalp  to mimic the 
sensation of active TMS.  The coil is visually identical on both sides, but only one side wi ll direct  an electric 
field on the participants head. At each TMS visit, the coordinator  will place [ADDRESS_928322] and the TMS coil is in position, the 
coordinator enters a 6 digit n umber assigned to that participant  into the MagPro capacitor.   Each number 
is coded to be either active or sham TMS, but the classification is unknown to the coordinator or the 
participant.  The capacitor can sense whether the TMS coil is positioned in a direction wherein the active 
or the sham side is facing the participant’s head. The capacitor will ins truct the coordinator that is  either 
“Ready” or to “Flip Coil” based upon the participants group assignment.   This enables both the participant 
and the c oordinator to be blind.    
For the initial TMS visit, during the motor threshold procedure, the active side is always down in order to 
determine an appropriate dose   To ensure that the coordinator (who both finds the motor threshold and then 
delivers the treatment) does not learn the relationship, on Visit [ADDRESS_928323] the TMS coil in the 
proper position, and commence the treatment.   
Further strategies to promote blinding: The TMS coil will be visually inspected by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_684998] a regular basis to be sure that no marks have occ urred on the surface of the coil.  If marks have occurred 
they will be either washed off or covered in a manner that is symmetrical to both sides of the coil. 
Additionally all staff will be trained on the importance of blinding when they join the laborator y and 
encouraged to contact [CONTACT_685037] [INVESTIGATOR_684999] “figured out” the blind. A 
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  15 questionnaire will be given to the participants  to evaluate their opi[INVESTIGATOR_685000], their level of confidence (L ikert scale 1 -10), and their rationale (text entry).   
Outcome Measure(s)  
Behavioral Outcomes : For the treatment phase (10 days of real/sham TBS) , the primary behavioral 
outcomes include Cigarette demand (Q0 and alpha), Craving (QSU Intention, QSU Relief), and Delay 
Discounting ($100 and $1000). For the treatment phase the analysis will be performed using repeated 
measures ANOVA on change scores fr om baseline for each visit. The main independent variable in the 
ANOVA will be time (visits on day 1, 6, 10), group (real or sham ) and their interaction.  For correlations of 
observations across visits an AR(1) structure will be considered and compared with  other structures such 
as compound symmetry and a general structure. The primary hypothesis is the interaction. If the interaction 
effect for an outcome is significant, we will conclude there is statistical evidence of overall treatment effect. 
If the spag hetti plots suggest trends (e.g., linear, quadratic, or pi[INVESTIGATOR_627020]) we will treat time as a 
continuous variable and fit repeated measures regression models along with group and its interaction with 
continuous time as independent variables.  
Neuroimag ing Outcomes:  For the treatment phase, primary analysis . Image pre -processing will be 
conducted with FSL v. 5.0: (FMRIB Analysis Group, Oxford, [LOCATION_006]) (108)  realignment to the first volu me, 
smoothing with an anisotropic [ADDRESS_928324] average template. 
Subjects with >3 mm movement (total mean fr ame displacement across the entire task) will be excluded 
from analysis.  
 
Hypothesis Aim 1 : Based on the framework predicted by [CONTACT_685038], and preliminary work (see Study 
4), we anticipate that mPFC stimulation will lead to a decrease in brain reactivit y to cues  during the “allow” 
condition (passive limbic engagement). We will analyze the neuroimaging data in concert with the 
behavioral data, evaluating the hypotheses that 1) mPFC iTBS will decrease the brain reactivity to cues in 
the ‘allow’ condition ( with no consistent link to the ‘resist’ condition) and that 2) this will be related to the 
behavioral change in a dose -dependent manner. This will be achieved by [CONTACT_685039] a priori 
anatomically defined regions of interest (ROIs), including the striatum (ventral striatum and dorsal 
striatum), insula, inferior frontal gyrus, and anterior cingulate cortex. Ventral striatal and dorsal striatal 
ROIs are derive d from the FSL Oxford -[COMPANY_004] -Imanova striatal atlas, mapped via probabilistic diffusion 
tractography (109)  in agreement with anatomical projection zones from the frontal cortex (1). Hypothesis 
Aim 2 : Based on the framework predicted by [CONTACT_685038], and prior studies of dlPFC stimulation in 
smokers (4 -9), we anticipate that dlPFC stimulation will lead to an increase in executive control circuitry 
(left dlPFC, posterior parietal cortex)  during the “resist” condition (executive engagement). As in Aim 1, 
we will analyze the neuroimaging data in concert with the behavioral data, evaluating the hypotheses that 
1) dlPFC iTBS will decrease the brain reactivity to cues  in the “resist” condition (with no consistent link to 
the “allow” condition) and that 2) this will be related to the behavioral change in a dose -dependent manner. 
The ROI based outcomes of Aim [ADDRESS_928325] 
general linear modeling as well as a data -driven hierarchical model (see Integration below). As an 
experimental control, for both Aims we will also calculate the percent signal change from the primary motor 
cortex, a region which should not be differentiall y modulated by [CONTACT_685040]. Although 
some studies have used the visual cortex as a control region a recent meta -analysis by [CONTACT_685041][INVESTIGATOR_685001] (78). 
Secondary functional connectivity analysis:  Additionally, an exploratory seed -based functional 
connec tivity analysis using psychophysiological interactions (PPIs) will be performed using the TMS 
stimulated ROIs (mPFC and dlPFC) and the striatal target regions (ventral striatum, dorsal striatum - defined 
above) as seed regions. These data will be compi[INVESTIGATOR_42602] a cross participants and compared between the mPFC 
and dlPFC stimulation days. Group analyses will be performed using a random effects model limiting 
significant clusters to those that meet p<0.05 family -wise error corrected.        
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  16 For the follow -up phase: We will test the hypotheses that  behavioral change related to Strategy 1 and 2 
will be based on an individual’s baseline brain cue reactivity data. We will generate Kaplan -Meier curves 
of behavioral change for the four groups and compare these with cue -reactivity in the MPFC, insula, 
cingulate (salience network nodes) and striatum using log -rank tests and consider Cox’s proportional 
hazards model to include covariates. Diagnostics will be performed to verify the assumptions such as 
homoscedasticity and norma lity. If it is merited, transformations on the outcomes will be considered. Linear 
contrasts will be utilized to test the hypothesis of equal effects in the two groups at any given time point. 
Covariates, such as gender and depression that were used to str atify, will be included.  
Exploratory Aim:  Evaluate baseline frontal striatal connectivity and discounting rate as factors to 
predict an individual's likelihood of responding to Strategy [ADDRESS_928326] the hypotheses that individuals with a higher ratio of (mPFC -
striatal)/(dlPFC -striatal) connectivity will be more likely to have a behavioral change after Strategy 1. 
Various demographics (e.g. gender, smoking history, socioeconomic status, su bclinical depressive 
symptoms, self -efficacy, & motivation to quit will be evaluated as explanatory variables.  This will be 
achieved by [CONTACT_685042] (HLM v. 7.0, Scientific Software International, Skokie, IL) of the 
behavioral variables of  interest as well as the BOLD signal change in the striatum (caudate) between 
smoking and image blocks (e.g., CIG vs. NEU) in ‘allow’ and ‘resist’ (behavioral change variables nested 
within treatment (cTBS, iTBS)).  
 
Analytical Plan  
Primary data analysis w ill be done on the Intent to Treat sample (n=138; 69 per Aim: 46 active, 23 
sham).   Prior to formal statistical analysis, summary statistics for all variables will be obtained and 
spaghetti plots will be generated. All behavioral outcome measures will be based on standardized 
composite scores from the literature. We will also use data reduction techniques (such as factor analysis 
or principle component analysis) to confirm the applicability of the composite scores in our population. 
Analyses will be perfor med for each phase separately.  
Results will be analyzed  initially  using descriptive statistics.  Comparison between groups will be done 
using chi square tests for proportions, and t -tests or ANOVA procedures for continuous variables.  
Regression analysis w ill be performed to identify independent outcome predictors.  Other inferential 
statistical analysis will be conducted as appropriate . 
 
Human Subjects Protection  
Potential Risks  
The risks fall into three categories: risks associated with psychological assessment, risks associated with 
repetitive TMS and risks associated with MRI scanning.  
 
Risks of psychiatric interviewing (minimal risk):   
1. Some participants may get emotionally di straught when disclosing sensitive personal stories. Some 
participants may feel anxiety about disclosing substance use histories and reporting some aspects 
of their demographics.  
Risks associated with MRI scanning (minimal risk):  
1. The major potential risks for MRI are all subsumed under the risks for TMS and primarily include 
risks to individuals who have metallic implants, pacemakers, or pregnant women.  These 
individuals will be excluded from the study.   
2. Participants may feel restless or uncomfortable whe n lying in the MRI scanner.  
 
Risks associated with repetitive TMS (FDA -designated minimal risk):  
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  17 Repetitive TMS has been considered “non -significant risk” by [CONTACT_1622]  (2007) when applied at similar 
intensities, durations, and frequencies to those being us ed in this protocol. Additionally medial prefrontal 
and dorsolateral prefrontal continuous theta burst stimulation in a manner identical to this protocol has been 
designated minimal risk by [CONTACT_685043].   
 
1. Potential risk of a seizure:  In designing this experiment, we have followed the latest safety 
guidelines for TMS. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_171080], there is a chance of a seizure as a result of rTMS. 
Eight seizures have been noted in previous studies, with six of them occurring in healthy vo lunteers 
without any history of seizures, brain tumors or traumatic brain injuries. All of these seizures have 
occurred during rTMS with the participant in the treatment chair and a trained operator on hand. 
All seizures have stopped by [CONTACT_351248]. No participants have had any 
problems after the seizures. WFUHS  has a plan for dealing with fainting and seizures, and every 
TMS researcher involved in providing TMS treatment for this protocol (Key Personnel) will 
have extensive TMS traini ng from the PI [INVESTIGATOR_685002] a skills test associated with 
collecting an accurate motor threshold (which is one of the largest factors that promotes 
safety).  Additionally, if a participant has a seizure an emergency response team will be called. Most 
seizures, including those caused by [CONTACT_112016], last less than [ADDRESS_928327] stimulation : The relative risk of having a seizure is related to the strength of  the 
TMS stimulation (% motor threshold) and the frequency (typi[INVESTIGATOR_897] 1Hz -20Hz, or theta).  There are 
published safety tables for fixed frequency rTMS paradigms (eg 1hz, 5 Hz, 10 Hz, 20 Hz).   For individuals 
receiving TMS doses within these ranges and wit hout other risk factors, (medication, significant sleep 
deprivation, etc.), TMS has been deemed a non -significant risk by [CONTACT_1622].  For some brain stimulation 
protocols (like theta burst), there are no currently published safety tables, but there are at le ast [ADDRESS_928328] is likely minimal risk to non -significant risk. These studies largely 
show that the risks/ safety  of theta  burst  protocols are comparable (or perhaps less than)  10Hz or 20 Hz 
rTMS.      
 
Other potential risks:  
   
2. Potential for scalp discomfort and headaches : Some people report mild discomfort when the 
magnetic pulses are applied over the scalp. A small number of people (~5%) report headache 
following rTMS. However, the headaches are tempo rary and manageable with common over -the-
counter pain remedies.  
3. Potential hearing loss : The TMS coil generates a high -energy click that may cause hearing damage. 
Humans exposed to TMS have shown temporary increases in auditory threshold (especially at hig h 
frequencies) lasting at least 5 minutes and less than 4 hours.  
4. Safety in case of pregnancy : This protocol will exclude pregnant women. The risks of using TMS 
with pregnant women are currently unknown. Please inform the research team if you are pregnant 
or think that you might have become pregnant during the study. A pregnancy test will be performed 
before the experiment begins.  
5. Potential for reflex syncopal event : Syncope is defined as a momentary loss of awareness and 
postural tone. It typi[INVESTIGATOR_333364] a rapid onset, short duration, and spontaneous recovery.  Although 
syncopal epi[INVESTIGATOR_351223] (less than 1%), they typi[INVESTIGATOR_685003]: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/[ADDRESS_928329] low or unstable blood pressure are at greater risk.   
6. Interaction with electrical or metal implants : Electrically, magnetically or mechanically activated 
implants (such as cardiac pacemakers), as well as clips on blood vessels in the brain may be af fected 
by [CONTACT_112016] (as well as MRI) and cause pain or abnormal signal propagation.  Therefore individuals 
that have these implants and devices or suspect that they may have pi[INVESTIGATOR_685004], 
head, or body (e.g. bullets, shrapnel, fragments from me tallurgy) will be excluded from the study.  
Adequacy of protection against risks  
(a) Recruitment and Informed Consent Identification of Subjects, Recruitment of Subjects and 
Informed Consent Process. Advertisements will be placed in local print and digital media. 
Interested individuals will email, call, or text the research center and will then be contact[CONTACT_685044] 1. Only individuals that have previously given 
permission to be contact[CONTACT_685045]. Informed consent will be 
reviewed with the potential participant by a member of the key personnel o n this proposal. The 
consent will be signed by [CONTACT_685046]. A 
copy of the consent will be given to the subject and the original placed in the research record.  
(b) Security of Participant Information  
For individuals that are enrolled in the study (invited for a screening visit) there will be two 
documents that contain their first and last names:  the informed consent  containing the HIPAA  
authorization  and a receipt for their compensation kept for tax p urposes.  Each of these documents 
will be kept in a separate 3 -ring binder.   
 
Each individual enrolled in the study will be assigned a unique participant  ID number (starting 
sequentially).  A folder will be created for each of these participants and label ed with their 
Participant  ID number. The folder will contain the results of all of the testing for each individual.  
The participants  will only be identified by [CONTACT_6227], not by [CONTACT_2300], on these documents.  All 
information stored digitally for the enrolled par ticipants will be labeled with the Participant  ID 
number. As above all of the participant folders, along with the binders will be stored in a locked 
cabinet in [CONTACT_351258]’s research laboratory .   
 
Protection Against Risks  
Risks of psychiatric assessments:  
All psychiatric assessments will be conducted by [CONTACT_685047].  
 
Risks associated with MRI and TMS (minimal risk):  
1. Although the TMS protocol that we are using has never been associated with causing a seizure, 
individuals that have a history of seizures, stroke, or other neurological impairment that might 
lower their seizure threshold will be excluded from the study. All study perso nnel will have 
received a formal education course in seizure detection, care, and treatment and a physician will be 
available to immidiately assist in stabilizing the participants in the event of a seizure  Any 
participant who has a seizure cannot continue  with the study.  
2. We will exclude individuals with claustrophobia such that they are not exposed to this risk. 
Additionally participants will be given a pressure sensitive squeeze ball that they can use to indicate 
at any time that they would like to leave the scanner.  
3. To protect against hearing loss concerns, participants will wear high fidelity earplugs throughout 
the scanning session.   
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/[ADDRESS_928330] a headache.We will also exclude individuals with chronic migraines such 
that they are not exposed to this risk.  
5. We will exclude pregnant females su ch that they are not exposed to this risk.  
6. All participants that enroll in this study will complete a written MRI saftey screen.  We will also 
use a handheld metal detector to ensure the participant has no metal in or on is/her body before 
entering the MR I scanning room.    
 
Participants may withdraw from the study at any time or may be withdrawn from the study if the PIs feel it 
is in the best interest of the participant. All key personnel will undergo appropriate IRB training for dealing 
with human parti cipants and will be trained by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_685005] e study interventions. 
Personnel listed in this protocol (as well as any rotating medical students, graduate students, psychiatry 
residents or fellows that may be exposed to this inves tigation as part of their reseaerch training exposre) 
will be required to maintain their certification of HIP AA training and Protection of Human Participants in 
Research  training on an annual basis. A ny new personnel without experience in human clinical re search 
will be encouraged to attend the WFUHS  Core Clinical Research Training Course, which is offered live 
and online throughout the year. Through these measures we will ensure that all study staff will be trained 
and will maintain ongoing understanding o f research ethics and the rights of the participant during the 
consenting process and throughout an individual's participation in the study.  
 
In the event of a medical emergency, a research participant will be transported to the Em ergency 
Department at WFU HS. If a psychiatric crisis occurs, the Department of Psychiatry will be contact[CONTACT_685048].  
 
Protocol for participants expressing suicidal ideation : All study team members performing the Becks 
Depression Inventory will have received online training from the Suicide Prevention Resource Center 
(https://training.sprc.org ). Completion documentation will be saved o n the laboratory drive. In the event 
that a participant expresses a desire to kill themselves (selects answer #2 or #3 on question #9 of the Becks 
Depression Inventory), the trained study team member will ask them about the level of detail of their 
thought s.  If the participant has a suicide plan to kill himself/herself, the study staff will recommend he/she 
speaks with the suicide hotline and initiate contact [CONTACT_172577] (Durham Center 
Crisis Line at 1 -[PHONE_14262]) while the indivi dual is in their presence. If the participant refuses to talk to 
the hotline and leaves, the study staff will call 911. The study staff member will also contact [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_685006], email, or text as soon as possible to inform them of the situation.  
 
Subject Recruitment Methods  
Advertisements will be placed around campus in approved locations, especially at WFUHS  clinics. Other 
ads will be submitted to local newspapers as well as internet advertising to reach the general population 
(e.g. Craigslist, broadcast messages at WFUHS ). Recruitment will also occur at community events where 
recruitment materials (such as pens, backpacks, and mugs) will be handed out to individuals. Interested 
individuals will  email,  call, or text the research center and will then be con tacted via telephone , phone 
screened,  and scheduled for screening if eligible. If an individual declines study participation or is not 
eligible via phone screen, their information will be shredded and destroyed.  Informed consent will be 
reviewed with the potential participant by a member of th e key personnel on this visit. The consent will 
be signed by [CONTACT_685046]. A copy of the consent 
will be given to the subject and the original placed in the resea rch record. The consent and HIPAA 
process will be done in [CONTACT_351258]’s research laboratory and  facility.  The MRI scans will be done at the 
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/[ADDRESS_928331]. Hanlon’s research 
lab.   
 
Addition ally, a  chart review will be conducted for research purposes.  Potentially eligible participants  will 
be identified.  The potentially eligible participants  in the PIs practice will be informed about the study a s 
the PI [INVESTIGATOR_685007]. Then potential participants  who have agreed to be contact[CONTACT_685049]. All other participants  will be contact[CONTACT_685050].  
 
Informed Consent  
Individuals that have previously consented to be contact[CONTACT_351249]. They will b e scheduled for their screening visi t, 
which will take place in a private, quiet screening room in the Clinical Neuromodulation Laboratory 
space in [CONTACT_351258]’s research suite. Informed consent will be reviewed with the potential participant by 
a member of  the key personnel on this proposal. The consent will be signed by [CONTACT_351250]. A copy of the consent will be given to the subject and the 
original placed in the research record. All records will be s tored in locked departmental files. Section 
301(d) of the Public Health Service Act of November 4, [ADDRESS_928332] protected.  No reference to any individual 
participant will appear in reports, presentations, or publications that may arise from the study.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring  
The principal investigator (PI ) will be the primary party responsible for data management, oversight, and 
accountability in terms of participant safety and consent.  
The DSMB member holing the unblinding key (Elizabeth Shilling) will have the following 
responsibilities:  
1) Storing the  unblinding spreadsheet on a secure server that is not accessible by [CONTACT_685051]  
2) In the event of a safety event (and at the conclusion of the year), she will have the ability to look up 
the condition the participant was re ceiving (active/placebo)  
3) A conflict of interest will be avoided by  [CONTACT_685052] a Monitoring Entity (ME) 
(aka. data safety monitoring board - DSMB) on an annual basis. Quality control will include regular data 
verification (I ntegrity of the Consent and HIPA A, scores on assessments, MRI scanning information), 
study progress, subject status, adverse events, and protocol deviations. Protocol adherence will be 
monitored by [CONTACT_351251], who will also be given access to the reports from the PI [INVESTIGATOR_351228].  
 
Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/[ADDRESS_928333] Plan:  Meet annually with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_685008] “Content of ME/DSM 
report”. This content of this meeting will be formalized in a report which will be circulated by [CONTACT_685053] [INVESTIGATOR_685009]/DSMB. The approved report will be sent to the Wake Forest IRB, 
and to NIH.  
 
Content of DSM Report:  The following information will be included in the DSM report - number of 
individuals consented, number of individuals enrolled, number of active participants, gender and race 
distribution of subjects, discussion and listing of all amendments to the proposal, any publications and/or 
scientific presentations related to the proposal, update on any resolved or unresolved AE/SAEs, review of 
any new scientific literature related to the safety and efficacy of this protocol.  
 
Plans for Interim Analysis of Efficacy Data:  Data from this study will be analyzed when 20% 
increments of the recruitment goal  have been obtained (e.g. 20% (n=27), 40% (n=55), 60% (n=83), 80% 
(n=110), 100% of the  total enrolled sample (n=138)).  A member of the DSMB that holds a copy of the 
unblinding key will provide the PI [INVESTIGATOR_685010] s that have completed 
enrollment. Data analysis will be performed by [CONTACT_685054]  (e.g. graduate students, 
postdoctoral fellows) as well as the laboratory manager for preparation of DSMB reports  and assessment 
of any disparities in the  demographic distribution between the active and placebo groups. Final analysis 
will occur when all participants have finished the final follow -up phase of the study.  
 
Responsibility for Data and Safety Monitoring:  The PI, protocol -approved research team,  and 
ME/DSMB are all responsible for data and safety monitoring. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_685011]. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_351231]/ participant  tolerance in 
weekly meetings with the research team.  
 
Data Entry Methods : Data will be collected using REDCap™, which is a secure web application for 
building and managing online surveys and databases. REDcap™ supports online or offline data capture 
for research studies and operations. Participants and protocol -approved study personnel will enter data 
directly into the online portal to ensure security and prevent data loss.  
 
Data Analysis Plan : Data for this study (behavioral assessments, functional MRI measurements) will be 
acquired by [CONTACT_990] -approved members o f the research team, including graduate students and research 
specialists. These individuals will also perform data management and analysis under the guidance of the 
PI. Deidentified data will be shared per NIH requirements. Manuscript composition will be led by [CONTACT_978] 
[INVESTIGATOR_7706] -Is, with the assistance of the research team.   
 
Quality Assurance Plan : Weekly meetings will be held between the PIs and research team to discuss 
any data -related problems as well as qualitative comments received during data collectio n. Initial data 
analyses will examine distributions of variable scores, and comparability of baseline characteristics across 
conditions, any necessary adjustments to analyses will be made.  Confidentiality protections are outlined 
below.  
 
Review of the stu dy will be conduc ted annually by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_685012]  (including enrollment, 
retention, assessment inventories)  and discussed with the DSMB . Data collected in previous studies by 
[CONTACT_685055] (likely 
more than 5000 pulses) the strength of the induced magnetic field from the biphasic coil begins to drop in 
a non -linear fashion. Consequently, the intensity of the induced magnetic field from the coil will be 
assessed by [CONTACT_60662] -approved study personnel and logged weekly (alongside with protocol use, number 
of pulses, intensity of pulses). This cumulative record of coil performance will be monitored and, when 
the intensity of the induced field had degraded 10%, we will swit ch to a new, identical coil.   
 
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  22 Definition and Repo rting of AEs/SAEs to the IRB /NIDA:  An adverse event (AE) is defined as any 
untoward medical occurrence in a study subject who was administered rTMS but does not necessarily 
have a causal relationship with this treatment. Any unwanted change, physically, psychologically or 
behaviorally, that occurs in a study participant during the course of the trial is an adverse event. A Serious 
Adverse Event (SAE) is defined as an adverse event that has one of the follow ing outcomes: death, life -
threatening, in participant  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081], persistent or 
significant disability/incapacity, a congenital anomaly/birth defect.  
 
All unexpected AEs will be reported to the Wake Forest  Institutional Review Board (IRB) and Committee 
on Human Research within 48 -business hours. Serious AEs will also be reported within 24 -business 
hours. Follow -up of all unexpected and serious AEs will also be reported to these agencies. AEs/SAEs are 
document ed and reported as per IRB requirements. Research staff will identify AEs and obtain all 
available information to assess severity, seriousness, study relatedness, expectedness, outcome, and the 
need for change or discontinuation in the study intervention. AEs are documented on AE Logs and AE 
Case Report Forms. Additional relevant AE information, if available, will be documented in a progress 
note and stored in the research record as appropriate to allow monitoring and further evaluation. If the AE 
meets the  definition for serious, appropriate SAE protocol specific reporting forms are completed and 
disseminated to the appropriate persons and within the designated timeframes as indicated above. For 
each AE/SAE recorded, the research staff will follow the AE/SA E until resolution, stabilization, or until 
the participant is no longer in the study as stated in the protocol. We will report adverse events to the 
Medical Wake Forest IRB online per the IRB’s guidelines.   
 
Collection and Reporting of AEs and SAEs : As m entioned above, all AEs/SAEs are documented and 
reported as per IRB requirements. Research staff will identify AEs, verify event with the participant, and 
obtain all available information to assess severity, seriousness, study relatedness, expectedness, ou tcome, 
and the need for change or discontinuation in the study intervention. AEs are documented on AE Logs 
and AE Case Report Forms. Additional relevant AE information, if available, will be documented in a 
progress note and stored in the research record a s appropriate to allow monitoring and further evaluation. 
If the AE meets the definition for serious, appropriate SAE protocol specific reporting forms are 
completed and disseminated to the appropriate persons and within the designated timeframes as indica ted 
above. If applicable, copi[INVESTIGATOR_685013]. De -identified copi[INVESTIGATOR_685014], ME/DSBM, and NIH. 
For each AE/SAE recorded, the research s taff will follow the AE/SAE until resolution, stabilization, or 
until the participant is no longer in the study as stated in the protocol.  
 
Reporting of Unanticipated Problems, Adverse Events or Deviations:  Any unanticipated problems, 
serious, and/or unexpected AEs, deviations or protocol changes will be reported within [ADDRESS_928334]  IRB,  ME/DSMB and to the sponsor, the NIH.  
 
Management of SAEs or Other Study Risks:  As described above, SAEs will be immediately reported, 
within 24 business hours, to the ME/DSBM, sponsor and Wake Forest  IRB. For each SAE recorded, the 
research staff will fo llow the SAE until resolution, stabilization, or until the participant is no longer in the 
study as stated in the protocol. If applicable, copi[INVESTIGATOR_351232]. De -identified copi[INVESTIGATOR_685014],   
ME/DSBM, and NIH.  
 
Reporting of IRB Actions and ME/DSMB Reports to NIAAA:  Any IRB actions and ME/DSMB 
reports will be reported to both the Wake Forest  IRB and the NIH Institute supporting the study fo llowing 
the sponsor’s report submission guidelines, should this study be awarded.  
 
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  23 Report of Changes or Amendments to the Protocol:  Any changes to the proposal/protocol must be 
approved by [CONTACT_351252]. Any amendments to the IRB protocol associated with 
the proposed work will be reported to NIH should this proposal be awarded funding.  
 
Trial Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_1869]:  The protocol will immediately be paused following notification of a SAE. Per 
IRB policy, the IRB and ME/DSMB will be notifie d within [ADDRESS_928335]:  Neither the PI, nor members of the research team have any Conflicts of Int erest 
directly related to this protocol. The rTMS device used for the proposed study is manufactured by 
[CONTACT_351253].  
 
References  
1. Haber SN, Knutson B. The reward circuit: linking primate anatomy and human imaging. 
Neuropsychopharmacology : official public ation of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology. 
2010;35(1):4 -26. doi: 10.1038/npp.2009.129. PubMed PMID: 19812543; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMC3055449.  
2. Bickel WK, Snider SE, Quisenberry AJ, Stein JS, Hanlon CA. Competing neurobehavioral 
decision systems theory of cocaine addiction: From mechanisms to therapeutic opportunities. Progress in 
brain research. 2016;223:269 -93. doi: 10.1016/bs.pbr.2015.07.009. PubMed PMID: 26806781.  
3. Huang YZ, Edwards MJ, Rounis E, Bhatia KP, Rothwell JC. Theta burst s timulation of the 
human motor cortex. Neuron. 2005;45(2):201 -6. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.12.033. PubMed PMID: 
15664172.  
4. Amiaz R, Levy D, Vainiger D, Grunhaus L, Zangen A. Repeated high -frequency transcranial 
magnetic stimulation over the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex reduces cigarette craving and consumption. 
Addiction. 2009;104(4):653 -60. doi: 10.1111/j.1360 -0443.2008.[ZIP_CODE].x. PubMed PMID: 19183128.  
5. Dinur -Klein L, Dannon P, Hadar A, Rosenberg O, Roth Y, Kotler M, Zangen A. Smoking 
cessation induce d by [CONTACT_685056]: a prospective, randomized controlled trial. Biological psychiatry. 2014;76(9):742 -9. doi: 
10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.05.020. PubMed PMID: 25038985.  
6. Eichhammer P,  Johann M, Kharraz A, Binder H, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_486441] D, Wodarz N, Hajak G. High -frequency 
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation decreases cigarette smoking. The Journal of clinical 
psychiatry. 2003;64(8):951 -3. PubMed PMID: 12927012.  
7. Li X, Hartwell KJ, Owens M, Lematty T, Borckardt JJ, Hanlon CA, Brady KT, George MS. 
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation of the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex reduces nicotine cue 
craving. Biological psychiatry. 2013;73(8):714 -20. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.01.003. PubM ed PMID: 
23485014; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3615051.  
8. Pripfl J, Tomova L, Riecansky I, Lamm C. Transcranial magnetic stimulation of the left 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex decreases cue -induced nicotine craving and EEG delta power. Brain 
stimulation. 201 4;7(2):226 -33. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2013.11.003. PubMed PMID: 24468092.  
9. Wing VC, Bacher I, Wu BS, Daskalakis ZJ, George TP. High frequency repetitive transcranial 
magnetic stimulation reduces tobacco craving in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia research. 2012; 139(1 -
3):264 -6. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2012.03.006. PubMed PMID: 22464727.  
10. Hanlon CA, Canterberry M, Taylor JJ, DeVries W, Li X, Brown TR, George MS. Probing the 
frontostriatal loops involved in executive and limbic processing via interleaved TMS and fu nctional MRI 
at two prefrontal locations: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. PloS one. 2013;8(7):e67917. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0067917. PubMed PMID: 23874466; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3706588.  
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  24 11. Hanlon CA, Hartwell KJ, Canterberry M, Li X, Owens M, Lematty T, Priscianda ro JJ, Borckardt 
J, Brady KT, George MS. Reduction of cue -induced craving through realtime neurofeedback in nicotine 
users: the role of region of interest selection and multiple visits. Psychiatry research. 2013;213(1):79 -81. 
doi: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.201 3.03.003. PubMed PMID: 23683344; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMCPMC4093788.  
12. Hartwell KJ, Hanlon CA, Li X, Borckardt JJ, Canterberry M, Prisciandaro JJ, Moran -Santa Maria 
MM, LeMatty T, George MS, Brady KT. Individualized real -time fMRI neurofeedback to attenuate 
craving in nicotine -dependent smokers. Journal of psychiatry & neuroscience : JPN. 2016;41(1):48 -55. 
PubMed PMID: 26505139; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4688028.  
13. Moran -Santa Maria MM, Hartwell KJ, Hanlon CA, Canterberry M, Lematty T, Owens M, Bra dy 
KT, George MS. Right anterior insula connectivity is important for cue -induced craving in nicotine -
dependent smokers. Addict Biol. 2015;20(2):407 -14. doi: 10.1111/adb.[ZIP_CODE]. PubMed PMID: 24529072; 
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4133311.  
14. [LOCATION_002]. Pub lic Health Service. Office of the Surgeon General. The health consequences of 
smoking --50 years of progress : a report of the surgeon general. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Office of the Surgeon General ; 2014. 2 volumes p.  
15. Xu X, Bishop EE, Kennedy SM, Simpson SA, Pechacek TF. Annual healthcare spending 
attributable to cigarette smoking: an update. Am J Prev Med. 2015;48(3):326 -33. doi: 
10.1016/j.amepre.2014.10.012. PubMed PMID: 25498551; PubMed Centr al PMCID: PMCPMC4603661.  
16. Cahill K, Stevens S, Perera R, Lancaster T. Pharmacological interventions for smoking cessation: 
an overview and network meta -analysis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013(5):CD009329. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD009329.pub2. PubMed P MID: 23728690.  
17. Cao ZF, Burdakov D, Sarnyai Z. Optogenetics: potentials for addiction research. Addict Biol. 
2011;16(4):519 -31. doi: 10.1111/j.1369 -1600.2011.[ZIP_CODE].x. PubMed PMID: 21929708.  
18. Steinberg EE, Janak PH. Establishing causality for dopamine  in neural function and behavior 
with optogenetics. Brain research. 2013;1511:46 -64. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.09.036. PubMed PMID: 
23031636; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3654072.  
19. Ferguson SM, Neumaier JF. Grateful DREADDs: engineered receptors reveal h ow neural circuits 
regulate behavior. Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2012;37(1):296 -7. doi: 10.1038/npp.2011.179. PubMed PMID: 22157861; 
PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3238068.  
20. Peters J, LaL umiere RT, Kalivas PW. Infralimbic prefrontal cortex is responsible for inhibiting 
cocaine seeking in extinguished rats. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for 
Neuroscience. 2008;28(23):6046 -53. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1045 -08.2008. PubMed PMID: 
18524910; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2585361.  
21. Barbas H. Pattern in the cortical distribution of prefrontally directed neurons with divergent axons 
in the rhesus monkey. Cereb Cortex. 1995;5(2):158 -65. PubMed PMID: 7620292.  
22. Groenew egen HJ, Uylings HB. The prefrontal cortex and the integration of sensory, limbic and 
autonomic information. Progress in brain research. 2000;126:3 -28. doi: 10.1016/S0079 -6123(00)[ZIP_CODE] -2. 
PubMed PMID: 11105636.  
23. Cho SS, Strafella AP. rTMS of the left do rsolateral prefrontal cortex modulates dopamine release 
in the ipsilateral anterior cingulate cortex and orbitofrontal cortex. PloS one. 2009;4(8):e6725. doi: 
10.1371/journal.pone.0006725. PubMed PMID: 19696930; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2725302.  
24. Strafe lla AP. Striatal dopamine release induced by [CONTACT_685057]. Brain. 2003;126(12):2609 --15. doi: 10.1093/brain/awg268. PubMed PMID: 
Strafella2003.  
25. Siebner HR, Bergmann TO, Bestmann S, Massimini M, Johansen -Berg H, Mochizuki H, 
Bohning DE, Boorman ED, Groppa S, Miniussi C, Pascual -Leone A, Huber R, Taylor PC, Ilmoniemi RJ, 
De Gennaro L, Strafella AP, Kahkonen S, Kloppel S, Frisoni GB, George MS, Hallett M, Brandt SA, 
Rushworth MF, Ziemann U, Rothwell  JC, Ward N, Cohen LG, Baudewig J, Paus T, Ugawa Y, Rossini 
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  25 PM. Consensus paper: combining transcranial stimulation with neuroimaging. Brain stimulation. 
2009;2(2):58 -80. Epub 2009/04/01. doi: S1935 -861X(08)[ZIP_CODE] -6 [pii]  
10.1016/j.brs.2008.11.002. PubMed P MID: 20633405.  
26. Mueller JK, Grigsby [CONTACT_46107], Prevosto V, Petraglia FW, 3rd, Rao H, Deng ZD, Peterchev AV, 
Sommer MA, Egner T, Platt ML, Grill WM. Simultaneous transcranial magnetic stimulation and single -
neuron recording in alert non -human primates. Nat Neur osci. 2014;17(8):1130 -6. doi: 10.1038/nn.3751. 
PubMed PMID: 24974797; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4115015.  
27. Hanlon CA, Dowdle LT, Moss H, Canterberry M, George MS. Mobilization of Medial and 
Lateral Frontal -Striatal Circuits in Cocaine Users and Controls: An Interleaved TMS/BOLD Functional 
Connectivity Study. Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication of the American College of 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2016. doi: 10.1038/npp.2016.114. PubMed PMID: 27374278.  
28. Bickel WK, Yi R, Kowal BP, Gatchalian KM. Cigarette smokers discount past and future rewards 
symmetrically and more than controls: is discounting a measure of impulsivity? Drug and alcohol 
dependence. 2008;96(3):256 -62. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2008.03.009. PubMed PMID: 18468814; 
PubMed Central P MCID: PMCPMC2701143.  
29. Bickel WK, Miller ML, Yi R, Kowal BP, Lindquist DM, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_311438]. Behavioral and 
neuroeconomics of drug addiction: competing neural systems and temporal discounting processes. Drug 
and alcohol dependence. 2007;[ADDRESS_928336] 1:S85 -91. Epub  2006/11/15. doi: 
10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2006.09.016. PubMed PMID: 17101239; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC2033431.  
30. Bechara A. Decision making, impulse control and loss of willpower to resist drugs: a 
neurocognitive perspective. Nat Neurosci. 2005;8(11):1458 -63. doi: 10.1038/nn1584. PubMed PMID: 
16251988.  
31. Mitchell SH. Measures of impulsivity in cigarette smokers and non -smokers. 
Psychopharmacology. 1999;146(4):455 --64. doi: 10.1007/PL00005491. PubMed PMID: Mitchell1999.  
32. Baker F, Johnson MW, Bickel WK. Delay discounting in current and never -before cigarette 
smokers: Similarities and differences across commodity, sign, and magnitude. J Abnorm Psychol. 
2003;112(3):382 --92. doi: 10.1037/0021 -843X.112.3.382. PubMed PMID: Baker2003.  
33. Bickel WK, Odum AL, Ma dden GJ. Impulsivity and cigarette smoking: delay discounting in 
current, never, and ex -smokers. Psychopharmacology. 1999;146(4):447 --54. doi: 10.1007/PL00005490. 
PubMed PMID: Bickel1999.  
34. Reynolds B, Richards JB, Horn K, Karraker K. Delay discounting a nd probability discounting as 
related to cigarette smoking status in adults. Behavioural Processes. 2004;65(1):35 --42. doi: 
10.1016/S0376 -6357(03)[ZIP_CODE] -8. PubMed PMID: Reynolds2004.  
35. Ohmura Y, Takahashi T, Kitamura N. Discounting Delayed and Probabilist ic Monetary Gains 
and Losses by [CONTACT_685058]2016:179 --96. doi: 10.1007/978 -4-431-[ZIP_CODE] -8_8. 
36. Amlung M, Petker T, Jackson J, Balodis I, MacKillop J. Steep discounting of delayed monetary 
and food rewards in obesity: a meta -analysis. Psychologica l medicine. 2016;46(11):2423 --34. doi: 
10.1017/S0033291716000866. PubMed PMID: Amlung2016.  
37. MacKillop J, Amlung MT, Few LR, Ray LA, Sweet LH, Munaf. Delayed reward discounting and 
addictive behavior: a meta -analysis. Psychopharmacology. 2011;216(3):305 --21. doi: 10.1007/s00213 -
011-2229 -0. PubMed PMID: MacKillop2011.  
38. Bickel WK, Koffarnus MN, Moody L, Wilson AG. The behavioral - and neuro -economic process 
of temporal discounting: A candidate behavioral marker of addiction. Neuropharmacology. 2014;76 Pt 
B:518 -27. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2013.06.013. PubMed PMID: 23806805; PubMed Central PMCID: 
PMCPMC3858579.  
39. Sheffer CE, Christensen DR, Landes R, Carter LP, Jackson L, Bickel WK. Delay discounting 
rates: a strong prognostic indicator of smoking relaps e. Addict Behav. 2014;39(11):1682 -9. doi: 
10.1016/j.addbeh.2014.04.019. PubMed PMID: 24878037; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC4316833.  
40. Sheffer C, Mackillop J, McGeary J, Landes R, Carter L, Yi R, Jones B, Christensen D, Stitzer M, 
Jackson L, Bickel W. Delay discounting, locus of control, and cognitive impulsiveness independently 
predict tobacco dependence treatment outcomes in a highly de pendent, lower socioeconomic group of 
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  26 smokers. The American journal on addictions / American Academy of Psychiatrists in Alcoholism and 
Addictions. 2012;21(3):221 -32. doi: 10.1111/j.1521 -0391.2012.[ZIP_CODE].x. PubMed PMID: 22494224; 
PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPM C3567840.  
41. Stein JS, Wilson AG, Koffarnus MN, Daniel TO, Epstein LH, Bickel WK. Unstuck in time: 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_171503]. Psychopharmacology. 2016:1 --
8. doi: 10.1007/s00213 -016-4410 -y. PubMed PMID: Stein2 016. 
42. Hursh SR. Behavioral economics. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior. 
1984;42(3):435 -52. doi: 10.1901/jeab.1984.42 -435. 
43. Hursh SR, Silberberg A. Economic demand and essential value. Psychological Review. 
2008;115(1):186 --98. doi: 10 .1037/0033 -295X.115.1.186. PubMed PMID: Hursh2008.  
44. Murphy JG, MacKillop J, Tidey JW, Brazil LA, Colby [CONTACT_10009]. Validity of a demand curve measure 
of nicotine reinforcement with adolescent smokers. Drug and alcohol dependence. 2011;113(2 -3):207 --
14. doi: 10. 1016/j.drugalcdep.2010.08.004. PubMed PMID: Murphy2011.  
45. Cox LS, Tiffany ST, Christen AG. Evaluation of the brief questionnaire of smoking urges (QSU -
brief) in laboratory and clinical settings. Nicotine Tob Res. 2001;3(1):7 -16. Epub 2001/03/22. doi: 
10.1080/14622200020032051. PubMed PMID: 11260806.  
46. Bakker N, Shahab S, Giacobbe P, Blumberger DM, Daskalakis ZJ, Kennedy SH, Downar J. 
rTMS of the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex for major depression: safety, tolerability, effectiveness, and 
outcome predicto rs for [ADDRESS_928337] stimulation. Brain stimulation. 
2015;8(2):208 -15. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2014.11.002. PubMed PMID: 25465290.  
47. Bellamoli E, Manganotti P, Schwartz RP, Rimondo C, Gomma M, Serpelloni G. rTMS in the 
treatment of dru g addiction: an update about human studies. Behavioural neurology. 2014;2014:815215. 
doi: 10.1155/2014/815215. PubMed PMID: 24803733; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4006612.  
48. Gorelick DA, Zangen A, George MS. Transcranial magnetic stimulation in the treatment  of 
substance addiction. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2014;1327:79 -93. doi: 10.1111/nyas.[ZIP_CODE]. PubMed PMID: 
25069523; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC4206564.  
49. Barr MS, Farzan F, Wing VC, George TP, Fitzgerald PB, Daskalakis ZJ. Repetitive transcranial 
magnetic stimu lation and drug addiction. International review of psychiatry. 2011;23(5):454 -66. doi: 
10.3109/09540261.2011.618827. PubMed PMID: 22200135.  
50. Wing VC, Barr MS, Wass CE, Lipsman N, Lozano AM, Daskalakis ZJ, George TP. Brain 
stimulation methods to treat to bacco addiction. Brain stimulation. 2013;6(3):221 -30. doi: 
10.1016/j.brs.2012.06.008. PubMed PMID: 22809824.  
51. Feil J, Zangen A. Brain stimulation in the study and treatment of addiction. Neuroscience and 
biobehavioral reviews. 2010;34(4):559 -74. doi: 10 .1016/j.neubiorev.2009.11.006. PubMed PMID: 
19914283.  
52. Denslow S, Lomarev M, George MS, Bohning DE. Cortical and subcortical brain effects of 
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) -induced movement: an interleaved TMS/functional magnetic 
resonance imag ing study. Biological psychiatry. 2005;57(7):752 -60. Epub 2005/04/12. doi: 
10.1016/j.biopsych.2004.12.017. PubMed PMID: 15820232.  
53. Fox MD, Buckner RL, White MP, Greicius MD, Pascual -Leone A. Efficacy of transcranial 
magnetic stimulation targets for depr ession is related to intrinsic functional connectivity with the 
subgenual cingulate. Biological psychiatry. 2012;72(7):595 -603. Epub 2012/06/05. doi: S0006 -
3223(12)[ZIP_CODE] -8 [pii]  
10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.04.028. PubMed PMID: 22658708.  
54. Bohning DE, Shastri  A, Lomarev MP, Lorberbaum JP, Nahas Z, George MS. BOLD -fMRI 
response vs. transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) pulse -train length: testing for linearity. Journal of 
magnetic resonance imaging : JMRI. 2003;17(3):279 -90. Epub 2003/02/21. doi: 10.1002/jmri .[ZIP_CODE]. 
PubMed PMID: 12594717.  
55. Bestmann S, Baudewig J, Siebner HR, Rothwell JC, Frahm J. Functional MRI of the immediate 
impact of transcranial magnetic stimulation on cortical and subcortical motor circuits. The European 
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  27 journal of neuroscience. 2004; 19(7):1950 -62. Epub 2004/04/14. doi: 10.1111/j.1460 -9568.2004.[ZIP_CODE].x. 
PubMed PMID: 15078569.  
56. Strafella AP, Paus T, Barrett J, Dagher A. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation of the 
human prefrontal cortex induces dopamine release in the caudate  nucleus. The Journal of neuroscience : 
the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience. 2001;21(15):RC157. PubMed PMID: 11459878.  
57. Di Lazzaro V, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_20640] F, Saturno E, Oliviero A, Dileone M, Mazzone P, Insola A, Tonali PA, 
Ranieri F, Huang YZ, Rothw ell JC. Theta -burst repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation suppresses 
specific excitatory circuits in the human motor cortex. The Journal of physiology. 2005;565(Pt 3):945 -50. 
doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2005.087288. PubMed PMID: 15845575; PubMed Central P MCID: PMC1464561.  
58. Bear MF, Malenka RC. Synaptic plasticity: LTP and LTD. Current opi[INVESTIGATOR_33591]. 
1994;4(3):389 -99. PubMed PMID: 7919934.  
59. Malenka RC, Bear MF. LTP and LTD: an embarrassment of riches. Neuron. 2004;44(1):5 -21. 
doi: 10.1016/j. neuron.2004.09.012. PubMed PMID: 15450156.  
60. Corrigall WA, Coen KM, Adamson KL. Self -administered nicotine activates the mesolimbic 
dopamine system through the ventral tegmental area. Brain Research. 1994;653(1 -2):278 -84. doi: 
10.1016/0006 -8993(94)[ZIP_CODE] -4. 
61. Barrett SP, Boileau I, Okker J, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_345125], Dagher A. The hedonic response to cigarette smoking is 
proportional to dopamine release in the human striatum as measured by [CONTACT_685059] [11C]raclopride. Synapse. 2004;54(2):65 -71. doi: 1 0.1002/syn.[ZIP_CODE]. PubMed PMID: 15352131.  
62. Marenco S, Carson RE, Berman KF, Herscovitch P, Weinberger DR. Nicotine -induced dopamine 
release in primates measured with [11C]raclopride PET. Neuropsychopharmacology : official publication 
of the American Coll ege of Neuropsychopharmacology. 2004;29(2):259 -68. doi: 
10.1038/sj.npp.1300287. PubMed PMID: 14666115.  
63. Hanlon CA, Dowdle LT, Austelle CW, DeVries W, Mithoefer O, Badran BW, George MS. What 
goes up, can come down: Novel brain stimulation paradigms may a ttenuate craving and craving -related 
neural circuitry in substance dependent individuals. Brain research. 2015. doi: 
10.1016/j.brainres.2015.02.053. PubMed PMID: 25770818.  
64. Bickel WK, Jarmolowicz DP, Mueller ET, Gatchalian KM. The behavioral economics a nd 
neuroeconomics of reinforcer pathologies: implications for etiology and treatment of addiction. Curr 
Psychiatry Rep. 2011;13(5):406 -15. doi: 10.1007/s11920 -011-0215 -1. 
65. Bickel WK, Marsch LA, Buchhalter AR, Badger GJ. Computerized behavior therapy for  opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480] -
dependent out: a randomized controlled trial. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 2008;16(2):132 -43. doi: 
10.1037/1064 -1297.16.2.132.  
66. Stein JS, Madden GJ. Delay Discounting and Drug Abuse: Empi[INVESTIGATOR_10477], Conceptual, and 
Methodological Considerations.  The Wi ley-Blackwell Handbook of Addiction Psychopharmacology: 
Wiley -Blackwell; 2013. p. 165 -208. 
67. Yi R, Buchhalter AR, Gatchalian KM, Bickel WK. The relationship between temporal 
discounting and the prisoner's dilemma game in intranasal abusers of prescriptio n opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438]. Drug Alcohol 
Depend. 2007;87(1):94 -7. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2006.07.007.  
68. Hanlon CA, Beveridge TJ, Porrino LJ. Recovering from cocaine: Insights from clinical and 
preclinical investigations. Neuroscience and biobehavioral reviews. 2013. Epub 2013/05/01. doi: 
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2013.04.007. PubMed PMID: 23628740.  
69. Hanlon CA, Canterberry M. The use of brain imaging to elucidate neural circuit changes in 
cocaine addiction. Subst Abuse Rehabil. 2012;3(1):115 -28. Epub 2012/11/20. doi: 10.2 147/SAR.S35153. 
PubMed PMID: 23162375.  
70. Hanlon CA, DeVries W, Dowdle LT, West JA, Siekman B, Li X, George MS. A comprehensive 
study of sensorimotor cortex excitability in chronic cocaine users: Integrating TMS and functional MRI 
data. Drug and alcohol d ependence. 2015. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.07.1196. PubMed PMID: 
26541870.  
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  28 71. Hanlon CA, Dufault DL, Wesley MJ, Porrino LJ. Elevated gray and white matter densities in 
cocaine abstainers compared to current users. Psychopharmacology. 2011;218(4):681 -92. Epub 
2011/06/22. doi: 10.1007/s00213 -011-2360 -y. PubMed PMID: 21691942.  
72. Hanlon CA, Wesley MJ, Porrino LJ. Loss of functional specificity in the dorsal striatum of 
chronic cocaine users. Drug and alcohol dependence. 2009;102(1 -3):88 -94. doi: 
10.1016 /j.drugalcdep.2009.01.005. PubMed PMID: 19264428; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC3124239.  
73. Hanlon CA, Wesley MJ, Roth AJ, Miller MD, Porrino LJ. Loss of laterality in cocaine users: an 
fMRI investigation of sensorimotor control. Neuropsychopharmacology : offi cial publication of the 
American College of Neuropsychopharmacology. 2009;in press.  
74. Dunlop K, Hanlon CA, Downar J. Noninvasive brain stimulation treatments for addiction and 
major depression. Annals of the [LOCATION_001] Academy of Sciences. 2016. doi: 10.11 11/nyas.[ZIP_CODE]. 
PubMed PMID: 26849183.  
75. Higgins S, Budney A, Bickel W. Applying behavioral concepts and principles to the treatment of 
cocaine dependence. Drug and alcohol dependence. 1994;34(2):87 -97. doi: 10.1016/0376 -
8716(94)[ZIP_CODE] -7. 
76. Marsch LA, Bi ckel WK, Badger GJ, Jacobs EA. Buprenorphine treatment for opi[INVESTIGATOR_2561]: 
the relative efficacy of daily, twice and thrice weekly dosing. Drug and alcohol dependence. 
2005;77(2):195 -204. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2004.08.011. PubMed PMID: 15664721.  
77. Stanger C, Ryan SR, Fu H, Landes RD, Jones BA, Bickel WK, Budney AJ. Delay discounting 
predicts adolescent substance abuse treatment outcome. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 2012;20(3):205 -12. 
doi: 10.1037/a0026543. PubMed PMID: 22182419; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3906638.  
78. Hanlon CA, Dowdle LT, Naselaris T, Canterberry M, Cortese BM. Visual cortex activation to 
drug cues: A meta -analysis of functional neuroimaging papers in addiction and substance abuse literature. 
Drug and alcohol dependence. 2014;143:206 -12. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2014.07.028. PubMed PMID: 
25155889; PubMed Central PMCID: PMC4161649.  
79. Giordano LA, Bickel WK, Shahan TA, Badger GJ. Behavioral economics of human drug self ‐
administration: progressive ratio versus random sequences of response requirements. Behav Pharmacol. 
2001;12(5):343.  
80. Bickel WK, Marsch LA. Toward a behavioral economic understanding of drug dependence: delay 
discounting processes. Addiction. 2001;96(1):73 -86. doi: 10.1080/09652140020016978.  
81. Bickel WK, Marsch  LA, Carroll ME. Deconstructing relative reinforcing efficacy and situating 
the measures of pharmacological reinforcement with behavioral economics: a theoretical proposal. 
Psychopharmacology. 2000;153(1):44 -56. 
82. Stein JS, Daniel TO, Epstein LH, Bickel WK. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_685015]. Drug and alcohol dependence. 2015;156:e212. doi: 
10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2015.07.571.  
83. Stein JS, Johnson PS, Renda CR, Smits RR, Liston KJ, Shahan TA, Madden GJ. Early and 
prolong ed exposure to reward delay: effects on impulsive choice and alcohol self -administration in male 
rats. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 2013;21(2):172 -80. doi: 10.1037/a0031245.  
84. Stein JS, Koffarnus MN, Snider SE, Quisenberry AJ, Bickel WK. Identification and management 
of nonsystematic purchase task data: Toward best practice. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 2015;23(5):377.  
85. Snider SE, LaConte SM, Bickel WK. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_10691]: Expansion of the Temporal 
Window in Individuals with Alcohol Dependence. Alcohol  Clin Exp Res. 2016;40(7):1558 -66. doi: 
10.1111/acer.[ZIP_CODE].  
86. Wilson AG, Franck CT, Koffarnus MN, Bickel WK. Behavioral Economics of Cigarette Purchase 
Tasks: Within -Subject Comparison of Real, Potentially Real, and Hypothetical Cigarettes. Nicotine Tob 
Res. 2016;18(5):524 -30. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntv154.  
87. Bickel WK, Mellis AM, Snider SE, Moody L, Stein JS, Quisenberry AJ. Novel Therapeutics for 
Addiction: Behavioral Economic and Neuroeconomic Approaches. Current Treatment Options in 
Psychiatry. 2016;3(3): 277-92. 
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/2022  29 88. Sheehan DV, Lecrubier Y, Sheehan KH, Amorim P, Janavs J, Weiller E, Hergueta T, Baker R, 
Dunbar GC. The Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): the development and 
validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview fo r DSM -IV and ICD -10. The Journal of 
clinical psychiatry. 1998;[ADDRESS_928338] 20:22 -33;quiz 4 -57. PubMed PMID: 9881538.  
89. Sobell LC, Sobell MB. Timeline Follow -Back. In: Litten RZ, Allen JP, editors. Measuring 
Alcohol Consumption: Psychosocial and Biochemical M ethods. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press; 1992. p. 41 -
72. 
90. Beck AT, Steer RA, Brown GK. Manual for the Beck Depression Inventory -II. San Antonio, TX: 
Psychological Corporation; 1996.  
91. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_33594], Gorsuch RL, Lushene RH. State -trait Anxiety Inventory. Pal o Alto: Consulting 
Psychologists Press; 1970.  
92. M. MD, M. L, F. DL. Profile of Mood States (POMS) –Revised Manual. San Diego, CA: 
Education and Industrial Testing Service; 1992.  
93. McClernon FJ, Hiott FB, Huettel SA, Rose JE. Abstinence -induced changes i n self -report craving 
correlate with event -related FMRI responses to smoking cues. Neuropsychopharmacology : official 
publication of the American College of Neuropsychopharmacology. 2005;30(10):1940 -7. Epub 
2005/05/28. doi: 1300780 [pii]  
10.1038/sj.npp.130 0780. PubMed PMID: 15920499.  
94. McClernon FJ, Kozink RV, Rose JE. Individual differences in nicotine dependence, withdrawal 
symptoms, and sex predict transient fMRI -BOLD responses to smoking cues. Neuropsychopharmacology 
: official publication of the Amer ican College of Neuropsychopharmacology. 2008;33(9):2148 -57. 
PubMed PMID: 17987060.  
95. Henningfield JE, Stitzer ML, Griffiths RR. Expi[INVESTIGATOR_685016] a function of number of cigarettes smoked. Addictive Behaviors. 1 980;5(3):265 -72. doi: 
10.1016/0306 -4603(80)[ZIP_CODE] -0. 
96. Fagerstrom KO, Schneider NG. Measuring nicotine dependence: A review of the Fagerstrom 
Tolerance Questionnaire. Journal of Behavioral Medicine. 1989;12(2):159 -82. doi: 10.1007/bf00846549.  
97. Fagerstrom K. Determinants of tobacco use and renaming the FTND to the Fagerstrom Test for 
Cigarette Dependence. Nicotine Tob Res. 2012;14(1):75 -8. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntr137. PubMed PMID: 
22025545.  
98. Jacobs EA, Bickel WK. Modeling drug consumption in the c linic using simulation procedures: 
Demand for heroin and cigarettes in opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480] -dependent outpatients. Experimental and clinical 
psychopharmacology. 1999;7(4):412 -26. doi: 10.1037/1064 -1297.7.4.412.  
99. MacKillop J, Murphy JG, Ray LA, Eisenberg DT, Lisman SA , Lum JK, Wilson DS. Further 
validation of a cigarette purchase task for assessing the relative reinforcing efficacy of nicotine in college 
smokers. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 2008;16(1):57 -65. doi: 10.1037/1064 -1297.16.1.57. PubMed 
PMID: 18266552.  
100. MacKillop J, Murphy JG. A behavioral economic measure of demand for alcohol predicts brief 
intervention outcomes. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2007;89(2 -3):227 -33. doi: 
10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2007.01.002.  
101. MacKillop J, Amlung MT, Few LR, Ray LA, Sweet LH, Munafo MR . Delayed reward 
discounting and addictive behavior: a meta -analysis. Psychopharmacology. 2011;216(3):305 -21. doi: 
10.1007/s00213 -011-2229 -0. PubMed PMID: 21373791; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC3201846.  
102. Hughes JR, Hatsukami D. Signs and Symptoms of Tob acco Withdrawal. Archives of general 
psychiatry. 1986;43(3):289. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.1986.01800030107013.  
103. Hughes JR. Tobacco withdrawal in self -quitters. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 
1992;60(5):689 -97. doi: 10.1037/0022 -006x.60.5.6 89. 
104. Toll BA, O'Malley SS, McKee SA, Salovey P, Krishnan -Sarin S. Confirmatory factor analysis of 
the Minnesota Nicotine Withdrawal Scale. Psychology of addictive behaviors : journal of the Society of 
Psychologists in Addictive Behaviors. 2007;21(2):21 6-25. doi: 10.1037/0893 -164X.21.2.216. PubMed 
PMID: 17563141; PubMed Central PMCID: PMCPMC2527730.  
Protocol version: 4.4  
Protocol date: 06/ 10/[ADDRESS_928339] R, Gilbert D, Craving SWGotAo, Withdrawal in Clinical T. Recommendation 
for the assessment of tobacco craving and withdrawal in smoking  cessation trials. Nicotine Tob Res. 
2004;6(4):599 -614. doi: 10.1080/14622200410001734067. PubMed PMID: 15370156.  
106. Mishory A, Molnar C, Koola J, Li X, Kozel FA, Myrick H, Stroud Z, Nahas Z, George MS. The 
maximum -likelihood strategy for determining tra nscranial magnetic stimulation motor threshold, using 
parameter estimation by [CONTACT_685060]. The 
journal of ECT. 2004;20(3):160 -5. 
107. Borckardt JJ, Nahas Z, Koola J, George MS. Estimating re sting motor thresholds in transcranial 
magnetic stimulation research and practice: a computer simulation evaluation of best methods. The 
journal of ECT. 2006;22(3):169 -75. doi: 10.1097/01.yct.[PHONE_3484].[ZIP_CODE].72. PubMed PMID: 
16957531.  
108. Smith SM, Jenki nson M, Woolrich MW, Beckmann CF, Behrens TE, Johansen -Berg H, 
Bannister PR, De Luca M, Drobnjak I, Flitney DE, Niazy RK, Saunders J, Vickers J, Zhang Y, De 
Stefano N, Brady JM, Matthews PM. Advances in functional and structural MR image analysis and 
imple mentation as FSL. NeuroImage. 2004;[ADDRESS_928340] 1:S208 -19. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.07.051. 
PubMed PMID: 15501092.  
109. Tziortzi AC, Haber SN, Searle GE, Tsoumpas C, Long CJ, Shotbolt P, Douaud G, Jbabdi S, 
Behrens TEJ, Rabiner EA, Jenkinson M, Gunn RN. Connectivity -Based Functional Analysis of 
Dopamine Release in the Striatum Using Diffusion -Weighted MRI and Positron Emission Tomography. 
Cerebral cortex. 2014;24(5):1165 --77. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs397. PubMed PMID: Tziortzi2014.  
110.  Ashare RL, Wileyto EP, Perkins KA, Schnoll RA. The first seven days of a quit attempt predicts 
relapse: Validation of a measure for screening medications for nicotine dependence. Journal of addiction 
medicine. 2013 Jul;7(4):249.  
111.  Kearney -Ramos TE, Dowdle LT, Lench DH, M ithoefer OJ, Devries WH, George MS, Anton RF, 
Hanlon CA. Transdiagnostic effects of ventromedial prefrontal cortex transcranial magnetic stimulation 
on cue reactivity. Biological Psychiatry: Cognitive Neuroscience and Neuroimaging. 2018 Jul 1;3(7):599 -
609. 