[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  July 18, 2021  Implementing a Mobile Technology -Based System for Physician -
Directed Remote Management of Hypertension: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116] 
 
1. PURPOSE OF THE STUDY  
a. Brief Summary 
This is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], single -site, cohort study at Stanford. The purpose of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_683778] a mobile technology -based system to assist 
Providers in managing hypertension remotely using a platform that integrates an FDA -
approved home blood pressure monitor with a dashboard that displays  patient blood 
pressure data. Hypertension is a major public health burden and hypertension is often 
undertreated despi[INVESTIGATOR_683779]. There is a 
strong need to promote optimal hypertension management across populat ions, including 
timely and effective medication titration to achieve optimal control and prevent future complications including cardiovascular and renal events.  
b. Objectives  
We aim to assess whether a novel mobile technology -based system will be feasible and 
effective in helpi[INVESTIGATOR_683780] a platform that 
integrates an FDA-approved home blood pressure monitor. Specifically, through this 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], we hope to assess how much providers and patients are utilizing the system 
after implementation, whether antihypertensive medication titration is being effectively performed, and whether blood pressure control is being achieved. This study will 
gene rate preliminary feasibility and effectiveness data which will be used to iterate the 
mobile technology system and will serve as the basis for a subsequent large randomized clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy of this system for remote blood pressure 
management.  
c. Rationale for Research in Humans  
The purpose of this study is to test the feasibility and effectiveness of a mobile 
technology- based system for hypertension management in outpatients with essential 
hypertension.  
2. STUDY PROCEDURES  
a. Procedures  
Prespecified Stanford clinics (Internal Medicine, Family Practice, Cardiology, and Hypertension) will undergo implementation of a mobile - technology based system that 
utilizes a remote home blood pressure cuff system integrated with a physician/APP (advanc ed practice provider) - facing platform.  
 First, these clinics will be verbally informed of the study by [CONTACT_30967]. 
Treating providers within these clinics will identify potentially eligible patients and will 
first inform patients and then the study team. The study team will screen t he patient for 
July 18, 2021   Page 2 of 7 eligibility by [CONTACT_683785]. The provider will begin use of the mobile technology system for 
hypertension management for the patient. When enrolling the patient, the provider wil l 
indicate the desired future sequence of antihypertensive medication for escalation if needed. Patients will be provided a commercially available, FDA-approved home blood 
pressure (BP) monitoring cuff (HEM 9200T or HEM 9210T, Omron HealthCare, Inc). 
These FDA- approved cuffs are used commercially with a mobile application (Omron 
HeartAdvisor) that stores the patient’s raw blood pressure readings from the blood pressure cuffs. Patients will be asked to download this application along with receiving 
the cuff . Blood pressure cuffs will be purchased by [CONTACT_5051]. Patients will be 
asked to measure their blood pressure twice a week for a total of [ADDRESS_926049] the presence/absence of adverse effects to medications. 
During the study, the dashboard presents to the physician/APP the changes in medications that the physician/APP has previously decided upon enrollment. Treating 
providers may us e BP data to modify the patient’s blood pressure management, act in 
accordance with these previously selected changes, or make other decisions regarding medications. The study coordinators will maintain a list of participating patients in the 
secure REDcap  system. The pi[INVESTIGATOR_683781] a total of 50 patients and 10 
providers. We will administer surveys to the patients and providers at the end of the study. Prespecified data regarding feasibility and effectiveness will be collected over a 
follo wup period of 12 weeks and will be stored in the secure REDcap system for analysis.  
 
 
Data collected at start of study period: Age, race/ethnicity, Body -mass index, baseline 
blood pressure, medications, comorbidities (including laboratory results related to 
comorbidities, such as serum creatinine related to renal dysfunction), treating prov ider, 
treating clinic.  
Data during and at the end study period: Blood pressure medication changes, reason for 
medication changes, adherence to medications, and anonymous patient and provider 
surveys.  
 The primary outcomes of the study will comprise of the following:  
• Blood pressure at 12 weeks compared to baseline blood pressure  
• Ease of using the home blood pressure cuff system by [CONTACT_1962] (through anonymous 
survey)  
• Ease of use of the system by [CONTACT_39487] (through anonymous survey)  
b. Procedure Risks  
Providers will retain the ability to make all final decisions regarding management thus 
avoiding inadvertent patient risk and deviations from standard of care.  
July 18, [ADDRESS_926050] of care treatment during the study. 
Providers will make all final treatment decisions based on clinical judgement.  
f. Will it be possible to continue the more (most) appropriate therapy for the 
participant(s) after the conclusion of the study?  
Yes, as we anticipate that patients will continue to receive standard of care therapy, as 
outlined above.  
g. Study Endpoint s/Analysis Plan 
The study outcomes will be assessed at the end of [ADDRESS_926051] of care therapy will be withheld during the study. The primary outcomes of the study will comprise of the following:  
• Blood pressure at 12 weeks compared to baseline blood pressure  
• Ease of using the home blood pressure cuff system by [CONTACT_1962] (through anonymous 
survey)  
• Ease of use of the system by [CONTACT_39487] (through anonymous survey)  
No power calculation is  used for the study.  
3. BACKGROUND  
a. Past Experimental and/or Clinical Findings  
No prior experimental or clinical work has been performed at Stanford. This pi[INVESTIGATOR_683782].  
b. Findings from Past Animal Experiments  
N/A 
4. RADIOISOTOPES OR RADIATION MACHINES  
N/A 
5. DEVICES  USED IN THE STUDY  
a. Investigational Devices (Including Commercial Devices Used Off -Label)  
N/A 
July 18, 2021   Page 4 of 7 b. IDE-Exempt Devices  
IND-Exempt Device 1  
Name:  [CONTACT_683788] -9200T Blood Pressure Monitor  
Description:  The device is a remote blood pressure monitor.   
IND-Exempt Device 2  
Name:  [CONTACT_683788] -9210T Blood Pressure Monitor  
Description:  The device is a remote blood pressure monitor.   
 
6. DRUGS , BIOLOGICS , REAGENTS , OR CHEMICALS  USED IN THE STUDY  
N/A 
7. DISINFECTION PROCEDURES  FOR MEDICAL EQUIPMENT USED ON BOTH HUMANS AND 
ANIMALS  
N/A 
 
8. PARTICIPANT POPULATION  
a. Planned Enrollment  
We expect [ADDRESS_926052] 
clinics: Internal Medicine, Family Practice, Cardiology, and Hypertension.  
b. Age, Gender, and Ethnic Background 
Patients who are 18 years of age or older with essential hypertension who meet medical inclusion/exclusion criteria will be enrolled, with no gender or race/ethnicity criteria.  
c. Vulnerable Populations  
Children and pregnant women will not be enrolled in this study. For other potentially 
vulnerable populations who may be enrolled, such as economically disadvantaged 
populations, this study minimizes risk as it is not anticipated to affect standard of care 
therapy and care will continue to be directed by [CONTACT_683786]. No additional research-
based physical visits or costs to the participants are expected either. In addition, potential 
benefits for vulnerable populations include a reduced need for participa nts to visit clinical 
offices to manage hypertension, thus minimizing financial costs and disruption to daily lives that can be associated with Provider visits.  
d. Rationale for Exclusion of Certain Populations  
Children are not included because hypertension management in adults is treated differently in clinical practice from hypertension in children. Adult hypertension 
management may not be appropriate for children. Hypertension management in children 
usually re quires pediatric expertise, which is beyond the scope of adult hypertension 
guidelines and beyond the scope of practice for adult Providers in primary care, nephrology and cardiology, including the study investigators.  
 
July 18, 2021   Page 5 of 7 Pregnant women are excluded to minimize harm, because pregnancy -related hypertensive 
disorders such as pre-eclampsia require specialized assessment and management 
protocols (including potentially high-risk obstetric and maternal -fetal medicine 
evaluation) that are beyond the scope of general adult hypertension management guidelines. Several commonly used antihypertensive agents that are core aspects of 
hypertension guidelines  (such as ACE inhibitors) may be harmful in pregnancy.  
e. Stanford Populations  
We do not anticipate laboratory personnel or students as participants. Enrolled providers who may be employees will undergo informed consent.  
f. Healthy Volunteers  
Only patients with essential hypertension will be included and no healthy patients will be enrolled. The enrolled providers (10) will be healthy volunteers.  
g. Recruitment Details  
Pre-specified Stanford clinics (Internal Medicine, Family Practice, Cardiology, and 
Hypertension) will be eligible and will be informed of the study verbally by [CONTACT_30967]. Treating providers will identify potentially eligible patients and will first 
inform patients and then notify the Study Protocol director about eligible participants. 
h. Eligibility Criteria  
i. Inclusion Criteria  
Patients aged [ADDRESS_926053] clinics: Internal Medicine, Family Practice, 
Cardiology, and Hypertension.  
ii. Exclusion Criteria  
Patients who meet the following criteria will be excluded:  
• Patients on more than 2 antihypertensives at time of enrollment  
• Clinical diagnosis of secondary hypertension, that is, hypertension due to a 
secondary cause, including but not limited to the following:  
o Renal artery stenosis 
o o Primary hyperaldosteronism 
o o Cushing syndrome  
o o Coarctation of the aorta  
o o Drug-induced hypertension  
o o Pheochromocytoma  
o o Obstructive sleep apnea  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_683783] (including stroke, cardiac events, acute kidney injury) in the preceding 6 months  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_683784] 6 months  
• Prior diagnosis of heart failure or cardiomyopathy  
• Stroke or transient ischemic attack within prior 6 months  
July 18, 2021   Page 6 of 7 • Prior organ transplantation 
• Failure to obtain informed consent  
• Pregnant or currently trying to become pregnant  
• Patients who are enrolled in other research studies 
i. Screening Procedures  
Treating Providers will identify eligible patients for recruitment based on inclusion and 
exclusion criteria. Treating providers will inform patients and then will contact [CONTACT_123894]. Patients will be contact[CONTACT_683787]. We will 
request a waiver of authorization for recruitment.  
j. Participation in Multiple Protocols  
Patients enrolled in other studies are excluded from our current study.  
k. Payments to Participants  
There is no participant reimbursement.  
l. Costs to Participants 
There are no participant costs.  
m. Planned Duration  of the Study  
The probable duration of the study will be 24 months, including 12 weeks of active participation in study per participant.  
9. RISKS 
a. Potential Risks  
i. Investigational devices  
N/A 
ii. Investigational drugs 
N/A 
iii. Commercially available drugs, biologics, reagents or chemicals  
N/A 
iv. Procedures 
We will use an FDA-approved home blood pressure monitoring system and do not 
anticipate additional risks.  
v. Radioisotopes/radiation -producing machines  
We will use an FDA-approved home blood pressure monitoring system and do not anticipate additional risks.  
July 18, 2021   Page 7 of 7 vi. Physical  well-being  
We will use an FDA-approved home blood pressure monitoring system and do not 
anticipate additional risks.  
vii. Psych ological  well-being 
We will use an FDA-approved home blood pressure monitoring system and do not 
anticipate additional risks.  
viii. Economic well -being  
We will use an FDA-approved home blood pressure monitoring system and do not anticipate additional risks.  
ix. Social  well-being 
We will use an FDA-approved home blood pressure monitoring system and do not anticipate additional risks.  
b. International Research  Risk Procedures  
N/A 
c. Procedures to Minimize Risk  
During the study, the participants will continue to receive standard of care management through their regular provider who will make all final treatment decisions, and thus 
potential risks will be minimized.  
d. Study Conclusion 
The study will terminate after obtaining [ADDRESS_926054] (HIPAA)  and privacy policies of Stanford University, Stanford 
Health Care, and Stanford Children’s Health.  