OFFICIAL TITLE OF STUDY: Targeting Burdensomeness Among Clinic Referred Youth  
 
NCT NUMBER: 03781037  
 
DATE: 0 2-13-2020 
  
PROTOCOL  
Suicidal  ideation  is prevalent  in youth : 17.7%  of high school  students  seriously  consider ed a suicide  
attempt  and 14.6%  made a specific  plan for suicide  in the past 12 months1. Suicidal  ideation  also is a strong  
predictor  of future  suicide  attempts  and suicide2-3. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_700452],  the rates  of 
suicidal  ideation  and suicide  in youth  continue  to rise in recent  years1. There  is critical  need  for novel  
intervention  targets  to prevent  and reduce  suicidal  ideation  in youth.  To address  this critical  need,  the Sponsor  
([CONTACT_700461])  is developi[INVESTIGATOR_700453]  a novel,  brief psychosocial  treatment  module  targeting  perceived  
burdensomeness  towards  others  that can be embedded  within  existing  psychosocial  treatments  for youth.  This 
F31 project  leverages  the sponsor’s  clinical  trial to allow  the applicant  to collect  additional  qualitative  and 
quantitative  data on the module  (described  below)  and gain clinically  relevant  research  experience  by [CONTACT_700456],  implementation  of the trial, and analysis  of additional  data.   
Substantial  research  documents  perceived  burdensomeness  towards  others  as a risk factor  for suicidal  
ideation4, including  in youth5-6, highlighting  the potential  promise  of perceived  burdensomeness  as an 
intervention  target  to prevent  or reduce  suicidal  ideation.  Only one study , conducted  by [CONTACT_1034],  has 
examined  an intervention  targeting  perceived  burdensomeness  in youth7. In [ADDRESS_950884]  compared  with subjects  who received  online  
psychoeducation.  This initial  finding  is exciting  because  it demonstrates  a brief psychosocial  intervention  can 
successfully  target  and reduce  perceived  burdensomeness  when  administered  online.  However,  tempering  this 
excitement  is the finding  that approximately  50% of subjects  did not complete  the online  modules.  Thus,  there  
is need  to enhance  engagement  with treatment,  as well as expand  intervention  approaches  to clinic -referred  
populations  at higher  risk of suicidal  behaviors  than community -based  populations.   
 One strategy  for enhancing  enga gement  and completion  of a brief intervention  targeting  perceived  
burdensomeness  is to embed  it within  existing  psychosocial  treatments  for youth  psychopathology  (e.g.,  
cognitive -behavioral  therapy  [CBT]  for youth  anxiety  disorders).  Consistent  with a modu lar CBT approach8, this 
strategy  would  enable  clinicians  to select  and employ  a brief intervention  module  when  youth  clients  
demonstrate  thoughts  of being  a burden  on others , with minimal  disruption  to the ongoing  intervention  protocol.   
 The purposes  of this project  are to (1) develop  a novel,  brief psychosocial  intervention  module  (the 
GIVE  module)  targeting  perceived  burdensomeness  towards  others  that can be embedded  within  existing  CBT 
protocols  for youth  internalizing  problems,  and then (2) collect  data relevant  to the timing  of reductions  in 
perceived  burdensomeness . The following  aims  will be pursued  with N=30  clinic  referred  youths  ages  10 to 17 
who are receiving  outpatient  CBT for anxiety  or depression .  
Aim 1: Develop  a manualized  module  targeti ng perceived  burdensomeness  to be used  as an adjunct  to 
existing  psychosocial  treatments.  The GIVE  module  will consist  of one core intervention  session  involving  
the youth  and a parent  (approx.  50 minutes)  and one follow -up discussion  of homework  completio n (approx . 10 
minutes).   
Aim 2: In an open trial, examine adherence and satisfaction with the GIVE module. Adherence, 
operationalized as provider fidelity and integrity, will be assessed by [CONTACT_700457]. Y outh 
and parent satisfaction will be assessed using the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire.  
Aim 3: In an open trial, demonstrate reductions in youth levels of perceived burdensomeness.  
Perceived burdensomeness will be assessed at pretreatment (PRE), midtre atment (MID; i.e., CBT session 6), 
every treatment session, and posttreatment (POST). We expect that perceived burdensomeness will be 
significantly lower at POST relative to MID (i.e., CBT session 6, immediately before beginning the GIVE 
module).  
APPROACH  
General  overview.  Following  parental  consent  and youth  assent,  parents  and youths  will be administered  
interviews  and questionnaires  as part of PRE assessment  to determine  eligibility  for this study  (see 
Inclusion/Exclusion  criteria).  Eligible  youths  will be allocated  to a 12-session  CBT protocol  with an additional  
module  targeting  perceived  burdensomeness  to be administered  during  CBT session  6.  Youth  participants’  
levels  of perceived  burdensomeness  will be assessed  weekly  at the beginning  of each  sessio n of the CBT 
protocol  and again  at a POST  assessment  one week  after the final CBT session.   
Participants.  N=30  youths  ages  10 to 17 years will be recruited  upon  entry  into clinical  services  for anxiety  
and/or  depression.   
Inclusion  criteria . To be included  in this study,  youth  must:  1) be between  ages  10 to 17 years  old; 2) meet  
for a primary  DSM -V diagnosis  of an anxiety  disorder,  persistent  depressive  disorder,  or major  depressive  
disorder;  3) score  > 4 on the youth  self-report  Interperson al Needs  Questionnaire - Perceived  Burdensomeness  
Scale  at PRE and again  at CBT session  5; and 4) if youth  have  ADHD,  tics, or impulse  control  problems,  those  
disorders  must  receive  an impairment  rating  no greater  than 4 (‘Moderate’) on the 0–8 point  scale  on the 
Anxiety  Disorders  Interview  Schedule  Child/Parent  versions  (ADIS -C/P).  
Exclusion  criteria.  Youth  will be excluded  from this study  if they:  1) meet  diagnostic  criteria  for Psychotic  
Disorders,  Autism  Spectrum  Disorder  or Intellectual  Disability,  2) show high risk of imminent  self-injurious  
behaviors,  3) are involved  currently  in another  psychosocial  treatment;  4) are not living  with a primary  caregiver  
who is legally  able to give consent  for the youth’s  participation,  or 5) are a victim  of previously  undisclosed  
abuse  requiring  investigation  or ongoing  supervision  by [CONTACT_700458].  
GIVE  module.  The GIVE  module  will include  three  components:  (1) in-session  cognitive  restructuring,  
introduced  by a brief rationale  and psychoeducation;  (2) a home  assignment  to be completed  by [CONTACT_91948];  (3) a 
parent  component  providing  psychoeducation  on burdensomeness  that sets up a brief parent -child relationship  
task.   Table  1 provides  an outline  of the core session  of the module,  and the follow -up session.  The module  will 
be briefly  introduced  to youth  with a rationale  outlining  the importance  of addressing  specific  negative  beliefs  
that may appear  as secondary  to the presenting  problem  but which  are nonetheless  critical  to address,  
particularly  perceived  burdensomeness;  this brief rationale  will be followed  by [CONTACT_700459]  (overall  introduction  is approximately  5 minutes).  The 
first major  component  of the GIVE  module  (during  the subsequent  15 minutes  of session  6), in-session  
cognitive  restructuring  with the youth  only,  consists  of identifying  negative  thoughts  (i.e., burdensomeness)  
using  real-life examples  and then collaboratively  evaluating  cognitions  of burdensomeness  using  techniques  
such  as reality  testing  and cost-benefit  analysis18, with the aim of developi[INVESTIGATOR_700454] . Cognitive  
restructuring  will be 
conducted  in a 
developmentally  
appropriate  manner  based  
on empi[INVESTIGATOR_3675] -supported  
CBT protocols  for youth.  
Consistent  with the priority  
of minimal  disruption  to 
ongoing  treatment,  session  
6 is an ideal  session  to 
introduce  the module  
because  it will leverage  
existing  CBT skills  covered  
earlier  in treatment  (i.e., 
cognitive  restructuring).  
The second  component  of the GIVE  module  is a home  behavioral  assignment  to be planned  in the 
subsequent  15 minutes  of session  6. This home  assignment  is based  on a brief online  intervention  developed  
by [CONTACT_456]7. In this brief at-home  assignment,  youths  will identify  one family  member  on whom  they believe  
themselves  to be a burden,  and will design  an activity  to contribute  to the well-being of that family  member7 
(usually  the mother).  This home  assignment  will be collaboratively  planned  during  the session,  including  
identification  of barriers  to completing  the assignment  and problem -solving  aimed  at improving  completion  of 
the assignment.  Youths  will already  have  been  completing  home  assignments  during  previous  CBT sessions  
and so the current  home  assignment  should  not impose  new burden  in terms  of planning  or execution.  There  
will also be a brief discussion  of this task in the beginning  of the following  session  for approximately  [ADDRESS_950885] two components,  the entirety  of this component  is done  with both the youth  and the parents present  in 
the subsequent  15 minutes  of session  6. This component  begins  with brief psychoeducation  for the parent  
explaining  parental  acceptance  and its implications  in the context  of perceived  burdensomeness.  Then,  the 
parent  will devise  two lists: one that highlights  the positive  qualities  of the child,  and a second  that includes  
ways  that the parent  can show  acceptance  and warmth.  The inclusion  of the third component  is driven  by 
[CONTACT_700460],  and forthcoming  research  
from our team  indicating  that low parental  acceptance  is significantly  associated  with youth  perceptions  of 
burdensomeness  towards  others18. There  will also be a brief 5 minute  wrap -up which  encompasses  review  of 
the module  and prevention  (i.e., discussing  the use of the module  tools  in forthcoming  situations  and 
experiences).  Table  1. Module  Outline  
Core  Session  
(session  6 of 
CBT protocol)   5 minutes: Rationale for module and psychoeducation on 
burdensomeness  
 15 minutes: Cognitive restructuring of burdensomeness  
 15 minutes: Planning home behavioral assignment  
 5 minutes: Psychoeducation on parental acceptance  
 10 minutes: Parental acceptance activity (positive qualities 
and ways to show acceptance lists)  
Follow -up 
Session  
(session  7 of 
CBT protocol)   5 minutes: Discussion of home behavioral assignment  
 5 minutes: Wrap -up 
 Resume ongoing CBT  
Measures.  
Primary  Outcome.   
Interpersonal  Needs  Questionnaire - Burdensomeness  Scale  (INQ10 -PB). The INQ10  is a widely  used  self-
rated  measure  of perceived  burdensome ness  and thwarted  belongingness . The burdensomeness  subscale  
(INQ10 -PB) consists  of 6 Likert -type items.  Prior  research  supports  the convergent  validity  and internal  
consistency  of the subscales  in youth5, 20.  
Secondary  Outcomes.  
The Child  and Parent’s  Report  of Parental  Behavior  Inventory  (CRPBI/PRPBI - warmth/acceptance  
subscale).  The CRPBI/PRPBI  are 30-item youth -rated  and parent -rated  measures  of perceived  parental  
behavior21. The warmth  and acceptance  subscale  consists  of 10 items  of the CRPBI/PRPBI,  with subscale  
scores  ranging  from 10 to 30, and higher  scores  representing  higher  levels  of parental  warmth  and 
acceptance.   
The Screen  for Child  Anxiety  Related  Emotional  Disorders  (Child  Version  and Parent  Versions;  
SCARED -C/P).  The SCARED -C/P is a 41-item youth -rated  and parent -rated  measure  of youth  anxiety  
symptoms22. Items  are rated  on a 3-point  likert  scale  ranging  from “not true or hardly  ever true” to “very  true or 
often  true”.   
The Children’s  Depression  Inventory  2- Child  and Parent  Version  (CDI 2-C/P) The CDI 2-C/P is a widely  
used  measure  of youth  depressive  symptoms,  with a 28-item child-rating  version  and a 17-item parent -rating  
version24.  
The Client  Satisfaction  Questionnaire -8 (CSQ -8) The CSQ -8 is an 8-item rating  scale  of client  satisfaction  
with treatment  administered26.  
Anxiety  Disorders  Interview  Schedule  – Child/Parent -V (ADIS -C/P-V). The ADIS -C/P is a widely  used  
semi -structured  diagnostic  interview  for youth  and parents.  It will be used  to determine  inclusion/exclu sion 
criteria.  
 
STATISTICAL  ANALYSIS  PLAN  
Data  management  protocols  will be used  to ensure  data integrity.  Missing  values  will be estimated  using  full 
information  maximum  likelihood  where  applicable.  A Holm  modified  Bonferroni  correction  will be used  to 
control  experiment  wise error  rate. We will examine  variables  measured  at PRE,  including  demographics,  
symptom  severity,  parental  warmth,  and diagnostic  status  (presence  of an anxiety  or depressive  disor der) for 
possible  inclusion  as covariates  in the analyses.  
Aim 1: Develop  a manualized  module  targeting  perceived  burdensomeness  to be used  as an adjunct  to 
existing  psychosocial  treatments.  No statistical  analyses  will be needed  to address  this aim. 
Aim 2: In an open  trial,  examine  adherence  and satisfaction  with the GIVE  module.  Adherence  will be 
examined  through  descriptive  statistics  of therapi[INVESTIGATOR_700455].  Youth  patient  and 
parent  satisfaction  will be examined  using  total mean scores  and frequencies  of item responses  on the CSQ -8.  
Aim 3: Demonstrate  reductions  in youth  levels  of perceived  burdensomeness.  Reductions  in levels  of 
perceived  burdensomeness  will be examined  using  two approaches.  In the first, a paired  samples  t-test will be 
conducted  to examine  changes  in mean  scores  from MID (i.e., session  6 INQ10 -PB score)  to POST.  A priori  
power  analysis  for the paired -samples  t-test indicated  that N=[ADDRESS_950886] 
intervention  (e.g.,  6 observations  before  and after),  and for the PRE assessment  variability  to be reduced  (e.g.,  
only selecting  youth  with higher  PB for the study)  to maximize  power28. For this reason,  there  are six 
assessment  points  (administrations  of INQ10 -PB) planned  prior to and after the administration  of the module  
for a total of 12 observations,  and only youth  with elevated  PB will be recruited  (i.e., variability  reduction).  The 
segmented  regression  analysis  is intended  to be preliminary  to gain insight  into the timing  of changes,  and as 
such,  may be underpowered  by [CONTACT_8345].  
 