Protocol Version #:  3 
  Version Date:  6/13/19 
 1 Protocol Outline  
 
Protocol Title:  Use of Text messaging for positive reinforcement to help improve qua lity of life 
in pediatric patients  with obesity.  
Protocol Version:  3 
Protocol Date:  6/13/2019  
Principal Investigator:  T. Marsha Ma  
Research Team:  Cristina Senger, Alexandra Kieffer , William Adams  
 
I. Abstract  
 
Background and Significance:   
  
Pediatric obesity has become a public health crisis in the [LOCATION_002]. Although research has 
been conducted surrounding this topic, rarely does this rese arch utilize mobile technology to 
promote accountability in children. Limited research has been done looking at any potential 
relationship between use of mobile apps and the benefit for quality of life in this patient 
population.  
 
Hypothesis:  
  
We hypoth esize that providing positive reinforcement through text messaging to children living 
with obesity will improve their overall quality of life.  
 
Specific Aims:  
 
This study primarily aims to evaluate the utility of mobile technology in improving the quality  of 
life of children living with obesity. Another aim of this study is to assess mobile technology’s 
role in promoting accountability in children with obesity.  
 
Brief Methods:  
 
We will recruit patients between the ages of [ADDRESS_434917] survey regarding quality of life for pediatric obese patients. 
This survey has been well studied and used in numerous other studies. The family will be given 
recommendations on various ways to increase physical activity weekly. These patients will then 
receive positive reinforcement for completed exercises through tex t messages.  
 
 
II. Background and Significance/Preliminary Studies  
 
Pediatric obesity has become a public health crisis in the [LOCATION_002]. The prevalence of 
overweight and obese children has increased anywhere from two to three -fold among various age 
groups  in the last few decades. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) has outlined the 
unique role of pediatricians in the prevention of pediatric obesity. By [CONTACT_349836] a large portion of their lives, pediatricians can encourage healthful behaviors and 
promote family engagement1. The AAP has also emphasized the importance of health supervision 
Protocol Version #:  3 
  Version Date:  6/13/19 
 2 to promote increased levels of physical  activity and early recognition of pediatric obesity in 
patients2.  
 
In public health practice, HRQOL can be utilized to understand a patient’s per ception of their 
own physical and mental health3. In addition, the assessment of quality of life in children can 
pose unique problems due to child ren’s perception of illness, interpretation of questions, and 
perspective on disease time course4. One study has found that children in the [LOCATION_002] living 
with a chronic medical condition are among those with the poorest HRQOL5.Several studies have 
shown that patients with obesity  have lower self -reported health, especially in the youngest 
adolescents (ages 12 -14).   
 
Many studies have been conducted to determine the utility of mobile applications or text 
messaging systems in changing the behavior of children with pediatric obesity . Few, however, 
have used mobile applications or text messaging to assess accountability in health decisions and 
the quality of life outcome for these children.  
 
One particular study, concluded that the use of coaching through twice -weekly text messages a nd 
telephone contact [CONTACT_349837] 2 -12 
years old with a BMI > 85th percentile from primary care practices in [LOCATION_005]6. Many 
studies have created applications or web -based interventions of their own to decrease pediatric 
obesity.  FitKids, a community -level intervention in Memphis, TN, utilized a mobile website to 
support parents and ch ildren in achieving healthier lifestyles10. Another study used a multi -
component intervention, “HAPPY ME, ” that included a wearable device11.  
 
It is evident that the majority of studies conducted include the interplay of multiple resources and 
forms of technology to promote behavior change. Stu dies have also been conducted to determine 
the quality and content of commercially available mobile applications. In 2014, a large iTunes 
app search coded [ADDRESS_434918] hopes to add to the literature other ways to help improve quality of life for 
this patient population with simple text messaging and potentially help them improve their overall 
lifestyle and general health.  
 
III. Study Aims  
 
Our study hopes to investigate the relationship between positive reinforcement for exercise 
activities in pediatric patients living with obesity and quality of life. We hypothesize that 
providing positive reinfor cement through text messaging to children living with obesity will 
improve their overall quality of life.  
 
 
Protocol Version #:  3 
  Version Date:  6/13/[ADDRESS_434919] a scheduled follow up for a weight check at regular intervals that can 
include one month, 3 months or 6 months.  
 
Inclusion criteria:  
A. Ages 13 -18  
B. BMI >95%  
C. Has a cell phone  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
A. Developmental delay and inability to read  
B. Does not have a cell phone  
 
The 40 subjects will be randomly assigned to either a control group or an intervention 
group.  
 
Survey  
A 23 item PedsQL 4.0 pre -survey will be administered to pediatric patients to establish a baseline 
at their wellness visit s. The parent of the pati ent will also complete the PedsQL survey . The 
patients’ BMI and blood pressure will be recorded. At the end of the [ADDRESS_434920] of care .   
 
Protocol Version #:  3 
  Version Date:  6/13/19 
 4 We will use a text message application  created by [CONTACT_349838].  This application 
will be able to text the subjects using their cell phone number via a n email service from the 
provider .  For example , 123456789@cellservice provider.com. This allows the resea rch team to 
send text m essages through an application without using a personal phone number . In addition, it 
offers automatic responses that will save them when sending messages to the patient .  
 
For six months, patients in the study wi ll receive a text message twice per week .  
 
Text messaging  
 
There will be two groups within this study —a control group and an intervention group. For the 
control group, the y will receive two text messages  weekly . The first text message will ask  if they 
completed the recommended activity. When they respond, they will receive a second text 
message  stating, "Thanks for your response."   
 
In the intervention group, the first text message will ask if they completed the recommended 
activity. If they respond yes , they will receive a positive reinforcement response comprising the 
words “Great job! We’re so proud of you! Keep up the good work!”.   If they respond no, they 
will receive a text message stating  “Thanks for your response ”. 
 
 Study Activities: See attached schedule for details  
The weekly activities we will recommend for the subjects include:  
1. Walking for 30 minutes 3 times a week  
2. Speed  walk for 30 minutes 3 times a week  
3. Walk up and down stairs for 30 minutes 3 times a week  
4. Jogging for 30 minutes 3 times a week  
5. Jumpi[INVESTIGATOR_349834] 30 minute 3 times a week  
 
Data:  
All patient data will be stored in a secure REDCap database located at 
hsddb.luhs.org/ redcap .  
 
Statistical analysis:  
 
In this study, patients who are age [ADDRESS_434921] the 95th percentile will be 
randomized to an intervention or control text -messaging cohort using a 1:1 random allocation . 
Subsequently, they will be asked to complete assigned exercises.  For six months, these patients 
will receive a text message twice per week asking whether they co mpleted their assigned 
exercises.  For those in the intervention group, when they respond “Yes”, they will receive a 
positive reinforcement response comprising the words “Great job! We’re so proud of  you! Keep 
up the good work!”.  Otherwise, when they respond “No”, they will receive a mes sage saying 
“Thanks for your response ”.  For those assigned to the control group, they will always receive the 
message “Thanks for your response” regardless of whether they complete or do not complete the 
assigned exercises.   
 
Six months following randomization, one goal of the proposed study is to test the null hypothesis 
that average total score on PEDSQ4.0 questionnaire between the two groups are equal.  With a 
proposed sample size of 20 assigned to receive the positive  reinforcement response and 20 
assigned to receive the control response (N = 40), the study will have power of 80.0% to yield a 
statistically significant result. This computation assumes a mean difference between the two 
Protocol Version #:  3 
  Version Date:  6/13/19 
 5 cohorts of 14.8 points (correspondi ng to means of 81.8 for the positive reinforcement cohort and 
67.0 for the control response cohort) and a common within -group standard deviation of 16.3 
points7.  This computation also assumes the criterion for significance (alpha) is 0.[ADDRESS_434922] will be used to compare this delta score between the cohort 
assigned to receive the positive reinforcement response and the cohort assigned to receive the 
control response.  For this comparison, the normal distribution assumption o f the delta score will 
be assessed using QQ plots and outliers will be assessed using box plots.  The homogeneity of 
variances assumption will be assessed using Levene’s test.  If any parametric assumption is 
strongly violated, a non -parametric Wilcoxon ra nk-sum test may be used to compare ranked 
PEDSQ4.0 scores between the two cohorts.  All analyses will be completed using SAS version 
9.4 (Cary, NC) by a Biostatistician in the Clinical Research Office.  
 
VII. Safety Monitoring Plan  
 
There are no adverse events that could be associated with text messages we will send to 
the subjects. We will send these text messages on Monday early ev ening between the 
5pm to 6pm . We chose this time because they will not be in school and are unlikely to be 
driving or doing activities that they could be distracted from when they receive the text, 
which could cause harm.  
 
If there is an adverse effect, we will ask the subjects to notify the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_349835]. We will review safety information once a month.  
 
VIII.  Literature Cited  
 
References  
 
1 Daniels et al. The role of the pediatrician in primary prevention of obesity.  Pediatrics . 
2015;136(1):e275  
2 Snyder, et al. American academy of pediatrics.  Congeni tal Heart Disease . 2012;7(2):200 -
201.   
3 Health -Related Quality of Life (HRQOL) | CDC. (2018). Retrieved from 
https://www.cdc.gov/hrqol/index.htm  
4 Eiser, et al. A review of measures of quality of life for children with chronic 
illness.  Archives of disease in  childhood.  2001;84(3):205 -211.   
5 Simon, et al. Assessment of children's health -related quality of life in the united states 
with a multidimensional index.  Pediatrics.  2008;121(1):e118.    
6 Swallen , et al . Overweight, obesity, and health -related quality of life among adolescents: 
The national longitudinal study of adolescent health.  Pediatrics . 2005;115(2):340.   
7 Schwimmer , et al . Health -related quality of life of severely obese children and 
adolescents.  JAMA . 2003;289(14):1813 -1819.   
Protocol Version #:  3 
  Version Date:  6/13/19 
 6 8 Williams , et al . Health -related quality of life of overweight and obese children.  JAMA . 
2005;293(1):70 -76.  
9 Taveras, et al. Comparative effectiveness of clinical -community childhood obesity 
interventions: A randomized clinical trial.  JAMA Pediatrics . 2017;171(8):e171325.    
10 Ullmann, et al. Memphis FitKids: Implementing a mobile -friendly web -based application 
to enhance parents’ participation in improving child health.  BMC Public Health . 
2018;18(1):1 -12.   
11 Yang, et al. Interventions for preventing childh ood obesity with smartphones and 
wearable device: A protocol for a non -randomized controlled trial.  International journal 
of environmental research and public health.  2017;14(2):184.    
12 Wearing et al. iPhone app adherence to expert -recommended guidelines fo r pediatric 
obesity prevention.  Childhood Obesity . 2014;10(2):132 -144.   
13 Schoeppe, et al. Apps to improve diet, physical activity and sedentary behaviour in 
children and adolescents: A review of quality, features and behaviour change 
techniques.  The Intern ational Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity . 
2017;14.   
 
 
 