Feasibility of Bisphosphonate Use on Sleeve Gastrectomy Associated Bone Loss: 
Healthy Body, Healthy Bones Trial  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
[ADDRESS_456152] been evaluated for safety and  efficacy in combating bone loss in patients with osteoporosis, 
but their use in bariatric  surgery induced bone loss has not been explored. The study’s  primary goal is to 
investigate  whether bisphosphonate therapi[INVESTIGATOR_365067]. This research proposal is a [ADDRESS_456153] treatment for low bone density, will  be an 
effective intervention to reduce  sleeve gastrectomy -induced bone loss. Bone loss is an unintended 
consequence of an  otherwise life -saving procedure, with declining bone health potentially contributing 
to major  morbidity in those undergoing a bariatric procedure. Identifying effective interventions to  
minimize bone loss is crucial for comprehensive treatment of patients who undergo bariatric  surgery.  
Specific Aim 1: To determine the efficacy of zoledronic acid in preventing bone loss  associated with 
sleeve gastrectomy . We will measure bone mineral density and  bone turnover markers at baseline and 9 
months. The primary outcome is change in bone mineral density as measured by [CONTACT_11342] -energy x -ray 
absorptiometry. Secondary outcomes are change  in bone mineral density  as measured by [CONTACT_365070], urinary collagen type 1 cross -
linked N -telopeptide ( a bone formation marker), serum type 1 procollagen N -terminal (bone resorption  
marker), sclerostin, and osteocalcin. Specific Aim 2: To evaluate the feasibility of this trial in  those who 
have undergone sleeve gastrectomy  surgery. We will assess the feasibility of the intervention by  
[CONTACT_365071].  
 
 
Purpose  
 
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the effect of zoledronic acid, a bisphosphonate  medicine used 
for osteoporosis, in preventing bone loss after bariatric surgery.  
Specific Aim 1: determine the efficacy of zoledronic acid in preventing  bone loss associated with 
sleeve gastrectomy  (SG) . 
Specific Aim 2 : evaluate the safety and tolerance of zoledronic acid in populations who  have 
undergone SG surgery.  
 
 
Background  
 
Bone loss is accelerated after sleeve gastrectomy (SG) procedures, which can lead to an  increased 
incidence of fragility fractures. This problem is becoming increasingly more  important as bariatric 
surgery rates continue to rise.  Fragility fractures due to poor bone health, are a leading cause of 
morbidity in older adults.  Observational studies link weight loss with a reduction in bone mineral density 
(BMD) and  an increased fracture risk, regardless of initial body weight.  Dietary -induced weight loss 
interventions have also been associated with decreases in total  hip BMD. Greater weight loss 
exacerbates this decline in BMD and  subsequent risk of fracture. (Tirosh, 2015) Data collected in the year 
following bariatric  surgery shows a rapid decline in BMD and a significant association between bariatric  
surgery and fracture risk. Emerging long -term  data suggest that bone loss continues in these patients 
even after weight stabilizes,  with elevated bone turnover markers seen up to five years post -surgical 
treatment and fracture  risk remaining high in long -term follow up. While  cardiovascular and metabolic 
health improve after bariatric surgery, patients are  increasingly vulnerable to fracture and the associated 
disability and morbidity.  Bariatric surgery irreve rsibly increases skeletal fragility and future fracture risk. 
Identifying  effective interventions to minimize bone loss is crucial for comprehensive treatment of  
patients who undergo bariatric surgery.  There are many available pharmacotherapeutic options to 
effectively treat low bone density  and decrease fracture risk. These treatments include anti -resorptive 
agents, such as the  bisphosphonate zoledronic acid, which inhibit osteoclast -mediated bone loss.  
Bisphosphonates have been well studied for safety and efficacy in the treatment of low bone  density in 
non-surgical populations, but the question of whether these pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_365068]. Guidelines put  forth by [CONTACT_365072], and further 
evidence is needed to provide  robust recommendations for prevention of bone loss after bariatric 
proced ures.   Weight loss is associated with a significant increase in bone  resorption which is mediated by 
[CONTACT_234595]. This makes bisphosphonates  an appropriate treatment choice. Thus, bisphosphonate use 
may prove to be an effective  intervention for countering bone loss during active weight loss, which is 
critical in reducing  long -term fracture risk in the bariatric surgery population.  
 
Bariatric surgery has resulted in remarkable cardiovascular and metabolic health  improvements, but 
often this occurs at the expense of bone health. The full extent of the  lifelong consequences of bone loss 
on quality of life and mobility are not known. This study  is significant because it could provide evidence 
for use of an existing therapy to counteract  bone loss seen in post -bariatric surgery patients.  
 
 
Methods  
 
Enrolled participants will have blood drawn from the to evaluate menopausal status in those < [ADDRESS_456154] and store serum at 80 degrees Celsius, for assay of bone  turnover 
markers and metabolic regulator proteins at a later date.  Analysis of bone  formation markers including 
procollagen Type 1 N -TerminalPropeptide  (P1NP) and bone  resorption marker N -Terminal Telopeptide of 
Type 1 Collagen (CTX) will be performed via  commercially available ELISA by [CONTACT_203623]. Participa nts 
will complete three surveys at baseline. The first, the Human Activity  Profile (HAP), is a 94 -question 
physical activity survey used to assess routine physical  activity. The second, the Knee Injury and 
Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS), will assess  overall knee pain, function, and knee -associated 
problems. Participants will also complete a  modified National Osteoporosis Foundation Calcium Intake 
Estimate to collect dietary  calcium habits.  Participants will then be asked to  perform three tasks relating 
to muscl e function and gait speed : hand grip test, repeated chair stands, and a four-meter gait speed 
test.  Participants  will be measured on a standard scale for weight  and have their waist circumference 
measured by [CONTACT_3462].  
 
Participants  will obtain dual energy x -ray absorptiometry (DXA) scan or bone densitometry scan  and a 
computed tomography (CT) scan  at baseline. Bone density measurement (BDM ) of the bilateral hips, 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_050], radius, proximal tibia as well as body  composition will be measured by [CONTACT_11324]. A CT scan of the spi[INVESTIGATOR_365069], as 
well as  abdominal composition. CT scans will be de -identified and transferred to Wake Forest University 
to complete analyses of the CT scans.  
 
All participant s will receive calcium citrate and vitamin D supplements, with  instructions for taking . 
Calcium, Vitamin D, and Bariatric ProCare  multivitamins will be processed and dispensed by [CONTACT_365073]. A total intake of 1200 mg of calcium will be prescribed throughout  the entirely of the study. 
Participants with normal serum 25(OH)D will be prescribed 1000 IU  Vitamin D. Participants with serum 
25(OH)D between 20 -29mg/mL will be prescribed [ADDRESS_456155] at their study visit . Based on prior randomization, participants will receive 
either non -active saline  (placebo) or active -medication (zoledronic acid) infusion. To minimize the risk of 
adverse  effects of Zoledronic acid,  all participants  will have a baseline glomerular filtration rate (GFR)  
measured prior to infusion to ensure they have adequate kidney function. A stat blood draw  with 
comprehensive metabolic panel will be ordered prior to the infusion. Those participants with glomerular 
filtration rate (GFR) less than 35mL/min or  those with evidence of acute kidney impairment will not 
receive the treatment. A single dose  of Zoledronic acid should not exceed 5mg, and the duration of 
infusion should be no less  than [ADDRESS_456156] over 15 minutes. To minimize risk of adverse events such as anaphylaxis, a 
Clinical  Research Center nurse will be present during the infusion and will monitor the patient for 15  
minutes after the infusion.  Adverse events including potential infusion reaction and other  side effects 
will be recorded by [CONTACT_365074].  Participants will be provided with a take -
home  sheet detailing common and/or expected reactions to the medication intervention, with  
instructions as to ho w to manage them. This sheet will be reviewed with the participant by  [CONTACT_25617], with ample time for questions.  
 
Participants will be contact[CONTACT_9134], email or phone call 24-hours and [ADDRESS_456157] and address any adverse events/reactions/concerns they may have. The contact  
[CONTACT_133557] a link to a RedCap survey to self -report adverse events. If contact[CONTACT_65312],  study 
personnel will complete the adverse events form with the participant. Participants will  be contact[CONTACT_365075] [ADDRESS_456158] blood 
drawn  and serum  will be stored  at 80 degrees Celsius, for assay of bone  turnover markers and metabolic 
regulator proteins at a later date.  Analysis of bone  formation markers including procollagen Type 1 N -
TerminalPropeptide(P1NP) and bone  resorption marker N -Terminal Telopeptide of Type 1 Collagen (CTX) 
will be performed via  commercially available ELISA by [CONTACT_203623]. Participants will complete three 
surveys : the Human Activity  Profile (HAP), is a 94 -question physical activity survey used to assess routine 
physical  activity ; the Knee Injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS), will assess  overall knee pain, 
function, and knee -associated problems ; and  a modified National Osteoporosis Foundation Calcium 
Intake Estimate to collect dietary  calcium habits.  Participants will complete a hand grip te st, repeated 
chair stands, and a [ADDRESS_456159] -operatively to gather data about calcium intake from diet.  
 
A whole body DXA scan will be obtained one month after follow -up visit to assess body  composition and 
bone mineral density (BMD) of the hip, lumbar vertebrae (L1 -L4), knee and  radius. To minimize variability 
between baseline and follow -up scans, each participant  will be scanned on the  exact same DXA scanner 
with identical scan parameters for each anatomic location. A real  BMD (a BMD, g/cm2) will be  
determined from each scan. For the femoral scan, a BMD will   be calculated from the proximal femur 
using the scanners standard procedures. For the  vertebral scan, a BMD will be calculated for each 
vertebral body and for all four combined  using the scanners standard procedures. For th e distal radius 
scan, a BMD will be  calculated for the distal one -third of the radius using the scanners standard 
procedures.  The DXA technologist will be blinded to treatment  group for each subject. The whole body 
DXA also provides data on lean and fat mass, as  well as distribution of these tissues.  A CT scan of the 
lumbar vertebrae, hips and associated soft tissue will be obtained from  one month after follow -up visit . 
To minimize variability between the baseline and follow -up scans, each  participant  will be scanned on 
the exact same CT scanner with identical scan parameters.  
 
 
Statistical Analysis  
 
In this pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], thirty  participants  will be enrolled: 15 randomized to the intervention group, and  15 
randomized to the control group  with a goal of 10 participants completing the  study in each group.  Data 
gathered from this study will be used to complete sample size  and power calculations for a larger 
randomized controlled trial. A sample size of 10 per  group achieves 80% power to detect a difference of -
0.02 (correlation coefficient) between  the null hypothesis correlation of 0.[ADDRESS_456160] of zoledronic acid on bone after bariatric surgery.  