IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-18-0885 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL1DATE : 01/03/[ADDRESS_318342] Current Stimulation and Mindfulness -based Meditation for 
Pain in Older Adults with Knee Osteoarthritis (Self tDCS and Meditation for Knee 
Pain)  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 01/03/2019  
  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-18-0885 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL2DATE : 01/03/2019  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  of 11   
Protocol  Title:  Self Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation and Mindfulness -based 
Meditation for Pain in Older Adults with Knee Osteoarthritis (Self tDCS and 
Meditation for Knee  Pain)  
 
Principal 
Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_52415]  
, PhD  
Co-Investigators:  Hongyu Miao,  PhD 
Luca Pollonini,  PhD 
 
Study  Coordinator:  Jung Hwa Do,  PhD 
 
Population:  A maximum of 30 community -dwelling older adults with knee osteoarthritis 
who are 50 –[ADDRESS_318343] [LOCATION_007] will be enrolled. Participants  
who meet eligibility criteria will be randomly assigned to either (1) tDCS plus 
meditation (n=15) or (2) sham -tDCS plus sham -meditation group (n=15) (1:1 
for two groups) using the order of entrance in the  study.  
 
Number  of Sites:  UTHealth School of Nursin g is the only site for this  study.  
 
Study  Duration:  One year  
 
Subject  Duration:  Two weeks  
 
 
 
General Information  
− Clinical studies of Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation (tDCS), which modulates central nervous 
system pain processing in a noninvasive and painless manner, have shown promising preliminary 
results for other types of chronic pain, but no studies to dat e have determined the synergistic effect 
of self tDCS and mindfulness -based meditation in osteoarthritis (OA). The purpose of this study is to 
determine the feasibility and preliminary efficacy of a two -week self tDCS and mindfulness -based 
meditation on pa in using randomized controlled trial design. In this randomized controlled study, 
clinical pain intensity, experimental pain sensitivity using quantitative sensory testing, pain -related 
cortical response using functional near -infrared spectroscopy, and psy chosocial symptoms will be 
compared between these two groups. tDCS is a novel treatment that is noninvasive, non - 
pharmacological, and likely to be well -received by [CONTACT_52438]. 
Mindfulness -based meditation has also demonstrated p romise for pain management. It may be 
particularly effective when combined with mindfulness -based meditation since both of them 
stimulates adaptive changes in the brain. Thus, this research has the potential to improve treatment 
of osteoarthritis -related s ymptoms in older  adults.  
 
Background Information  
− Arthritis is one of the leading causes of pain, impairments of activities in daily life, and disability in 
people aged 45 and above.1,2 Of the 53 million adults diagnosed with arthritis, more than 22 million  
(42%) reported trouble with their activities of daily living due to arthritis.3 Osteoarthritis (OA) is the 
most common of the arthritic conditions, with the knee being the most commonly affected joint.2,4,5 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-18-0885 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL3DATE : 01/03/[ADDRESS_318344] sufficient pain relief,6 and this leads  to 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-18-0885 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL4DATE : 01/03/[ADDRESS_318345] 
Current Stimulation (tDCS), has received significant attention for the treatment of pain in chronic 
conditions due to its neuromodulatory effect.12-[ADDRESS_318346] injury,12 and multiple sclerosis.14 It may be 
particularly effective when combi ned with mindfulness -based meditation19 since both of them 
stimulates adaptive changes in the brain. Therefore, we will evaluate the feasibility and preliminary 
efficacy of a self tDCS combined with mindfulness -based mediation in older adults with knee OA 
pain. Our hypothesis is that 10 daily sessions of self tDCS and mindfulness -based meditation over 2 
weeks will reduce clinical pain intensity, experimental pain sensitivity, and pain -related cortical 
response (e.g., reduced heat pain -evoked response in pai n-related cortical regions) more than sham 
tDCS -meditation  group.  
 
Objectives  
− The purpose of this project is to determine the feasibility and preliminary efficacy of a two -week self 
tDCS and mindfulness -based meditation on pain in older adults with knee OA. The specific aims are 
the following: (1) To evaluate feasibility and safety of self tDCS and mindfulness -based meditation in 
older adults with knee osteoarthritis pain, and (2) To estimate preliminary efficacy of self tDCS and 
mindfulness -based meditation on clinical pain, experimental pain sensitivity using quantitative 
sensory t esting measures, fNIRS imaging, and psychosocial symptoms in older adults with knee OA. 
Outcome measures include clinical pain intensity, experimental pain sensitivity using quantitative 
sensory testing, pain -related cortical response using functional near -infrared spectroscopy 
(hemodynamic activity in pain -related cortical regions), and psychosocial  symptoms.  
 
Study Design  
− We will conduct a randomized, sham -controlled,  parallel -group 
study in 30 older adults with knee OA at the UTHealth School 
of Nursing with two groups: (1) two -week self tDCS and 
mindfulness -based meditation (n=15) and (2) sham -tDCS plus 
sham -meditation  (n=15).  
− Expected duration of study is one year after the IRB approval 
from  CPHS.  
− tDCS with a constant current intensity of 2 mA will be a pplied 
for 20 minutes per session daily for 2 weeks (Monday to Friday) 
via the Soterix 1x1 tDCS mini -CT Stimulator device (Soterix 
Medical  Inc.,  NY; 6.5 inches  long,  3 inches  wide,  0.7 inches  thick) 
with headgear and 5x7 cm saline -soaked surface  sponge  
electrodes. The FDA has ruled that the aforementioned tDCS stimulator is a “non -significant risk” 
device, a requirement for Investigational Device Exceptions. The sponge electrodes snap into the 
custom headgear, which is secured to the participant’s head f or simple and fail -safe electrode 
preparation. This single -position headgear with clearly labeled sponge markers eliminates room for  

IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-18-0885 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL5DATE : 01/03/[ADDRESS_318347]  quality  is achieved  (only  the on/off  button 
will be adjustable by [CONTACT_36801]; they will not be abl e to adjust the device settings). After 
the participant enters the unlock code, the screen on the device will show a timer that counts down 
the minutes until the end of the session. At [ADDRESS_318348] the sponges and to safely 
store  all materials  for the next  session.  For sham  stimulation,  the electrodes  will be placed  in the same 
positions as for active stimulation, but the stimulator will only deliver 2 mA current for 30 seconds. 
This sham stimulation method has been shown to be reliable and indistinguishable from active 
treatment.12,20 
− During each tDCS session, participants will practice mindfulness -based meditation. The meditation 
intervention will be delivered by a recorded device that participants will be given together with the 
tDCS. All meditation instruction recordings will be done by [CONTACT_261702] -body interventi on 
specialist and installed in a user -friendly MP3 player. For sham meditation, the participants will be 
instructed, approximately every 2 –3 minutes, to take deep breaths as we sit in meditation. We will 
match time spent giving instructions in the sham med itation intervention to the mindfulness 
intervention.  
 
Study Population  
− A maximum of 30 community -dwelling older adults with knee osteoarthritis (OA) will be enrolled. 
Participants who are 50 –85 years old will be considered eligible if they (1) have self -reported 
unilateral or bilateral knee OA pain, according to American College of Rheumatology criteria,21 (2) 
have had knee OA pain in the past [ADDRESS_318349] 30 on a 100 Numeric Rating 
Scale (NRS) for pain, (3) can speak and read Engli sh, (4) have a device with internet access that can 
be used for secure video conferencing for real -time remote supervision, (5) have no plan to change 
medication regimens for pain throughout the trial, (6) are able to travel to the coordinating center, 
and (7) are willing and able to provide written informed consent prior to enrollment. According to 
American College of Rheumatology criteria,[ADDRESS_318350] 3 of 6 criteria, 
including age > 50 years, stiffness < [ADDRESS_318351] concurrent medical conditions that 
hinder the completion of the protocol, including: (1) history of brain surgery, brain tumor, seizure, 
stroke, or intracrani al metal implantation, (2) serious medical illness, such as uncontrolled 
hypertension (i.e., systolic blood pressure/ diastolic blood pressure ≥ 150/95 mm Hg), heart failure, 
or history of acute myocardial infarction, (3) alcohol/substance abuse, (4) cogni tive impairment, (5) 
pregnancy or lactation, and (6) hospi[INVESTIGATOR_261690].  
− Participants will be recruited in Southeast [LOCATION_007] under the direction of the PI. We will advertise 
around local institutions (e.g., UTHealth) and communities, including advertisements in clinics. Our 
recruitment strategy involves screening and recruiting p otential participants from the UT Physicians 
clinic and posting study flyers. Screening will include accessing Allscripts. Identifiers will be collected 
from Allscripts for finding potential subjects (e.g. name, date of birth, telephone number, email 
addre ss). PI [INVESTIGATOR_261691]. Study investigators or trained study 
personnel will approach the potential participant for further determination of eligibility screening 
requirements. Obtaining written informed consent will take  place in -person at a scheduled baseline 
visit.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-18-0885 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL6DATE : 01/03/2019  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  of 11  Study Procedures  
− Participants will do self tDCS and mindfulness -based meditation at their home or private room for 
two weeks (Mondays -Fridays) under real -time supervision by [CONTACT_16133]. Da ta will be 
collected by [CONTACT_261703]. Ahn’s 
(PI’s) laboratory at UTHealth School of Nursing (see Table below). Participants will visit UTHealth 
School of Nursing two times, and each visit w ill take [ADDRESS_318352] (female)  X           
Clinical Pain Intensity             
NRS  X X X X X X X X X X X 
WOMAC  X          X 
Psychosocial Symptoms             
PROMIS Anxiety  X          X 
PROMIS Depression  X          X 
PROMIS Sleep Disturbance  X          X 
PCS X          X 
FMI X          X 
Feasibility and Tolerability             
Participants’ tDCS experience            X 
Side Effects Questionnaire   X X X X X X X X X X 
Experimental Pain Sensitivity             
QST measures  X          X 
Pain -related Cortical response             
fNIRS imaging  X          X 
Note: B, Baseline; NRS, numeric rating scale for pain; WOMAC, Western Ontario and McMaster 
Universities Osteoarthritis Index; QST, quantitative sensory testing; fNIRS, functional near -infrared 
spectroscopy; PROMIS, Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement Inf ormation System; PCS, Pain 
Catastrophizing Scale; FMI, Freiburg Mindfulness Inventory.  
 
− Pregnancy Test. If participants are a woman of childbearing potential, there may be unknown risks 
to the fetus. Therefore, pregnancy test by a sample of urine will be o btained in all woman of 
childbearing potential once at baseline  visit.  
− Medical History Questionnaire. All patients will complete a thorough medical history that include 
height and weight, self -reported duration of OA, current and past treatments for OA, co morbid 
conditions, and current medication  use. 
− Clinical Pain. Clinical pain will be measured by (1) numeric rating scale for pain (NRS) for pain 
(primary outcome),22 and (2) Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index 
(WOMAC).[ADDRESS_318353] 24 hours from 0 (no pain) to 100 (most 
intense pain imaginable), and has been reported to have Cronbach’s alpha coefficient of ≥ 0.[ADDRESS_318354] pain change in adults with  knee OA.22 The 
WOMAC ranges from 0 to 96, with higher scores indicating worse OA pain -related symptoms. NRS 
will be conducted at 11 time points (baseline, and each treatment session during the treatment 
period) and WOMAC will be obtained two times (baseli ne and at the end of the treatment  week).  
− Psychosocial Symptoms. Psychosocial symptoms will be measured by (1) PROMIS anxiety -short 
form, (2) PROMIS depression -short form, and (3) PROMIS sleep disturbance -short form scale,24 (4) 
Pain  Catastrophizing  Scale  (PCS),  and (5) Freiburg  Mindfulness  Inventory  (FMS).  The 7-item  PROMIS  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-18-0885 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL7DATE : 01/03/2019  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  of 11  Anxiety Short Form assesses the pure domain of anxiety in individuals age 18 and older, and each 
item on the measure is rated on a 5 -point scale (1=never; 2=rarely; 3=sometimes; 4=often; and 
5=always) with a range in score from 7 to 35 with higher scores i ndicating greater severity of 
anxiety. The 8 -item PROMIS Depression Short Form assesses the pure domain of depression in 
individuals age 18 and older, and each item on the measure is rated on a 5 -point scale (1=never; 
2=rarely; 3=sometimes; 4=often; and 5= always) with a range in score from 8 to 40 with higher 
scores indicating greater severity of depression. The 8 -item PROMIS Sleep Disturbance Short Form 
assesses the pure domain of sleep disturbance in individuals age 18 and older, and each item on the 
meas ure is rated on a 5 -point scale (1=never; 2=rarely; 3=sometimes; 4=often; and 5=always) with a 
range in score from 8 to 40 with higher scores indicating greater severity of sleep disturbance. The 
Pain Catastrophizing Scale (PCS) consists of 13 items assess ing three components of catastrophizing: 
rumination, magnification, and helplessness.25 The Freiburg Mindfulness Inventory (FMI) is a 
psychometrically valid 14 -item instrument with high internal consistency.26 
− Feasibility. We will calculate the number of p articipants who a) meet the inclusion criteria, and b) 
complete the full tDCS -meditation protocol. We will also collect data on participants’ tDCS 
experience at the conclusion of tDCS treatment on a 0 (strongly disagree) to 10 (strongly agree) 
scale:  1) It was easy  to prepare  the device  and accessories,  2) The device  was unnecessarily  complex,  
3) The device was easy to use, 4) I felt the video conferences with a technical person were helpful, 5) 
I would imagine that most people would learn to use this devic e quickly, 6) The device was 
cumbersome to use, 7) I felt confident using the device, 8) I needed to learn a lot of things before I 
could get going with this device, 9) The effectiveness of the treatment increased over the course of 
treatment, 10) Overall,  I felt that transcranial electrical stimulation treatment benefited me.  
− Tolerability. We will evaluate the presence and severity of possible side effects of treatment at the 
end of each session on a 0 (not at all) to 10 (highest degree) scale. The partici pants will be asked in 
an open -ended manner whether they have experienced any side effects, and they will then be asked 
specifically about tingling, itching sensation, burning sensation, pain at the stimulation site, fatigue, 
nervousness, headache, difficu lty concentrating, mood change, and changes in vision or visual 
perception. If any side effects are reported, the degree of relatedness to the intervention will be 
assessed on a 5 -point scale. This approach has been used in our previous study and frequentl y in 
other  studies.27-29 
− Experimental Pain Sensitivity. In order to measure experimental pain sensitivity, a multimodal 
Quantitative Sensory Testing (QST) battery will be completed: heat pain (e.g. threshold, tolerance), 
pressure pain threshold, punctate m echanical pain (e.g. suprathreshold ratings and temporal 
summation), and Conditioned Pain Modulation (CPM). These measures will be assessed using 
equipment and methods available at the [CONTACT_52449]’s laboratory, including a Medoc TSA -II 
Neurosensory Analyzer an d Wagner pressure algometer. These QST battery will be obtained two 
times: at baseline and at the end of the  intervention.  
− Pain -related Cortical response. We will measure pain -related cortical response using a continuous - 
wave, multichannel fNIRS imaging system (LIGHTNIRS, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) with three 
semiconductor lasers at 780, 805, and [ADDRESS_318355] ent with the locations investigated in previous studies.30,31 In 
addition, a few optical channels will be located to the primary auditory cortex as a control region 
that remains inactive during pain stimulation (i.e., both fNIRS and thermal stimulation dev ices run 
silently). Optical recordings will be collected during thermal pain stimulation according to the 
following protocol. A temperature -controlled pain generator (Medoc TSA -II Neurosensory Analyzer) 
will be used to produce thermal stimulation through a  1616 mm2 thermode placed onto the  index  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-18-0885 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL8DATE : 01/03/2019  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  of 11  knee. The experimental protocol consists of an initial baseline period of 60 seconds during which no 
thermal stimulation will be applied (i.e., the thermode at room temperature), followed by [ADDRESS_318356] about 20 -25 min, inc luding the brain imager setup time. fNIRS 
data will be obtained at two time points: baseline, at the end of the  intervention.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring  
− A data and safety monitoring plan (DSMP) will be implemented to ensure the safety of all 
participants involved in the study and to ensure the validity and integrity of the data. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_52417], including arranging meetings and 
communication and identifying and reviewing relevant participant materials. The  data and safety 
information obtained from each study participant will be reviewed weekly. The primary goal of the 
DSMP will be to monitor the progress of the study and safety of participants and, if necessary, 
recommend modifying the study or terminating the study as  appropriate.  
− Concerns that might dictate the modification or termination of the study include: participant safety, 
outcome data, data quality, data integrity, intervention efficacy, recruitment, and performance. 
Both the PI [INVESTIGATOR_261692] -up. Throughout the study, 
information regarding issues deemed critical to the study or to the safety of research participants 
will be provided to the PI. Upon receiving this critical information, a meeting to discuss this 
information may be convened. Information deemed critical would include: serious and non -serious 
adverse events that may occur, suspi[INVESTIGATOR_261693], and any other issues that 
may warrant protocol changes or  modifications.  
− The research team will follow the procedures for data safety and monitoring as required by [CONTACT_245187]. To ensure data integrity and the safety  of human subjects, 
all adverse events will be reported to the UTHealth Institutional Review Board. Any subsequent 
recommendations regarding protocol changes will be implemented. In addition, the investigators 
will review the reported adverse events every [ADDRESS_318357] interim data analyses every 6 
months to minimize the risk to the study  participants.  
− Safety Review Plan. Study progress and safety will be reviewed monthly (and more frequently if 
needed) by [CONTACT_978]. Progress reports, including participant recruitment, retention/attrition, and 
adverse events (AEs), will be provided the UTHealth IRB for annu al review. In addition, the reports 
will address (1) whether AE rates are consistent with pre -study assumptions; (2) reasons for 
dropouts from the study; (3) whether all participants met entry criteria; (4) whether continuation of 
the study is justified on  the basis that additional data are needed to accomplish the stated aims of 
the study; and (5) conditions whereby [CONTACT_261704].  
− Monitoring Health and Safety. All the stimulation and testing sessions will be supervised by [CONTACT_31610] d 
research staff who will monitor potential adverse experiences and symptoms. At each stimulation, 
participants will be asked to report any adverse events they have experienced. Specifically, they will 
be asked about any adverse events, including itching, pain, nausea, and headache, they have  had.  
− Adverse Event Reporting. An adverse event (AE) is any unfavorable and unintended sign, symptom, 
or disease temporally associated with the intervention irrespective of whether it is considered 
related to the interv ention. Non -serious AEs are conditions that may be unpleasant and bothersome 
to the participant that do not require discontinuing the study. Serious adverse events (SAEs) are 
events that may be harmful to the participant and/or may be serious enough to war rant either 
temporary or permanent discontinuation of the study intervention, either because they  are 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-18-0885 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL9DATE : 01/03/2019  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  of 11  intolerable or because they are judged to be potentially harmful. All SAEs require immediate 
reporting and an assessment of the implications f or the continuation of the study and/or 
modification of the consent form. The following are considered SAEs: (1) it is acute or life 
threatening; (2) it results in prolonged, permanent, or severe disability; (3) it is another severe 
illness including worse ning of a pre -existing condition, injury, or accident; (4) it is an inpatient 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_52420] a treatment to prevent an SAE; (5) it results in death; and (6) 
it is a clinically significant abnormal laboratory or diagnostic  test.  
− The PI [INVESTIGATOR_52421], expectedness, severity, and relationship to the study 
intervention at each study visit. The primary mechanism for ensuring participant safety will be 
clinical observation of symptoms. The study will be conducte d and supervised by [CONTACT_52443]. All AEs will also be categorized 
according to the likelihood that they are related to the study intervention. Specifically, they will be 
labeled either def initely, probably, possibly, or unrelated to the study intervention. The classification 
of potential relationship to the intervention is shown in Table  below.  
 
Adverse Event (AE) Classification  
Adverse Event (AE) Classification  
Definite  Temporal pattern + known or expected AE response pattern + confirmed by [CONTACT_13635][INVESTIGATOR_52422] + reappearance of AE on re -challenge  
Probable  Temporal pattern + known or expected AE response pattern + confirmed by [CONTACT_13635][INVESTIGATOR_52423] + could not be explained by [CONTACT_3445]’s clinical state  
Possible  Temporal pattern + known or expected AE response pattern + could have been 
produced by a number of other factors  
Unknown  Relationship for which no evaluation can be made  
Not 
related  AE for which sufficient information exists to indicate that the cause is unrelated to the 
study intervention  
− SAEs that are unanticipated, serious, and possibly related to the study intervention will be reported 
within 24 hours of the study staff’s knowledge of the SAE to the IRB in accordance with the 
regulatory requirements. Anticipated SAEs or those unrelated t o the study intervention will be 
reported to the same individuals/entities in accordance with regulatory  requirements.  
− Minor events will be reported to the IRB. Both the PI [INVESTIGATOR_261694] - 
up. Throughout the study, information regarding issues deemed critical to the study or to the safety 
of research participants will be provided to the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_261695]. As a result of receiving this critical information, a meeting to discuss this information 
may be convened. Information deemed critical would include: (1) serious and non -serious AEs that 
may occur; (2) suspi[INVESTIGATOR_261696]; and (3) any other issues which may 
warrant protocol changes or modifications. AE and SAE determination and monitoring will be 
achieved via administration of structured questionnaires. Standardized forms for referring and 
treating study partici pants who experience AEs will be in  place.  
 
Statistics  
− This protocol adopts a randomized controlled trial design. A maximum of 30 community -dwelling 
older adults (50 -85 years old) with knee osteoarthritis will be enrolled. The treatment group will 
receive tDCS plus meditation, and the control group will receive sham -tDCS with sham -mediation. 
To balance the distributions of subjects’ age, race, and gender between the treatment and control 
groups, a minimization procedure will be adopted. Power calculation is  based on two -sample  t-test 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-18-0885 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL10DATE : 01/03/2019  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  of 11  assuming equal variance. For a significance level of 0.05, 15 subjects per group correspond to a 
power of 0.91, given a 25% difference in means between the two groups and a standard deviation of 
20% of the mean.  
− Statistical analyses will be performed on data from all enrolled subjects using SAS 9.4. Data will be 
summarized and checked for outliers and missing values before statistical analyses. The descriptive 
statistics will be derived for the feasibility and tolerab ility measures. The clinical pain intensity 
measures and the experimental pain sensitivity measures will be compared between two groups 
using univariate or multivariate tests (e.g., Wilcoxon rank  test).  
 
 
Ethics  
− IRB approval will be sought from  CPHS.  
− Participation in this study is completely voluntary. All participants will be informed of the nature of 
the procedures and associated risks. Also, participants will be informed that they can withdraw from 
the study at any time and that this will have no ad verse impact on the study or on their own future 
medical treatment. Subjects will participate in the study only after they provide verbal and signed 
consent. Trained research personnel will obtain consent in a private room where participants feel 
comfortab le. Informed consent will be documented in writing via the participants’ and investigators’ 
signatures.  
 
Data handling and record keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  
− Procedure for Collection and Storage of Data. A number of quality control procedures will be used to 
ensure the validi ty and integrity of the data and the safety of all participants involved in the study. 
Relevant data and safety information obtained from each study participant will be verified against 
the original source documents by [CONTACT_261705]. The primary goal of these meetings will be to monitor the 
progress of the study and safety of participants, and if necessary, recommend modifying the study 
or terminating the study as appropriate . All identifying information will be archived on a password - 
protected server. Only study staff will have access to these  files.  
− Location of Data Collection. All procedures involving human participants will be performed using 
equipment and resources avail able at the [CONTACT_52449]’s (PI’s) laboratory at  UTHealth.  
− Storage of Collected Data. All electronic data will be stored in password -protected, secured 
computer systems. All paper data will be stored in a locked file cabinet. Only the participant’s study 
identif ication number will appear on any data forms. Only research team members will have access 
to the completed data forms and electronically stored data. All data will be considered part of the 
participant’s confidential record. All data will remain confidenti al. A file will be maintained that 
associates  the participant’s  name  [CONTACT_261707]’s  study  identification  number.  This file will be 
kept in a locked cabinet separate from the study  data.  
− Data Entry Requirements. The data entry system will require a  login identification and password to 
gain  access  to the data.  Only  the PI [INVESTIGATOR_261697].  
 
Quality control and assurance  
− Audit/Verification of Entered Data. All data designated as primary outcome data will be subject to a 
100%  cross -referencing  between  electronic  and paper  forms.  This audit  must  have  an error  rate less 
than 1%. If the verification fails the audit, all data w ill be re -entered, the original computer files will 
be discarded, and the newly re -entered data will be audited. This process will continue until  the 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-18-0885 
IRB APPR OPaVgAeL11DATE : 01/03/2019  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  of 11  audit no longer exceeds the maximum allowable error rate. All audits will be supervised and 
documented by [CONTACT_978].  
− Data Management and Analysis. PI [INVESTIGATOR_261698], participant 
confidentiality, and timely analysis. Based on our experience, we believe that the major data 
management and analysis needs for the proposed project can be met by [CONTACT_2329] a high -end PC, 
equipped with SPSS and SAS  for Windows and appropriate spreadsheet programs. All data files will 
be automatically backed up  daily.  
− Data Quality Control. At the time of collection, there will be an initial clerical review of all data for 
accuracy and completeness. Every effort will be made to ensure that missing data are kept to a 
minimum. Data entry programs with range checking and response validation will be used for all data 
entered. Under supervision from the PI, the research assistant will conduct error -checking 
procedures and p reliminary analyses on all data to ensure their accuracy. The research assistant will 
be trained to avoid omissions in data entry, and computer entry protocols will be programmed to 
avoid accidental skippi[INVESTIGATOR_52429]. We believe that the quality c ontrol system to be used 
will ensure a complete and accurate database and will maximize the likelihood that the intervention 
will be delivered correctly and  efficiently.  
− Frequency of Data Review. Relevant data and safety information obtained from each stud y 
participant will be verified against the original source documents by [CONTACT_52445] a bi -weekly basis. As noted above, any identified discrepancies will be discussed with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_52430].  
− Measurement and Reportin g of Participant Accrual and Adherence to Eligibility Criteria. Review of 
the rate of participant accrual as well as adherence to inclusion/exclusion criteria will occur weekly 
during the recruitment phase and then every month to assure that participants m eet the eligibility 
criteria and ethnic diversity goals outlined in the grant  proposal.  
− Final Storage of Paper Data. All paper data (e.g., consent forms) will be housed at a facility that 
specializes in the storage of medical/research information. The destruction date of these files will be 
at least 7 years from the termination of the study a nd will be authorized by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_52431].  
− Access to Cleaned Computer Data. Once the study is complete, and all data have been collected, 
entered, and passed the audit process, the data will be available to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_261699] s. Only the PI [INVESTIGATOR_261700]. No confidential 
information may be released without the express written consent of the study participants. Only 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_52434].  The original  data  file will remain  in its pristine  state.  
 
Publication Plan  
− We will publish research results at the peer -reviewed journal and/or scientific conferences. After 
completion of the study, results will be returned to research subjects if they  want.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-18-0885 
IRB APPRPOagVeA1L0DATE : 01/03/2019  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  of 11  Refe rences  
 
1. Hunter DJ, McDougall JJ, Keefe FJ. The symptoms of osteoarthritis and the genesis of  pain.  
Rheum Dis Clin North Am. 2008;34(3):623 -643.  
2. Lawrence RC, Felson DT, Helmick CG, et al. Estimates of the prevalence of arthritis and other 
rheumatic conditions in the [LOCATION_002]. Part II. Arthritis Rheum.  2008;58(1):26 -35. 
3. Barbour KE, Helmick CG, Theis KA, et al. Prevalence of doctor -diagnosed art hritis and arthritis - 
attributable activity limitation -[LOCATION_002], 2010 -2012. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 
2013;62(14):869 -873.  
4. Felson DT, Lawrence RC, Dieppe PA, et al. Osteoarthritis: new insights. Part 1: the disease and its 
risk factors. Ann Intern Med.  2000;133(8):635 -646.  
5. Jordan JM, Helmick CG, Renner JB, et al. Prevalence of knee symptoms and radiographic and 
symptomatic knee osteoarthritis in African Americans and Caucasians: the Johnston County 
Osteoarthritis Project. J Rheumatol.  2007;34(1):172 -180.  
6. Institute of Medicine. Relieving pain in America: A blueprint for transforming prevention, care, 
education, and research. Washington, DC: National Academies Press;  2011.  
7. Davis KD, Moayedi M. Central mechanisms of pain revealed through functional and structural 
MRI. Journal of neuroimmune pharmacology : the official journal of the Society on NeuroImmune 
Pharmacology.  2013;8(3):518 -534.  
8. Latremoliere A, Woolf CJ. Central sens itization: A generator of pain hypersensitivity by [CONTACT_52446]. The journal of pain : official journal of the American Pain Society. 
2009;10(9):895 -926.  
9. O'Neil CK, Hanlon JT, Marcum ZA. Adverse effects of analgesics commonly used by [CONTACT_261706]:  focus  on non-opi[INVESTIGATOR_261701].  The American  journal  of geriatric 
pharmacotherapy.  2012;10(6):331 -342.  
10. Solomon DH, Rassen JA, Glynn RJ, Lee J, Levin R, Schneeweiss S. The comparative safety  of 
analgesics in older adults with arthritis. Arch Intern Med.  2010;170(22):1968 -1976.  
11. Reid MC, Henderson CR, Jr., Papaleontiou M, et al. Characteristics of older adults receiving 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_245182]: treatment duration and outcomes. Pain Med.  2010;11(7):[ADDRESS_318358] current stimulation for the treatment of pain in fibromyalgia. Arthritis Rheum. 
2006;54(12):[ADDRESS_318359] curre nt stimulation on 
chronic neuropathic pain in patients with multiple sclerosis. J Pain.  2010;11(5):[ADDRESS_318360] current stimulation of the motor 
cortex ameliorates chronic pain and reduces short intracortical inhibition. J Pain Symptom 
Manage.  2010;39(5):[ADDRESS_318361] current stimulation: State of 
the art 2008. Brain stimulation.  2008;1(3):206 -223.  
17. Fregni F, Pascual -Leone A. Technology insight: noninvasive brain stimulation in neurology - 
perspectives on the therapeutic potential of rTMS and tDCS. Nature clinical practice Neurology. 
2007;3(7):[ADDRESS_318362] current stimulation 
(tDCS) for the treatment of fibromyalgia: results of a randomized, sham -controlled longitudinal 
clinical trial. Journal of pain management.  2009;2(3):353 -361.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -SN-18-0885 
IRB APPRPOagVeA1L1DATE : 01/03/2019  UT Houston Protocol Template  
Adapted from NIH protocol template and ICH Guidelines  of 11  19. Zeidan F, Grant JA, Brown CA, McHaffie JG, Coghill RC. Mindfulness meditation -related pain 
relief: evidence for unique brain mechanisms in the regulation of pain. Neurosci Lett. 
2012;520(2):165 -173.  
20. Gandiga  PC, Hummel  FC, Cohen  LG. Transcranial  DC stimulat ion (tDCS):  a tool for double -blind 
sham -controlled clinical studies in brain stimulation. Clin Neurophysiol.  2006;117(4):845 -850.  
21. Altman R, Asch E, Bloch D, et al. Development of criteria for the classification and reporting of 
osteoarthritis. Classificat ion of osteoarthritis of the knee. Diagnostic and Therapeutic Criteria 
Committee of the American Rheumatism Association. Arthritis Rheum.  1986;29(8):1039 -1049.  
22. Hawker GA, Mian S, Kendzerska T, French M. Measures of adult pain: Visual Analog Scale for 
Pain (VAS Pain), Numeric Rating Scale for Pain (NRS Pain), McGill Pain Questionnaire (MPQ), 
Short -Form McGill Pain Questionnaire (SF -MPQ), Chronic Pain Grade Scale (CPGS), Short Form - 
36 Bodily Pain Scale (SF -36 BPS), and Measure of Intermittent and Constant Os teoarthritis Pain 
(ICOAP). Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2011;[ADDRESS_318363]  11:S240 -252.  
23. Bellamy N, Buchanan WW, Goldsmith CH, Campbell J, Stitt LW. Validation study of WOMAC: a 
health status instrument for measuring clinically important patient relevant outcom es to 
antirheumatic drug therapy in patients with osteoarthritis of the hip or knee. J Rheumatol. 
1988;15(12):1833 -1840.  
24. Driban JB, Morgan N, Price LL, Cook KF, Wang C. Patient -Reported Outcomes Measurement 
Information System (PROMIS) instruments among ind ividuals with symptomatic knee 
osteoarthritis: a cross -sectional study of floor/ceiling effects and construct validity. BMC 
musculoskeletal disorders.  2015;16:253.  
25. Sullivan M, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_8331] J. The pain catastrophizing scale: development and Validation. Psychol  Assess.  
1995;7:524 -532.  
26. Zeidan F, Gordon NS, Merchant J, Goolkasian P. The effects of brief mindfulness  meditation 
training on experimentally induced pain. J Pain.  2010;11(3):[ADDRESS_318364] curren t stimulation over primary 
motor cortex (anode) and contralateral supraorbital area (cathode) on clinical pain severity and 
mobility performance in persons with knee osteoarthritis: An experimenter - and participant - 
blinded, randomized, sham -controlled pil ot clinical study. Brain stimulation.  2017;10(5):[ADDRESS_318365] Current Stimulation: 
Evidence Based Update 2016. Brain stimulation.  2016;9(5):[ADDRESS_318366] current stimulation. Brain stimulation.  2012;5(2):155 -162.  
30. Yennu  A, Tian  F, Gatchel  RJ, Liu H. Prefrontal  hemodynamic  mappi[INVESTIGATOR_52437] -infrared 
spectroscopy in response  to thermal stimulations over three body sites. Neurophotonics. 
2016;3(4):045008.  
31. Yucel MA, Aasted CM, Petkov MP, Borsook D, Boas DA, Becerra L. Specificity of  hemodynamic 
brain responses to painful stimuli: a functional near -infrared spectroscopy study. Scientific 
reports.  2015;5:9469.  