Official Title: Sleep and Healthy Aging Research on Depression for Younger Women   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]; IRB#16-000583-AM-[ZIP_CODE]   Date: 5/23/2019     Study Officials:    Chloe C Boyle, PhD Study Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_113678], Los Angeles  Michael R Irwin, MD Study Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_113678], Los Angeles      
SPECIFIC AIMS 
Depression is a major public health burden that is associated w ith increased morbidity and mortality,[ADDRESS_126789] a subset of individuals. Approximately 30% of patients 
treated with high doses of interferon (IFN)-α develop major dep ressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841],[ADDRESS_126790] systemic inflammati on, there are substantial increases in 
depressive symptoms.4 However, not all individuals exposed to increased inflammation  develop depression.5 
Thus, investigating who becomes depressed at exposure to heightened inflammatory state s—e.g., aging, 
obesity, infections, IFN-α, or endotoxin—and why one becomes depressed in such states informs future 
studies of depression prevention regarding identification of at -risk individuals and actual interventions. In 
particular, risk for depression is nearly twice as high in females  as in males from puberty through adulthood,6,[ADDRESS_126791] subsequent depressive symptoms over the following 2 yea rs (Preliminary Data). Notably, depressive 
responses to endotoxin are far more accentuated in females than  males, which suggests one potential 
mechanism underlying enhanced risk for depression in females.14,15 
A key unanswered question is whether female sex increases vulne rability to endotoxin-induced 
depression across the adult lifespan. The transition to late ad ulthood, particularly in women, is marked by a 
number of substantial psychobiological changes, including alter ations in physiology (e.g., dopaminergic 
function19, major hormonal shifts) and psychological processes (e.g., cop ing strategies15). Most notably, late 
adulthood is characterized by [CONTACT_113691]20 and decreased  depression prevalence16. 
Rates of depression in women drop precipi[INVESTIGATOR_113679] 6517; one hypothesis is that this “aging paradox” 
may reflect age-related decreases in affective sensitivity to i nflammation among women. However, no studies 
have directly compared effects of inflammation on affective pro cesses in younger and older females.  
Indeed, the psychobiological mechanisms underlying any differen tial risk conferred by [CONTACT_113692]. Depression is 
increasingly recognized as a heterogeneous disorder comprised o f dysfunction in a variety of domains, 
including increased negative affective processes (e.g., dysphor ia) and decreased positive affective processes 
(e.g., anhedonia). While there is some evidence for sex- and ag e-related shifts in the predominance of such 
alterations, the extent to which inflammation differentially al ters these domains is unclear. Characterizing these 
processes may clarify the mechanisms that contribute to the dis proportionate prevalence of depression in 
women likely across the adult lifespan, which will inform preve ntion and intervention efforts.   
The current study proposes to interrogate these mechanisms and how they differ as a function of sex 
and age. We will first leverage our ongoing experimental study examining endotoxin-induced depression in 
older adults (R01AG051944, PI [INVESTIGATOR_113680]) to test for sex difference s in endotoxin-induced alterations in negative 
and positive affective processes among older adults. This study  is expected to recruit 160 subjects aged 60-80 
years (80 females vs. 80 males). We next propose to recruit an additional 40 healthy premenopausal women 
(age 30-40) to participate in this supplemental study, which wi ll allow us a complementary test of age as a 
vulnerability factor for endotoxin-induced depression and assoc iated affective responding mechanisms in 
females. Specifically, in this randomized placebo-controlled ex perimental study, we aim to: 
1. Examine the effect of female sex on affective responses to e ndotoxin in older adults.  We hypothesize 
that, compared to males, females will present with higher negat ive affective responses and lower positive 
affective responses to endotoxin. 
2. Examine the effect of age on affective responses to endotoxi n in females.  We hypothesize that, 
compared to older females, younger females will present with hi gher negative affective responses and lower 
positive affective responses to endotoxin. 
3. Examine the correlation between inflammatory response and af fective response to endotoxin 
according to sex and age. We hypothesize that the correlations between circulating proinf lammatory 
cytokines and affective responses following endotoxin administr ation will be stronger in older females than in 
older males and in younger females than in older females. 
Exploratory Aim: Examine the prospective associations between acute affective re sponses to endotoxin and 
long-term development of depressive disorders over 2 years, ext ending our preliminary findings. 
RESEARCH STRATEGY 
A. SIGNIFICANCE 
A.1. Female Sex: A Vulnerability Factor for Inflammation-Induce d Depression? 
Compelling evidence suggests that inflammation plays a signific ant role in the pathophysiology of 
depression.16-[ADDRESS_126792],21,22 and endotoxin affects the two cardinal affective 
symptoms that constitute depression: depressed mood and anhedon ia. Endotoxin induces depressed mood 
(Profile of Mood Scores23, POMS>3) and mild depression (Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rat ing Scale24, 
MADRS>7)[ADDRESS_126793]-related brain regions like the ventral stria tum (VS).10 Thus, endotoxin can be used to probe 
for changes in both negative and positive affective processes a nd their associated neural substrates.  
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_113681] n, not all individuals exposed to 
increased inflammation develop depression.5 Less than 30% of patients treated with high doses of IFN-α 
develop major depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]3; and even when endotoxin is experim entally administered induci ng robust 
systemic inflammation, largely va riable increases in depressive  symptoms are found.[ADDRESS_126794] age-related changes in sex differences and 
inform future studies on underlying inflammatory and affective mechanisms. 
An institute of medicine (IOM) report in 2001 stated: “Sex matt ers. Sex, that is, being male or female, is 
an important basic human variable that should be considered whe n designing and analyzing studies in all 
areas and at all levels of biomedical and health-related resear ch … .The study of sex differences is evolving 
into a mature science. There is now sufficient knowledge… to al low the generation of hypotheses. The next 
step is to move from the descriptive to the experimental…”30 This supplemental study is significant by 
[CONTACT_113693]-induced depr ession leveraging our highly controlled experimental 
study (R01AG051944, PI [INVESTIGATOR_113680]), and particularly because, while sex differences in depression and 
inflammation decrease with aging, it is unknown whether female sex remains a vulnerability factor for 
inflammation-induced depression in late life. Thus, this application addresses the following strategic goals of 
the new Trans-NIH Strategic Plan for the Health of Women "Advancing Science for the Health of Women": 1) 
To advance rigorous research that is relevant to the health of women; 2) To develop methods and leverage 
data sources to consider sex and gender influences that enhance research for the health of women. 
A.2. Using Age to Interrogate Sex Differences in Vulnerability to Inflammation-Induced Depression 
No studies have specifically tested for age differences in vuln erability to inflammation-induced 
depression. Our prior work has shown that young females (i.e., below the age of 30) are more affectively 
sensitive to the effects of inflammation than young males, but it is not known if this vulnerability persists into 
late adulthood. Because late adulthood is characterized by [CONTACT_113694]20 and 
decreased  depression prevalence,16, 17 we hypothesize there may be potential age-related decreases in  
affective sensitivity to inflammation in older compared to youn ger females. Notably, major hormonal shifts (e.g., 
menopause) render older females more biologically similar to ol der males, which could help explain changes in 
affective sensitivity to inflammation across the lifespan. If r esults are consistent with this hypothesis, we will 
further characterize underlying affective mechanisms by [CONTACT_113695]. 
If, conversely, results are not consistent with our hypothesis,  and sex differences in vulnerability to 
inflammation induced depression remain evident in late adulthoo d, we will have identified a potentially 
vulnerable subgroup (i.e., female older adults) and we will be poised to interrogate affective mechanisms that 
enable this vulnerability to persist. Furthermore, it is also p ossible that both older female and older male adults 
will evidence greater  vulnerability to inflammation-induced depression than younger women. Regardless of 
sex, there are alterations in cognition and dopaminergic functi on (e.g., the dopaminergic vulnerability 
hypothesis)1931 that could confer increased sensitivity to inflammation and in creased risk for inflammation-
induced depression among older versus younger adults. The curre nt study includes assessment of cognition 
and dopaminergic activity. Thus, results from this study will facilitate identification of at-risk subgroups and 
potential mechanisms underlying these vulnerabilities.   
A.3. Negative and Positive Affective Mechanisms: A Dimensional Approach to Depression 
Clinical presentation of depression is enormously heterogeneous , composed of both negative and 
positive psychological processes that have distinct neurobiolog ical substrates that can further dynamically 
interact with the environment over time. Consistent with the ar ticulated goals of the National Institute of Mental 
Health (NIMH), the current study adopts a dimensional approach to the study of depression, focusing on 
dysregulation in fundamental processes, such as excess negative  affect and a deficit in positive affect. To 
date, the role of negative processes in depression has received  a great deal of attention, but there is some 
evidence that among older adults, presence of anhedonia, but no t dysphoria, is associated with elevated risk 
for disability and death.[ADDRESS_126795] particular relevance for older 
adults. As detailed in the approach section below, we employ a vertically integrated assessment of 
dysregulation in the negative and positive valence systems, inc orporating self-report questionnaires, observer 
ratings, and behavioral tasks.  
A.4. Prospective and Clinical Validity of Endotoxin Model of De pression 
Acute inflammatory reactivity predicts acute increases in depre ssive symptoms35,36 as well as increases 
in depressive symptoms over the following year.35 Our data also show that acute depressive reactivity (i.e., 
transient increases in depressed mood during 6 hours following endotoxin administration) predicts subsequent 
depressive symptoms over 2 years (Preliminary Data). However, t he predictive ability of this experimental 
model—either inflammatory or depressive reactivity—for clinical  depressive disorders has never been 
examined. Inflammation predicts the onset of depressive disorde rs.[ADDRESS_126796] never been 
examined for depression risk predi ction. In our preliminary stu dy, only depressed mood enhanced by 
[CONTACT_113696], but not depressed mood observed after placebo infusi on, was predictive of subsequent depressive 
symptoms (Preliminary Data). Similar to a cardiac stress test f or coronary heart disease, inflammatory and 
affective reactivity to endotoxin stress may be able to uncover  latent vulnerability to depression that cannot be 
identified by [CONTACT_113697]. If the predictive abili ty of the endotoxin depression model for clinical 
depression is confirmed in this 2-year longitudinal design, we will have further justification to test interventions 
that target such inflammatory and affective mechanisms in preve ntion trials. This experimental study followed 
by a 2-year prospective observation will be significant because of its potential to provide prior and future 
endotoxin studies of depression with empi[INVESTIGATOR_113682]. Importantly, it also has the 
potential to provide further justification to test interventions that target inflammatory and affective mechanisms 
in large prevention trials of depression. 
A.5. Summary of Significance 
 The proposed study is significant by [CONTACT_113698]-induced depression, which 
can inform the development of adjunctive psychological treatment components that target specific processes 
related to emotion processes (i.e., social rejection sensitivity, negative bias in facial emotion recognition, 
reward processing). Depression is a major public health burden across the lifespan,  and effective screening 
methods and interventions for prevention are needed. Female sex  may identify older adults at high depression 
risk to be prioritized for prevention efforts. Alternatively, a ging may confer resilience among females; if so the 
current study assesses potential mechanisms that may underlie t his resilience and could be leveraged at 
efforts for depression prevention and treatment. This study is also significant in using a 2-year longitudinal 
observation period to probe whether acute inflammatory and depr essive responses as a function of sex and 
age predict depression risk over time. The findings will inform  future trials to test pharmacologic and 
psychobehavioral interventions for depression prevention based on inflammatory and affective mechanisms. 
B. INNOVATION 
This research is highly innovative in using an experimental mod el of inflammation-induced depression 
to develop a framework for prevention of depression across the lifespan, integrating behavioral (i.e., reward, 
socio-emotional responses) and biologic (i.e., inflammation, in flammatory signaling, gene expression) 
processes to probe mechanisms that may underlie sex-differences  in depression prevalence, focusing on how 
age may modulate affective sensitivity to inflammation. Further more, this study substantially advances our prior 
work for several reasons: 1) Older adults show higher rates of inflammation and depression, yet prior research 
using this experimental model of inflammation has been performe d only in young- or middle-aged adults; 2) No 
studies have directly compared response to an inflammatory chal lenge in younger and older females, which 
will inform on sex differences in sensitivity to inflammation-i nduced depression; 3) Objective assessment of 
negative and positive affective responding informs the developm ent of treatments that target these affective 
pathways, yet our prior research has relied exclusively on sing le item self-report measures and related neural 
substrates. 
B.1. Use of a highly controlled experimental model to understan d depression risk mechanisms 
Low-dose endotoxin administration (0.8 ng/kg) is a highly innov ative experimental model to understand 
the causal role of inflammation in the induction of depressive symptoms. Endotoxin induces increases in 
proinflammatory cytokines to levels similar to those found in a n inflammatory disorder (e.g., rheumatoid 
arthritis) and chronic infections,41 and induces replicable increases in depressive symptoms.8-12,19,20,42 Other 
models such as interferon-  treatment and typhoid vaccination have also been proposed. How ever, the effects 
of interferon-  do not usually occur until 8-12 weeks of treatment,43 and this model cannot be double-blind nor 
applied to healthy volunteers. Administration of the typhoid va ccine induces only slight increases in IL-6, and is 
not robustly associated with induction of depressed mood.44,45 Laboratory stress (i.e., Trier Social Stress Task) 
can also activate inflammation, and such reactivity is associat ed with depressive symptoms 1 year later35; 
however, laboratory stress does not target the inflammatory cas cade, and inflammatory responses are 
transient and less robust than endotoxin. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_113683] s, endotoxin is a procedure that has only been 
implemented by a few laboratories in the world with only a smal l number of studies conducted to date 
(n=12).19,20 Furthermore, no research has been conducted in older adults.12 Moreover, no study has attempted 
to evaluate key clinical characteristics (i.e., sex and age) th at might explain differential increases in depressed 
mood and anhedonic symptoms following inflammatory challenge.19,20,[ADDRESS_126797] been examined in y oung adults, but there is a paucity of 
such research in older adults; and experimental or longitudinal  studies evaluating such mechanisms using task 
based multi-dimensional methods in older adults are even more l imited. Given that social disconnection plays a 
critical role in the onset and perpetuation of depression,36,[ADDRESS_126798] of sex and age and inflammatory challenge on  accurate judgment of facial emotions with 
implications for perceived threat (i.e., angry face) or reward value (i.e., happy face).[ADDRESS_126799] reactivity, learning, and 
motivation.50-52 Understanding how sex and age influence affective responding, at baseline and in response to 
inflammatory challenge, has the potential to refine psychobehavioral interventions to prevent depression, and 
to inform the design of neuroimaging studies aimed at identifying the neural sensitivities related to 
inflammation. 
B.3. Use of systemic, cellular and genomic markers of inflammat ion: predictors of depression  
The vast majority of research that has examined the association s between inflammation and 
depression has assessed C-reactive protein (CRP) and circulatin g levels of interleukin (IL)-6 and tumor 
necrosis factor (TNF).[ADDRESS_126800] pi[INVESTIGATOR_113684] e valuate the upstream 
molecular pathways of inflammation: inflammatory gene expressio n,54 inflammatory transcription factor, 
nuclear factor (NF)- B,55 and signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) fa mily proteins,[ADDRESS_126801] of endotoxin administration, in the context of female sex and age, on genes involved in 
inflammation, and the extent that these genes and related transcriptional pathways map onto increases in 
inflammation and depressive symptoms. Integrated analyses of inflammatory and affective responding will 
inform targets of future translational studies. 
C. APPROACH 
C.1. Preliminary Data  
C.1.1. Inflammation induces increases in depressive 
symptoms. 
Using an experimental inflammatory challenge (i.e., 
endotoxin vs. placebo), increases in proinflammatory 
cytokines are associated with increases in depressed mood 
and anhedonia.8-12 
C.1.1.1 Inflammatory challenge induces increases 
in depressed mood, especially in females.14  Aim: To 
evaluate the effects of endotoxin on depressed mood and 
sex differences in depressive responses to endotoxin. 
Methods : In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
design, 115 participants (69 females, mean age 24.1 ± 6.3 
years) received either low-dos e endotoxin (0.8 ng/kg of body we ight) or placebo (same volume of 0.9% saline). 
Blood sampling for IL-[ADDRESS_126802]-injection for the next six hours 
(T1-T6), along with assessment of social disconnection and depr essed mood using the POMS.  Results:  
Endotoxin (vs. placebo) led to significant increases in IL-6 (P <0.001) and TNF levels (P<0.001). Endotoxin (vs. 
placebo) also led to significantly greater increases in depress ed mood (P<0.001), and these effects did not 
change when controlling for sickness symptoms (P<0.05) (Fig. 1) . Additional analyses found that endotoxin 
induced increases in IL-6 and TNF which were similar between th e two sexes, but suggested that women 
showed significantly greater increases in depressed mood than m en in response to endotoxin (P<0.05). Similar 
results were found for feelings of social disconnection.  Conclusion:  Endotoxin induces increases in depressed 
mood, which are not due to sickness symptoms (i.e., headaches, muscle pain, shivering, nausea, breathing 
difficulties, and fatigue). Additional analyses suggested that women are more sensitive to an inflammatory 
challenge and show greater increases in depressed mood and soci al disconnection as compared to men. 
However, these analyses were limited to younger adults. Given t he different hormonal milieu of younger vs. 
older women, and the regulation of inflammation by [CONTACT_113699], this study will evaluate inflammatory 
and affective responses in older adults stratified by [CONTACT_78471] e xamine whether there are sex differences in 
inflammatory and affective responses. 
C.1.1.2. Increases in inflammation correlate with depressive sy mptoms following endotoxin.  
Aim:  To evaluate whether increases in inflammation account for incre ases in depressed mood following an 
inflammatory challenge.  Methods:  See C.1.3.1.  Results:  There were significant correlations between 
changes in IL-6 or TNF and social disconnection ( r = 0.27, P<0.05; r = 0.37, P<0 0.01), and between changes 
in IL-6 or TNF and depressed mood ( r = 0.25, P<0.08; r = 0.30, P<0.05). Additional analyses suggested that 
women showed more robust correlations than men.  Conclusion:  Levels of inflammation following endotoxin 
are associated with social affective responses, and these relat ionships appear to be stronger in younger 
women than men despi[INVESTIGATOR_113685]. This study will examine there are 
sex differences in affective sensitivity to inflammatory challe nge in older adults. Figure 1. Changes in dep ressed mood over 6 hours 
following endotoxin administration (vs. placebo)  

C.1.1.3. Endotoxin safely induces increases in depressed mood i n older females.  Aim: To 
evaluate the safety and feasibility of endotoxin administration  in older females.  Methods:  In our ongoing study 
(K23AG049085, PI [INVESTIGATOR_113686]), healthy older females aged 60-70 years ( N=35) were entered into the previously 
described endotoxin protocol, which included hourly assessments  of depressed mood using the POMS.  
Results:  None of the subjects had significant adverse events. Similar to  prior results in younger adults, 
endotoxin was found to induce a significant increase in depress ed mood (P=0.017; effect size 0.51), with peak 
increases in depressed mood at 2 hours; this timepoint of maxim al increase is identical to our prior results 
(C.1.1.1).  Conclusion:  These data show that endotoxin can be safely administered to ol der females and 
induces increases in depressed mood with a similar time course of response. 
C.1.2. Endotoxin-induced depressed mood predicts 
subsequent depressive symptoms over 2 years.  Aim: To 
examine whether transient increases in depressed mood during [ADDRESS_126803] subsequent 
depressive symptoms over a 2-year follow-up.  Methods:  In our 
ongoing study (K23AG049085, PI [INVESTIGATOR_113686]), healthy older females 
aged 60-70 years who completed the above-described endotoxin 
protocol (N=22) were followed up for 21 months with an 
assessment of depressive symptoms every 3 months using the 
telephone-administered 9-item Patient Health Questionnaire 
(PHQ-9).  Results:  Endotoxin and placebo groups did not differ in 
subsequent depressive symptoms over 21 months (P=0.37), 
indicating that the intervention itself did not affect subseque nt 
depressive symptoms (Fig. 2). In the endotoxin group, depressed  
mood assessed during 6 hours of experimental session at 
baseline strongly correlated with subsequent depressive 
symptoms over 21 months ( r = 0.71, P<0.0001) (Fig. 3). However, 
in the placebo group, depressed mood assessed during 6 hours of  
experimental session did not correlate with subsequent 
depressive symptoms ( r = 0.07, P=0.74).  Conclusion:  Transient 
increases in depressed mood following endotoxin administration 
strongly predict subsequent depressive symptoms over [ADDRESS_126804] processing.  Aim: The 
aim of this observational study was to assess whether increases  
in the proinflammatory cytokine IL-[ADDRESS_126805] tasks assessing 
motivation (monetary reward), learning (monetary reward) and se nsitivity (monetary and general social 
reward).  Methods : [ADDRESS_126806] tas ks 24-29 hours after the vaccine; this 24-[ADDRESS_126807]-influenza vaccine.  Results : 
Levels of IL-[ADDRESS_126808], and decreas es in attentional bias to positive faces (an 
index of sensitivity to general social reward). Changes in sens itivity to monetary reward, as operationalized 
through parameters in the reward motivation task, were not asso ciated with changes in IL-6.  Increases in IL-[ADDRESS_126809] responsiveness on a standar dized learning task, although sample size for 
computational analyses was not sufficient to identify whether t his was driven by [CONTACT_113700].  Conclusion : Consistent with hypotheses, mild increases in IL-[ADDRESS_126810].  Figure 2. Changes in depressive symptoms over 
2 years after endotoxin protocol (vs. placebo)  
Figure 3. Correlations between endotoxin-induced 
depressed mood at baselin e and subsequent 
depressive symptoms over 2 years (vs. placebo)  
C.1.3. Summary of Preliminary Data 
 I n f l a m m a t o r y  c h a l l e n g e  i n d u c e s  d e p r e s s e d  m o o d ,  e s p e c i a l l y  i n  f emales; and increases in depressed 
mood correlate with increases in circulating markers of inflamm ation. Importantly, preliminary data suggest that 
older adults show similar increas es in depressed mood in respon se to endotoxin as found in younger adult 
samples. Transient increases in depressed mood following endoto xin administration strongly predict 
subsequent depressive symptoms over [ADDRESS_126811] 
 “ D e p r e s s i o n ,  o n e  o f  t h e  m o s t  c o m m o n  d i s e a s e s  i n  o l d e r  a d u l t s ,  carries significant risk for morbidity and 
mortality. Because of the burgeoning population of older adults , the enormous burden of late-life depression, 
and the limited efficacy of current antidepressants in older ad ults, biologically plausible models that translate 
into depression prevention efforts are needed. Insomnia predict s depression recurrence, and is a modifiable 
target for depression prevention. Yet, it is not known how inso mnia gets converted into biological- and affective 
risk for depression, which is critical for identification of mo lecular targets for pharmacologic interventions, and 
for refinement of insomnia treatments that target affective res ponding to improve efficacy. This study will use 
an inflammatory challenge (i.e., endotoxin) to probe acute infl ammatory- and depression responses (primary 
outcome) in older adults as a function of insomnia. Older adult s with insomnia show chronic inflammation; 
sleep disturbance also activates inflammatory signaling; chroni c inflammation primes acute inflammatory 
responses; chronic inflammation, as well as acute inflammatory reactivity, predict depression over the following 
year; and finally, endotoxin induces acute inflammation along w ith depressive symptoms, with preliminary 
evidence that “two-hits” (i.e., sleep disturbance and inflammat ory challenge) are associated with exaggerated 
increases in depression, especially in women. In this placebo-c ontrolled, randomized, double-blind study of low 
dose endotoxin in older adults (60-80 y; stratified by [CONTACT_4321]) wit h insomnia (n=80) vs. comparisons without 
insomnia (n=80), we hypothesize that older adults with insomnia  will show heightened inflammatory- and 
affective responding to inflammatory challenge as compared to t hose without insomnia. We aim to: 1) examine 
differences in depressive symptoms and measures of negative aff ect responding as a function of insomnia and 
inflammatory challenge; 2) examine differences in measures of p ositive affect responding as a function of 
insomnia and inflammatory challenge; and 3) examine differences  in experimentally-induced inflammation in 
relation to depressive symptoms and measures of negative- and p ositive affect responding as a function of 
insomnia. If the hypotheses are confirmed, older adults with tw o “hits”, insomnia and inflammation, would 
represent a high risk group to be prioritized for monitoring an d for depression prevention efforts using 
treatments that target insomnia or inflammation. Moreover, this  study will inform the development of 
mechanism-based treatments that target affect responses in addi tion to sleep behaviors, and which might also 
be coupled with efforts to reduce inflammation to optimize effi cacy of depression prevention. ” 
C.2.2. Overview of study design 
To address Aim 1, examining sex differences in affective sensit ivity to inflammation among older adults, 
we will select a total of 80 healthy older adults aged 60-80 ye ars (40 males and 40 females), who are absent of 
current psychiatric illnesses, i nsomnia, and medical conditions  (e.g., inflammatory disorders), into a placebo-
controlled, randomized, double-blind, experimental inflammatory  challenge protocol. Participants will be 
randomly assigned to receive either endotoxin (n=40) or placebo  (n=40) in a between-subjects manner, 
stratified by [CONTACT_4321]. To address Aim 2, examining age differences in affective sensitivity to inflammation among 
females, we will recruit an additional 40 healthy premenopausal  adult women (age 30-40) to be randomly 
assigned to receive endotoxin (n=20) or placebo (n=20). 
For all participants, administration of endotoxin (0.8 ng/kg bo dy weight vs. placebo), will be followed by 
[CONTACT_6270]-report measures of depressed mood, negative and positive a ffect, and sickness symptoms (e.g., fatigue) 
assessed hourly over a 12-hour period; objective ratings of dep ressive symptoms by [CONTACT_113701] [ADDRESS_126812] Task,59 the Social Choice task (i.e., intersection of reward 
motivation and sensitivity for social reward),60,[ADDRESS_126813]-injection only, participants will complete t he Cyberball Social Exclusion 
task (i.e., self-reported sensitivity to social rejection).11,64 Proinflammatory cytokines levels will be repeatedly 
assessed through hourly blood draws, and measures of activation  of the inflammatory transcription factor (NF-
B) and inflammatory gene expression, as well as assessment of d opaminergic activity, will be obtained during 
the first half of the protocol prior to and immediately after p eak cytokine responses. A between-subject parallel 
design will be used for the following reasons: 1) the proposed study involves endotoxin administration, and in a 
hypothetical crossover design, subjects who experience aversive  sickness symptoms from endotoxin (possibly 
also from placebo due to expectation) might drop out, which wou ld introduce bias and invalidate the results; 2) 
the effect of endotoxin on inflammation might not resolve betwe en sessions; 3) repeated exposure to 
behavioral tests of social exclusion might alter responses; 4) two sessions have high subject burden; 5) distinct 
endotoxin and placebo groups are required for the 2-year follow -up. 
Because the administration of endotoxin in this experimental pr otocol is designed to mimic the 
increases in plasma cytokines reported in chronic low-grade inf lammatory conditions (i.e., 2-10 fold increases 
in IL-6 and TNF), we will use low-dose endotoxin (0.8 ng/kg) si milar to what we have used in our prior 
studies.9,11,12,42,65 An endotoxin dose of 0.8 ng/kg yields significant increases in  proinflammatory cytokines, 
increases in depressed mood and anhedonia.9,11,12,42,[ADDRESS_126814] ered endotoxin dose 0.8 ng/kg in over 170 
participants with no adverse events, including older adults (20 -70 years). We have also not observed any 
clinically significant fever or hyper- or hypotension at the 0. 8 ng/kg dose. Of note, we have elected to use this 
low-dose rather than higher endotoxin dose (2.0 ng/kg; results in a 2.5-fold increase in proinflammatory 
cytokines) because the higher dose has been shown to induce gre ater fever responses, and hypotension in 
elderly subjects (60-69 years)  as compared to young adults (20- 27 years).106,[ADDRESS_126815] 40 non-insomniac older females 
and 40 non-insomniac older males to examine sex differences (Ai m 1). We will use the basic demographic 
information in the sample of 40 healthy older females to guide recruitment of the younger female sample (Aim 
2). Specifically, we will ensure that the samples are comparabl e in terms of BMI, years of education, and 
ethnicity. As with the parent project, compensation for complet ion of all study components will be $1,000.   
Inclusion Criteria:  Participants will be healthy older adults aged 60-80 years. Fo r the younger sample, 
inclusion criteria will be healthy, biologically female adults between the ages of 30 and 40. By [CONTACT_113702] 
(median age of onset for mood disorders is 30; of note most stu dies using endotoxin have a mean age of 
participants well below age 30).66,67 
Exclusion Criteria:  Participants will be excluded with a current medical or psychi atric disorder or who 
report current use of medications such as antidepressants and a nti-inflammatory drugs, consistent with prior 
endotoxin protocols involving elderly subjects.41,58,68 For the younger sample, males will be excluded for the 
following reasons: feasibility, reduction of variability and su bsequent enhanced power, and to build upon our 
prior observation of accentuated affective sensitivity to infla mmation among women. Other exclusion criteria 
include pregnancy or planning to become pregnant; presence of c hronic mental or physical illness, history of 
allergies, current and regular use of prescription medications,  and nightshift work or time zone shifts (>3 hours) 
within the previous 6 weeks, or previous history of fainting du ring blood draws. See Protection of Human 
Subjects section for full details. 
C.2.4. Experimental Procedures  
Recruitment and Enrollment:   Recruitment for the younger female sample will use existing i nfrastructure 
in place for the parent project, including identification of po tential participants through the GENESYS Sampling 
System (Fort Washington, PA), which records telephone numbers a nd mailing addresses of households across 
the [LOCATION_002]. This will allow us to select for households with at least one female person aged 30-40 years 
and living in the greater Los Angeles area; age information is based on known age-related data or a statistical 
estimate of age, predicted using individual household character istics and Census demographic information. 
Research staff are in place to send out recruitment letters and  respond to inquiries by [CONTACT_648]. Interested 
individuals will go through a two-step screening and assessment  procedure to ensure that they are eligible for 
participation in the study. The initial screening process will be completed by [CONTACT_648]; eligible and interested 
participants will then be scheduled for an in-person morning sc reening and assessment session (Visit 1).  
Baseline Visit 1:   Participants will be scheduled for this baseline session near  the last day of their 
menstrual cycle to minimize variability due to hormonal status.  They will have their height and weight 
measured, a urine sample to check for substance use, and an EKG  to check for signs of heart disease. They 
will complete the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-5 Disor ders (SCID-5) with trained research staff. After 
this, participants will complete baseline assessment of several  behavioral tasks, including tasks assessing 
cognition, reward, and emotion processing. These tasks will be administered between the hours of 10am and 
2pm to match the time of administr ation during the experimental  endotoxin vs. placebo session.  
Experimental study session - Endotoxin vs. placebo administration :  Similar to our previous research,8-
12 the experimental session will be conducted at the UCLA Clinica l Translational Research Center (CTRC) 
using a randomized, double-blind, placebo controlled design. Be fore each session beginning at 8am, a CTRC 
nurse blind to the randomization schedule will assess height an d weight as well as vital signs (blood pressure, 
pulse, temperature). Participants will be excluded if: (a) bloo d pressure less than 90/60 or greater than 
160/120, (b) pulse less than 50 beats/minute, or (c) temperatur e greater than 99.5°F. An indwelling venous 
catheter with a heparin lock will be inserted into the particip ant’s dominant forearm (right) for hourly blood 
draws and one into the non-dominant forearm (left) for a contin uous saline flush (150 cc/h) for endotoxin vs. 
placebo administration. Baseline blood samples, self-report que stionnaires, and experimental affective 
response tasks will then be completed. CTRC pharmacy will maint ain the randomization assignment and 
prepare the endotoxin vs. placebo. After 90 minutes, participan ts will randomly receive either low-dose 
endotoxin (0.8 ng/kg of body weight) or placebo as an intraveno us bolus over 30-60 seconds. NIH will provide 
reference endotoxin humans (E. coli group O:113).[ADDRESS_126816] burden precludes in person follow-up the next day; howe ver, participants will receive a safety follow-up 
phone call 1 and 7 days after the CTRC session. 
C.2.5. Baseline Measures: Prior to the Experimental Protocol 
Baseline assessment procedures (prior to experimental protocol) :  In a face-to-face interview, the 
following domains will be assessed: psychiatric history, insomn ia, negative and positive valence, biobehavioral 
and medical factors (i.e., demographic; medical/medication hist ories; health status) and psychosocial stress 
and social support. The SCID-[ADDRESS_126817] over two decades of 
experience in the administration of the SCID, train to criterio n validity, obtain diagnoses in a weekly consensus 
meeting to maintain reliability and criterion validity, and use  videotaped interviews for quarterly monitoring of 
validity/reliability of interviewers. Depressive/anxiety sympto ms will be assessed using Beck Depression 
Inventory (BDI-II), Beck Anxiety Inventory (BAI),69,[ADDRESS_126818] valence:   Affect valence characteristics might be related to variable a ffect 
response following inflammatory challenge, and will be assessed  by [CONTACT_6270]-report questionnaires including the 
Behavioral Inhibition and Activation Systems (BIS/BAS) Scale72 (i.e., punishment sensitivity; drive, fun seeking, 
reward responsiveness); Temporal Experience of Pleasure Scale 73 (i.e., anticipatory, consummatory 
pleasure); and Response Style Questionnaire Ruminative Responses Scale74 (i.e., tendency to ruminate in 
response to symptoms of negative emotion). 
Biobehavioral and medical factors  will be assessed that might be associated with inflammation, 
depression risk, or both, including demographic information ; biobehavioral confounds of inflammation  75 such 
as alcohol use, smoking, BMI, and physical activity (i.e., Godin Leisure-Time Exercise Questionnaire76); and 
medical factors (i.e., Charlson Co-Morbidity Index, Chronic Disease Score77) and health functioning (i.e., 
Medical Outcomes Study Short-form [SF-36]78-80). We also assess menstrual history and status.  
Psychosocial factors  will be assessed including num ber and perceived threat of rece nt life stresses 
(i.e., Perceived Stress Scale81) and subjective social isolation that is associated with depre ssion, sleep 
disturbance and inflammation (i.e., 10-item Revised UCLA Loneliness Scale ,[ADDRESS_126819],83 short form Social Support Questionnaire [SSQ]84). 
C.2.6. Experimental Measures 
Negative Affect Responding  
 Self-report and observer based measures of depressed mood:  Depressed mood, a core symptom of 
depression, will be assessed hourly using the Profile of Mood S tates (POMS).[ADDRESS_126820] (DACL) will also be administered hourly as the DACL,  used in another endotoxin study,65 correlating 
well with the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). We will also use  the Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating 
Scale (MADRS)24 as it has been found to be sensitive to acute changes in depre ssed mood and anhedonia 
following endotoxin.19 Because feelings of social di sconnection and loneliness predic t depression and co-occur 
with depressed mood following inflammatory challenge, feelings of social disconnection (Feelings of Social 
Disconnection Scale9) and loneliness (adapted UCLA Loneliness Scale82) will also be assessed. To 
complement prior research that perceived social support is a ri sk factor for cytokine-induced depression, 
participants will complete the short form of the SSQ84 at baseline and 2-hours post injection. Finally, an 
interviewer, blind to the experimental condition, will make rat ings of items of depressed mood, feelings of guilt, 
loss of interest, retardation/agi tation, anxiety, and somatic s ymptoms using items from the Hamilton 
Depression Rating Scale,[ADDRESS_126821] widely used scales in depression research, whi ch will be adapted 
to evaluate acute changes in depressive symptoms. 
 E x p e r i m e n t a l  t a s k :  s u b j e c t i v e  s e n s i t i v i t y  t o  s o c i a l  r e j e c t i o n  ( C y b e r b a l l  S o c i a l  E x c l u s i o n  T a s k )   Socio-
emotional mechanisms of depression will be examined in this stu dy as they are particularly significant to older 
adults, who often experience objective and subjective social is olation, which is associated with depression 
risk.86 Feelings of ‘social disconnection’ play a critical role in the  onset and perpetuation of (non-inflammatory 
forms of) depression.87 Inflammatory processes can trigger social withdrawal88 and increase feelings of 
distress and related neural sensitivity (i.e., activation of th e dorsal anterior cingulate cortex).[ADDRESS_126822] round (inclusion),  participants will play with the two other players 
for the entire period. In the second round (exclusion), partici pants will receive the ball for seven throws and 
then will be excluded for the rest of the round when the two pl ayers will stop throwing the ball to the participant. 
Following this task, they will complete a self-report measure o f social distress in response to social exclusion.89 
 Experimental task: negative bias to emotional face recognition (Emotion Recognition Task)   Depressed 
subjects have a negative bias in the perception of emotions exp ressed in faces as they tend to interpret neutral 
faces as sad and happy faces as neutral.49 Furthermore, such a bias appears to play a role in the etiolog y and 
maintenance of depression as it predicts relapse in currently d epressed and remitted patients.40 Emotional 
Face Recognition Task62 consists in showing participants a series of black and white p hotographs (Ekman 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_38527] ), in which facial expression is morphed from Neutral to either Sad, Angry, or Fearful.[ADDRESS_126823] Responding 
 S e l f - r e p o r t  m e a s u r e s  o f  p o s i t i v e  m o o d .  Participants will self-report positive mood each hour using it ems 
from the Profile of Mood States (POMS), and items that assess a nticipatory (i.e., future oriented) and 
consummatory (i.e., present oriented) pleasure and interest in activities and social interaction (e.g., the Snaith 
Hamilton Pleasure Scale; the A ffective Forecasting Questionnair e).91 
Experimental task: intersection of reward motivation and sensitivity for social and non-social reward 
(Social Choice Task and cartoon task).  A social choice61 and semi-structured social interaction60 task will be 
used to assess motivation and sensitivity for social reward. Th e social choice task will be administered at 
baseline (visit 1) and during the experimental session ([ADDRESS_126824]-injection). Participants will be asked to rate 
their desire to engage in three 10-minute activities on a 1-10 Likert scale. These include a social activity 
(talking with another person) and two solitary activities (solv ing word problems, sitting quietly). Participants are 
told that this preference along with an element of chance will determine which they actually do. At the baseline 
visit, a neutral option will alw ays be chosen. During the exper imental session, the social interaction will always 
be selected. For this semi-structured social interaction task, participants will be asked to spend [ADDRESS_126825] Count Software. Percept ions of the RA will also be assessed (e.g., 
“S/he was truly interested in me”). A “Cartoon Effort Task”[ADDRESS_126826] stim uli. Motivation is the amount of effort 
participants are willing to exer t to view funny vs non-funny ca rtoon. Participants also rate their enjoyment when 
viewing funny cartoons. The task is 20-30 minutes long, and has  been pi[INVESTIGATOR_113687].    
Experimental tasks: reward learning (Probabilistic Reward Task, PRT; Probabilistic Selection Task), motivation 
(Effort Expenditure for Rewards Task (EEfRT), and sensitivity (Emotional Dot Probe, Face Morphing Task) risk 
(BART).   Anhedonia is a core feature of major depressive disorder and includes a reduction in experienced 
pleasure (liking reward), motivation (wanting reward) and rewar d learning.50-[ADDRESS_126827] learning, we will use the PRT, which o bjectively measures participants’ ability to 
modulate behavior as a function of reward, because this task id entifies reduced reward learning in depressed 
patients which is state-dependent and also predicts the persist ent diagnosis of depression in the midst of 
treatment.50-[ADDRESS_126828]-learning task is extensively describe d in Pi[INVESTIGATOR_7301].94 The 
probabilistic selection task  is a 15-minute trial and error (procedural) implicit learning task that assesses 
reinforcement learning for both positive and negative monetary cues; this task has also been used by [CONTACT_95584][INVESTIGATOR_113688] (Science, 2 004). Prior work suggests that dopaminergic 
function is associated with learning from both types of cues vi a different neurobiological mechanisms. Lower 
dopamine levels are associated with decreased sensitivity to po sitive reinforcement, but increased sensitivity to 
negative reinforcement. A similar trend is expected following t he inflammatory stimulus.  
To assess reward motivation, we will employ the EEfRT,[ADDRESS_126829] sensitivity/liking will be assessed with two 
common emotion processing tasks, the emotional dot probe and fa ce morphing task,95,[ADDRESS_126830] cues; specifically, reduc ed sensitivity to rewarding social stimuli is indicated 
by [CONTACT_113703].  The 
Balloon Analogue Risk task (BART) is used to assess reward sens itivity and risk. In this brief task, participants 
view a computer screen with three items: a balloon with a butto n labeled Click here to pump, button labeled 
Collect $$$, and a box where total earnings were tallied in eve ry trial. The goal during the BART is to earn as 
many dollar points as possible. Participants are shown a mock l ist of high scores to provide a frame of 
reference for their performance, but no monetary reward was off ered. Every time the subject clicked on the 
“pump” button, the balloon increased slightly in size. When the  Collect $$$ button was pressed, the total 
earnings display added [ADDRESS_126831] its individual explos ion point, a “pop” sound effect played and the 
participant did not earn any money for that balloon. At any poi nt during a trial, participants could cash out by 
[CONTACT_113704] $$$ button and their earnings would be upd ated while a slot machine “payoff” sound 
emphasized the payment. The number of pumps before an explosion  occurred ranged from 1–128. For every 
balloon, the first pump had 1/128 probability of exploding and a potential gain of 100% (i.e., from 5 cents to 10 
cents), the second pump had a 1/127 probability of exploding an d a potential gain of 50% (i.e., from 10 cents to 
15 cents), and so on until the 128th pump which carried a 1/1 p robability of exploding and a potential gain of 
0%. Thus, with each additional pump on a particular balloon the  risk of losing increased and the relative gain 
decreased. In this way, some risk taking was necessary to make gains but excessive risk was associated with 
diminishing returns.  
 Dopaminergic Function.  Given that inflammation can influence dopaminergic function, w hich underlies 
reward motivation and learning, this proposal includes an asses sment of resting state eye blink rate (EBR). 
EBR is used as an indicator of striatal dopaminergic (D2 recept or) activity and correlates with performance on 
reward motivation and learning tasks. Alterations in dopaminerg ic function activity have been proposed to play 
a key role in mediating effects of inflammation on reward motiv ation, and EBR has been shown to decrease 
with greater age. However, EBR has not been assessed following endotoxin administration. With the addition 
of this brief and simple measure, we will test for changes in c entral dopaminergic activity following endotoxin, 
and examine whether these changes are correlated with reward ta sk performance among women in early and 
late adulthood. EBR will be assessed prior to infusion, and 1.[ADDRESS_126832]-infusion. Eye blinks will 
be video recorded for a 5-minute period. The participant will b e asked to sit quietly, look ahead, and refrain 
from visually fixating on any objects. The video will be coded by [CONTACT_113705] (blinded to condition).   
Daily Diary Assessment 
 Daily diaries will be completed for [ADDRESS_126833] them to the survey site at 6 random 
points during the day (range of time between prompts = 30 to 18 0 minutes). Participants will have 1 hour to 
respond to a single prompt; this is to ensure that participants  are given sufficient time to complete an 
assessment during a working envir onment (e.g., business meeting s) or family obligations (e.g., driving children 
to school). Data from a second or third submission in the same 30-minute window will be discarded. 
Completing each prompt will take [ADDRESS_126834] prompt (or since waking) on a 0-[ADDRESS_126835] to each activity. For each 
activity, they rate their motivation (hedonic, eudaimonic, or n ot applicable if their “wanti ng” is sufficiently low). 
Each evening, participants will complete one additional prompt assessing positive and negative mood, daily 
rumination and sleep quality (estimated time: 2 minutes). 
 
Cognition and Executive Function. Behavioral tasks will be administe red by [CONTACT_113706] (Visit 1) and 3-hours  post-injection during the experimental session.[ADDRESS_126836] imulus presented elsewhere.  
Emotion Regulation.  Participants will complete questionnaires assessing dispositio nal and situational 
emotion regulation strategies and attitudes towards emotions. P articipants will also complete a 20-30 minute 
standardized emotion regulation task44. The task includes two phases: a reactivity phase and a regula tion 
phase, and assesses the ability to down-regulate negative emoti onal response to negative images and/or film 
clips using reappraisal strategies. Participants receive instru ctions as to how to reappraise (e.g., thinking about 
the “silver lining” or imagining oneself at a distance from the  negative emotion). The dependent variable is the 
degree to which self-reported emotion changes when reacting to versus reappraising negative stimuli.  The 
task also includes assessment of the ability to up-regulate pos itive emotion using cognitive strategies (e.g., 
thinking about a positive image/film clip in such a way that mo re positive emotion is felt). The stimuli used in 
the emotion regulation task are drawn from standardized databas es and have been used in many previous 
studies, including studies conducted in our group with younger breast cancer survivors. 
Physical Sickness Symptoms  (i.e., muscle pain, shivering, nausea, breathing, difficulties , and fatigue) 
will be assessed hourly by [CONTACT_6270]-report, and controlled in analy ses to ensure that the social or affective 
consequences of inflammatory challenge are not due simply to in dividuals feeling more ‘sick.’ 
 Inflammatory Cytokine, Signaling Pathway, Gene Expression Analy sis: Blood samples will be 
collected at baseline, every half hour for the first two hours,  and hourly for the remainder of the 12 h. Samples 
will be immediately processed and stored at -800C. Plasma samples (all timepoints) will be assayed for pro- 
and anti-inflammatory cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, IL-8, TNF, and IL- 10) by [CONTACT_3553] a high sensitivity bead-based 
multiplex immunoassay (Performance High Sensitivity Human Cytok ine, R& D Systems, Minneapolis, MN) and 
a Bio-Plex 200 (Luminex) Instrument, with excellent intra- and inter-assay reproducibility97 and very strong 
correlations ( r ≥ 0.94) with high sensitivity ELISA.98 We are examining IL-1 , TNF, and IL-6 as these cytokines 
are increased in response to endotoxin and correlate with incre ases in depressed mood. IL-8 is also assayed 
because endotoxin activates the TLR-4 receptor and IL-8 is a pr oinflammatory cytokine that is released with 
TLR-4 activation. We also explore changes in IL-10, an anti-inf lammatory cytokine that is thought to counter-
regulate the inflammatory responses; no study has examined IL-1 0 responses to endotoxin and determined 
whether its expression might alter magnitude/duration of inflam matory response. Baseline levels of CRP will be 
assessed, as CRP is a robust marker of systemic inflammation. B aseline levels of CRP may moderate 
increases in inflammation and affective responding. However, re peated measures of CRP will not be obtained. 
Increases in IL-6 induce CRP over several hours or longer; henc e, the experimental protocol is too short in 
duration to evaluate changes in CRP. Peripheral blood mononucle ar cell (PBMC) nuclear extracts (baseline, 
30 min, 1 h, 2 h or peak cytokine response) will be prepared an d assayed to quantify the amount of activated 
NF-κB p65 present in the nucleus utilizing recombinant p65 (Active Motif, Carlsbad, CA) as the reference 
standard (range 0.08-5.00ng),[ADDRESS_126837]-injection, 
blood samples will be drawn in PaxGene RNA tubes, which preserv e RNA integrity. Expression of genes 
involved in proinflammatory pathways ( IL1B, IL6, IL8, CD83, CCL3, TNFAIP3 , and NF-κB/Rel family) will be 
assayed by [CONTACT_23133]-time RT-PCR using established TaqM an Gene Expression Assays. Genome-wide 
transcriptional profiling will be performed using Illumina HT-[ADDRESS_126838] depression (i.e., PHQ-9 ≥ 5), the project 
coordinator will conduct the SCID-5-RV over telephone. We have successfully conducted such a telephone 
follow-up in an ongoing depression prevention Study (R01AG02636 4, PI [INVESTIGATOR_113680]). Telephone administration of 
the SCID has been found acceptable and comparable to in-person administration.101,102 
C.2.8. Statistical Analyses  
All measured variables will be assessed for distributional qual ities and transformed if necessary for use 
in the selected statistical models. Adequacy of random assignme nt and matching will be tested using t-tests 
and chi-square tests as appropriate. All pre-classification var iables (age, BMI, insomnia, medical comorbidity, 
prior depression history) and baseline values of outcomes will be compared; those that are significantly 
different between females and males (at P<0.15) will be conside red for inclusion as covariates in the main 
analyses. Missing data patterns will be analyzed to assess the potential for biased parameter estimates; 
missing data will not be imputed as the methods selected allow for missing data under common missingness 
assumptions. The basic design for Aim 1 is a 2 group (females v s. males) by 2 condition (endotoxin vs. 
placebo) independent balanced analysis of variance (ANOVA) with  one or repeated outcome measures (times: 
Thr where hr = [ADDRESS_126839]-infusion; peak cytok ine concentration at T 212), conducted with 
linear mixed models (LMM). The number of repeated measures vari es by [INVESTIGATOR_13699]. The key results are the 
main effects of sex, condition, and their interaction; for thos e analyses with repeated measures, the two main 
effects and interaction will further interact with the time var iable. Other planned analyses include lagged (time 
series) relationships between cytokine outcomes and affect meas ures via general linear modeling (GLM). 
Standard pharmacokinetic parameters (e.g., AUC, C MAX, TMAX) may also be used to create summary cytokine 
and affect profile outcomes. Finally, covariates (i.e., pre-cla ssification variables such as prior depression 
history, insomnia, or baseline CRP) will be tested if appropria te (i.e., p<0.15) to assess the robustness of the 
results and further explicate the findings. Aim 1 is tested with LMM for the following outcomes (timepoints): 
POMS Depression, DACL, Social Disconnection (T 0, T1 – T12), Observer rated depression (T 0, T2,4,6,8,12), 
Cyberball Social Exclusion Task (T 2), Emotion Tasks (T 0, T2), Social Support Questionnaire (T 0, T2), Social 
Choice Task (T 0, T2), Reward Response (T 0, T2), Reward Learning (T 0, T2), and Reward Motivation (T 0, T2). 
The basic design for Aim 2 is identical to Aim 1 but using age as the group variable (you ng females vs. older 
females) instead of sex. Aim [ADDRESS_126840], will be  entered in the regression models in their 
longitudinal format, thus reflecting all the measurements perfo rmed during the study (T 0, T1 – T12). Exploratory  
Aim is tested using mixed-effects logistic regression, separately i n the endotoxin and placebo groups, because 
the outcome (depressive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]) is a binary variable repeated ly measured over 2 years. The predictor 
variables include the sum of POMS depression during 12 hours of  experimental session, Cyberball Social 
Exclusion Task (T 2), Emotion Tasks (T 2), Social Choice Task (T 2), and Reward Tasks (Response, Learning, 
Motivation, Sensitivity) (T 2). 
Finally, we will also evaluate the changes of gene expression i n response to endotoxin as a function of 
sex and age and evaluate a priori  whether changes in the inflammatory transcriptome are associat ed with 
affective response; these analyses will focus upon specialized genomic analyses (T 0, T2, T4), and utilize 
methods previously reported by [CONTACT_3019].54,103,[ADDRESS_126841] to GLM analysis to provide maximum likel ihood point estimates of differential transcript 
abundance across group (females vs. males; younger females vs. older females) and condition (endotoxin vs. 
placebo), which provide maximally replicable inputs into the hi gher-order set-based bioinformatics analyses. 
TELiS (Transcription Element Listening System www.telis.ucla.edu ) promoter-based bioinformatics analyses 
will test the hypothesis that PBMC will show alterations by [CONTACT_113707]-κB (assessed by 
[CONTACT_113708] V$NFKAPPAB65_01 nucleotide motif in differentially expressing promoters) and 
AP-1 (V$AP1FJ_Q2) in the female groups and the endotoxin condit ion. We will explore whether female sex, 
younger age, and endotoxin decrease activity of Type I interfer on signaling pathways (V$ISRE_01, 
V$IRF2_01); decrease activity of the anti-inflammatory glucocor ticoid receptor (GR) (V$GR_Q6); and increase 
activity of CREB transcription factors involved in β-adrenergic  signaling by [CONTACT_113709] 
(V$CREB_01). Both depression and inflammation are implicated in  the regulation of these pathways.105,[ADDRESS_126842] developed a c onserved transcriptional response to 
adversity (CTRA) that involves up-regulating pro-inflammatory g ene expression (e.g., cytokine genes) while 
conversely down-regulating anti-viral gene expression (e.g., in terferon response genes) whenever 
environmental conditions are experienced as threatening, stress ful, or uncertain for an extended period of 
time.107 The ratio of response element frequencies in the promoters of up- vs. down-regulated genes are 
assumed to be a measure of differential activity of transcripti on control pathways, and (log) ratios will be 
averaged over 9 different parametric combinations of promoter l ength (-300, -600, and -1000 to +200 bp 
upstream of RefSeq-designated transcription start site) and mot if detection stringency (TRANSFAC mat_sim 
values of .80, .90, and .95) to ensure robust results.[ADDRESS_126843] errors will be estimated by 2000 cycles of bootstrap r esampling of residual vectors from the linear 
models used to estimate differential gene expression across gro ups (sex and age) and condition (controlling 
for correlated expression across genes). 
C.2.9. Justification of Sample Size 
In our endotoxin study of younger adults, the effect of endotox in on depressed mood was large in 
females (d=0.70) while minimal in males (d=0.003).[ADDRESS_126844] between sexes. In our endotoxi n study of older females (K23AG049085, PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_113686]), as shown in C.1.1.3, the effect size of endotoxin on depr essed mood was still large but expectedly 
smaller (d=0.51) than in younger females. For Aim 1, based on t hese estimates, the assumed minimal effect 
size in older males (d=0.003), and the use of matching and mult ivariate regression analyses, with [ADDRESS_126845] a power > 80% (α=.05, two-tailed). For Aim 2, 
assessing differences between younger and older females, our pr evious work with several of the behavioral 
reward tasks has yielded moderate effect sizes when assessing t he relationship between increases in IL-6 and 
task performance (e.g., f2 = 0.22, 0.32). Given this range of effect sizes, a multiple re gression analysis with 
three predictors of interest (age, group, age x group interacti on) and two covariates (BMI, education level) 
would require a sample size of [ADDRESS_126846] motivation task with a sample of 29 participants (15 saline 
placebo, 14 endotoxin),92 and greater feelings of social disconnection following endotox in vs. placebo were 
observed in a small sample of women (n=20; age 18-36) in our pr evious study. Thus, the current study aims to 
recruit 40 premenopausal women with equal randomization between  the endotoxin and saline group, and an 
additional 40 females will be drawn from the parent study for a  total sample of 80. 
C.3. Interpretation of Results and Potential Concerns 
Endotoxin elicits sickness symptoms (e.g., nausea, achiness) th at will be assessed as potential 
covariates in statistical analyses. The battery of administered  tasks could lead to excessive fatigue and non-
compliance. This is not currently a concern in the parent study , but we will monitor participants’ subjective 
response to the tasks, as well as current fatigue, and assess t hese variables either as potential covariates or 
as indicators that the experimental session requires modificati on. While we do not anticipate strong emotional 
response to any of the tasks, there is the potential for carryo ver effects without task counterbalancing. 
However, since the order is the same for the experimental and t he control group, such effects should not 
impact the primary research questions assessing group differenc es.  
REFERENCES 
 
1. Blazer DG. Depression in late life: review and commentary. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 
2003;58(3):249-265. 
2. Depression Guideline Panel: Clinical Practice Guideline 5: D epression in Primary Care, vol 2: 
Treatment of Major Depression. In: US Department of Health and Human Services PHS, Agency for 
Health Care Policy and Research, ed. Rockville, MD.1993. 
3. Udina M, Castellvi P, Moreno-Espana J, et al. Interferon-ind uced depression in chronic hepatitis C: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Clin Psychiatry. 2012;73(8):1128-1138. 
4. Eisenberger NI, Inagaki TK, Mashal NM, Irwin MR. Inflammatio n and social experience: an 
inflammatory challenge induces feelings of social disconnection  in addition to depressed mood. Brain 
Behav Immun. 2010;24(4):558-563. 
5. Raison CL, Miller AH. Is depression an inflammatory disorder ? Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2011;13(6):467-
475. 
6. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_113689] M, Wilkinson G. G ender differences in depression.  The British Journal of Psychiatry. 
2000;177(6):486-492. 
7. Kuehner C. Gender differences in unipolar depression: an upd ate of epi[INVESTIGATOR_113690]. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2003;108(3):163-174. 
8. Inagaki TK, Muscatell KA, Irwin MR, Cole SW, Eisenberger NI.  Inflammation selectively enhances 
amygdala activity to soc ially threatening images. NeuroImage. 2012;59(4):3222-3226. 
9. Eisenberger NI, Inagaki TK, Mashal NM, Irwin MR. Inflammatio n and social experience: an 
inflammatory challenge induces feelings of social disconnection  in addition to depressed mood. Brain 
Behav Immun. 2010;24(4):558-563. 
10. Eisenberger NI, Berkman ET, Inagaki TK, Rameson LT, Mashal NM, Irwin MR. Inflammation-induced 
anhedonia: endotoxin reduces ventral striatum responses to rewa rd. Biol Psychiatry. 2010;68(8):748-
754. 
11. Eisenberger NI, Inagaki TK, Rameson LT, Mashal NM, Irwin MR . An fMRI study of cytokine-induced 
depressed mood and social pain: the role of sex differences. NeuroImage. 2009;47(3):881-890. 
12. Moieni M, Irwin MR, Jevtic I, Olmstead R, Breen EC, Eisenbe rger NI. Sex Differences in Depressive 
and Socioemotional Responses to an Inflammatory Challenge: Impl ications for Sex Differences in 
Depression. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2015. 
13. Inagaki TK, Muscatell KA, Irwin MR, et al. The role of the ventral striatum in inflammatory-induced 
approach toward support figures. Brain Behav Immun. 2015;44:247-252. 
14. Moieni M, Irwin MR, Jevtic I, Olmstead R, Breen EC, Eisenbe rger NI. Sex differences in depressive and 
socioemotional responses to an inflammatory challenge: implicat ions for sex differences in depression. 
Neuropsychopharmacology. 2015;40(7):1709-1716. 
15. Cho HJ, Eisenberger NI, Olmstead R, Breen EC, Irwin MR. Pre existing mild sleep disturbance as a 
vulnerability factor for inflammation-induced depressed mood: a  human experimental study. Transl 
Psychiatry. 2016;6(3):e750. 
16. Raison CL, Miller AH. Role of inflammation in depression: i mplications for phenomenology, 
pathophysiology and treatment. Mod Trends Pharmacopsychiatry. 2013;28:33-48. 
17. Dantzer R, O'Connor JC, Freund GG, Johnson RW, Kelley KW. F rom inflammation to sickness and 
depression: when the immune system subjugates the brain. Nature reviews. 2008;9(1):46-56. 
18. Lotrich FE. Inflammatory cytokine-associated depression. Brain research. 2015;1617:113-125. 
19. DellaGioia N, Hannestad J. A critical review of human endot oxin administration as an experimental 
paradigm of depression. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2010;34(1):130-143. 
20. Schedlowski M, Engler H, Gri goleit JS. Endotoxin-induced ex perimental systemic inflammation in 
humans: a model to disentangle immune-to-brain communication. Brain Behav Immun. 2014;35:1-8. 
21. Insel TR. The NIMH Research Domain Criteria (RDoC) Project:  precision medicine for psychiatry. Am J 
Psychiatry. 2014;171(4):395-397. 
22. Insel T, Cuthbert B, Garvey M, et al. Research domain crite ria (RDoC): toward a new classification 
framework for research on mental disorders. Am J Psychiatry. 2010;167(7):748-751. 
23. McNair DM, Lorr M, Droppleman LF. Manual for the Profile of Mood States.  San Diego: Educational 
and Industrial Testing Service; 1992. 
24. Montgomery SA, Asberg M. A new depression scale designed to  be sensitive to change. The British 
journal of psychiatry. 1979;134(4):382-389. 
25. Hannestad J, DellaGioia N, Ortiz N, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2289] B, Bhagwagar Z.  Citalopram reduces endotoxin-induced 
fatigue. Brain Behav Immun. 2011;25(2):256-259. 
26. Yang Y, Kozloski M. Sex Differ ences in Age Trajectories of Physiological Dysregulation: Inflammation, 
Metabolic Syndrome, and Allostatic Load. The Journals of Gerontology: Series A. 2011;66A(5):493-
500. 
27. Whitacre CC. Sex differences in autoimmune disease. Nat Immunol. 2001;2(9):777-780. 
28. Bebbington PE, Dunn G, Jenkins R, et al. The influence of a ge and sex on the prevalence of 
depressive conditions: report from the National Survey of Psych iatric Morbidity. Psychol Med. 
1998;28(01):9-19. 
29. Pedersen CB, Mors O, Bertelsen A, et al. A comprehensive na tionwide study of the incidence rate and 
lifetime risk for treated mental disorders. JAMA Psychiatry. 2014;71(5):573-581. 
30. Pardue M-L, Wizemann TM. Exploring the biological contributions to human health: does sex matter?  : 
National Academies Press; 2001. 
31. Geddes MR, Mattfeld AT, de los Angeles C, Keshavan A, Gabri eli JD. Human aging reduces the 
neurobehavioral influence of motivation on epi[INVESTIGATOR_10682]. NeuroImage. 2018;171:296-310. 
32. Covinsky KE, Cenzer IS, Yaffe  K, O'Brien S, Blazer DG. Dysp horia and anhedonia as risk factors for 
disability or death in older persons: implications for the asse ssment of geriatric depression. The 
American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 2014;22(6):606-613. 
33. Nutt D, Demyttenaere K, Janka Z, et al. The other face of d epression, reduced positive affect: the role 
of catecholamines in causation and cure. Journal of Psychopharmacology. 2007;21(5):461-471. 
34. Craske MG, Meuret AE, Ritz T, Treanor M, Dour HJ. Treatment  for anhedonia: a neuroscience driven 
approach. Depression and anxiety. 2016;33(10):927-938. 
35. Aschbacher K, Epel E, Wolkowitz OM, Prather AA, Puterman E,  Dhabhar FS. Maintenance of a positive 
outlook during acute stress protects against pro-inflammatory r eactivity and future depressive 
symptoms. Brain Behav Immun. 2012;26(2):346-352. 
36. Slavich GM, Irwin MR. From stress to inflammation and major  depressive disorder: a social signal 
transduction theory of depression. Psychol Bull. 2014;140(3):774-815. 
37. Pasco JA, Nicholson GC, Williams LJ, et al. Association of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein with de 
novo major depression. Br J Psychiatry. 2010;197(5):372-377. 
38. Stringaris A, Vidal-Ribas Belil P, Artiges E, et al. The Br ain's Response to Reward Anticipation and 
Depression in Adolescence: Dim ensionality, Specificity, and Lon gitudinal Predictions in a Community-
Based Sample. Am J Psychiatry. 2015;172(12):1215-1223. 
39. Nelson BD, Perlman G, Klein DN, Kotov R, Hajcak G. Blunted Neural Response to Rewards as a 
Prospective Predictor of the Development of Depression in Adole scent Girls. Am J Psychiatry. 
2016;173(12):1223-1230. 
40. Bouhuys AL, Geerts E, Gordijn MC. Depressed patients' perce ptions of facial emotions in depressed 
and remitted states are associated with relapse: a longitudinal  study. J Nerv Ment Dis. 
1999;187(10):595-602. 
41. Andreasen AS, Krabbe KS, Krogh-Madsen R, Taudorf S, Pederse n BK, Moller K. Human endotoxemia 
as a model of systemic inflammation. Curr Med Chem. 2008;15(17):1697-1705. 
42. Grigoleit JS, Kullmann JS, Wolf OT, et al. Dose-dependent e ffects of endotoxin on neurobehavioral 
functions in humans. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28330. 
43. Asnis GM, De La Garza R, 2nd. Interferon-induced depression  in chronic hepatitis C: a review of its 
prevalence, risk factors, biology, and treatment approaches. J Clin Gastroenterol. 2006;40(4):322-335. 
44. Harrison NA, Brydon L, Walker C, Gray MA, Steptoe A, Critch ley HD. Inflammation causes mood 
changes through alterations in subgenual cingulate activity and  mesolimbic connectivity. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2009;66(5):407-414. 
45. Harrison NA, Brydon L, Walker C, et al. Neural origins of h uman sickness in interoceptive responses to 
inflammation. Biol Psychiatry. 2009;66(5):415-422. 
46. Kullmann JS, Grigoleit JS, Wolf OT, et al. Experimental hum an endotoxemia enhances brain activity 
during social cognition. Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci. 2014;9(6):786-793. 
47. Eisenberger NI. Social pain and the brain: controversies, q uestions, and where to go from here. Annu 
Rev Psychol. 2015;66:601-629. 
48. Stuhrmann A, Suslow T, Dannlowski U. Facial emotion process ing in major depression: a systematic 
review of neuroimaging findings. Biol Mood Anxiety Disord. 2011;1(1):10. 
49. Bourke C, Douglas K, Porter R. Processing of facial emotion  expression in major depression: a review. 
Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 2010;44(8):681-696. 
50. Whitton AE, Treadway MT, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_96095]. Reward processing d ysfunction in major depression, bipolar 
disorder and schizophrenia. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2015;28(1):7-12. 
51. Vrieze E, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_96095], Demyttenaere K, et al. Reduced rew ard learning predicts outcome in major 
depressive disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2013;73(7):639-645. 
52. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_96095], Iosifescu D, Hallett LA, Ratner KG, Fava M. Reduced hedonic capacity in major 
depressive disorder: evidence from a probabilistic reward task.  J Psychiatr Res. 2008;43(1):76-87. 
53. Kiecolt-Glaser JK, Derry HM, Fagundes CP. Inflammation: dep ression fans the flames and feasts on 
the heat. Am J Psychiatry. 2015;172(11):1075-1091. 
54. Irwin MR, Wang M, Campomayor  CO, Collado-Hidalgo A, Cole S.  Sleep deprivation and activation of 
morning levels of cellular and genomic markers of inflammation.  Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(16):1756-
1762. 
55. Irwin MR, Wang M, Ribeiro D, et al. Sleep loss activates ce llular inflammatory signaling. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2008;64(6):538-540. 
56. Irwin MR, Witarama T, Caud ill M, Olmstead R, Breen EC. Slee p loss activates cellular inflammation 
and signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT) fam ily proteins in humans. Brain Behav 
Immun. 2014. 
57. Krabbe KS, Bruunsgaard H, Hansen CM, et al. Ageing is assoc iated with a prolonged fever response in 
human endotoxemia. Clin Diagn Lab Immunol. 2001;8(2):333-338. 
58. Krabbe KS, Bruunsgaard H, Qvist J, et al. Hypotension durin g endotoxemia in aged humans. Eur J 
Anaesthesiol. 2001;18(9):572-575. 
59. Treadway MT, Buckholtz JW, S chwartzman AN, Lambert WE, Zald  DH. Worth the ‘EEfRT’? The effort 
expenditure for rewards task as an objective measure of motivat ion and anhedonia. PloS one. 
2009;4(8):e6598. 
60. Wardle MC, de Wit H. MDMA alters emotional processing and f acilitates positive social interaction. 
Psychopharmacology. 2014;231(21):4219-4229. 
61. Kirkpatrick MG, Lee R, Wardle MC, Jacob S, De Wit H. Effect s of MDMA and Intranasal Oxytocin on 
Social and Emotional Processing. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2014;39(7):1654-1663. 
62. van der Helm E, Gujar N, Walker MP. Sleep deprivation impai rs the accurate recognition of human 
emotions. Sleep. 2010;33(3):335-342. 
63. Miyake A, Friedman NP, Emers on MJ, Witzki AH, Howerter A, W ager TD. The unity and diversity of 
executive functions and their contributions to complex “frontal  lobe” tasks: A latent variable analysis. 
Cognitive psychology. 2000;41(1):49-100. 
64. Eisenberger NI, Lieberman MD. Why rejection hurts: a common  neural alarm system for physical and 
social pain. Trends Cogn Sci. 2004;8(7):294-300. 
65. Reichenberg A, Yirmiya R, Schuld A, et al. Cytokine-associa ted emotional and cognitive disturbances 
in humans. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2001;58(5):445-452. 
66. Brinton RD, Yao J, Yin F, Mack WJ, Cadenas E. Perimenopause  as a neurological transition state. 
Nature reviews endocrinology. 2015;11(7):393. 
67. Bollen J, Trick L, Llewellyn D, Dickens C. The effects of a cute inflammation on cognitive functioning 
and emotional processing in humans: a systematic review of expe rimental studies. J Psychosom Res. 
2017;94:47-55. 
68. Suffredini AF, Hochstein HD, McMahon FG. Dose-related infla mmatory effects of intravenous endotoxin 
in humans: evaluation of a new clinical lot of Escherichia coli  O:[ADDRESS_126847] Dis. 
1999;179(5):1278-1282. 
69. Morin C, Cholecchi C, Stone J, Sood R, Brink D. Behavioral and pharmacological therapi[INVESTIGATOR_57399]-life 
insomnia: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 1999;281:991-999. 
70. Beck AT, Steer RA, Ball R, Ranieri W. Comparison of Beck De pression Inventories -IA and -II in 
psychiatric outpatients. Journal of Personality Assessment. 1996;67:588-597. 
71. Trivedi MH, Rush AJ, Ibrahim HM, et al. The Inventory of De pressive Symptomatology, Clinician Rating 
(IDS-C) and Self-Report (IDS-SR), and the Quick Inventory of De pressive Symptomatology, Clinician 
Rating (QIDS-C) and Self-Report (QIDS-SR) in public sector pati ents with mood disorders: a 
psychometric evaluation. Psychol Med. 2004;34(1):73-82. 
72. Watson D, Clark LA, Tellegen A. Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative 
affect: the PANAS scales. J Pers Soc Psychol. 1988;54(6):1063-1070. 
73. Hasler BP, Germain A, Nofzinger EA, et al. Chronotype and d iurnal patterns of positive affect and 
affective neural circuitry in primary insomnia. J Sleep Res. 2012;21(5):515-526. 
74. Boivin DB, Czeisler CA, Dijk DJ, et al. Complex interaction  of the sleep-wake cycle and circadian phase 
modulates mood in healthy subjects. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 1997;54(2):145-152. 
75. O'Connor MF, Bower JE, Cho HJ, et al. To assess, to control , to exclude: effects of biobehavioral 
factors on circulating inflammatory markers. Brain Behav Immun. 2009;23(7):887-897. 
76. Godin G, Shephard RJ. A simple method to assess exercise be havior in the community. Can J Appl 
Sport Sci. 1985;10(3):141-146. 
77. Charlson ME, Pompei P, Ales KL, MacKenzie CR. A new method of classifying prognostic comorbidity 
in longitudinal studies: development and validation. J Chronic Dis. 1987;40(5):373-383. 
78. McHorney Ca. Measuring and monitoring general health status  in elderly persons:  practical and 
methodological issues in using the SF-[ADDRESS_126848]. 1996;36:571-583. 
79. McHorney CA, Ware JE, Jr., Lu JF, Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36 -item Short-Form Health Survey (SF-
36): III. Tests of data quality, scaling assumptions, and relia bility across diverse patient groups. Med 
Care. 1994;32(1):40-66. 
80. McHorney CA, Ware JE, Jr., Raczek AE. The MOS 36-Item Short -Form Health Survey (SF-36): II. 
Psychometric and clinical tests of validity in measuring physic al and mental health constructs. Med 
Care. 1993;31(3):247-263. 
81. Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of perc eived stress. J Health Soc Behav. 
1983;24(4):385-396. 
82. Russell D, Peplau LA, Cutrona CE. The revised UCLA Loneline ss Scale: concurrent and discriminant 
validity evidence. J Pers Soc Psychol. 1980;39(3):472-480. 
83. Brookings JB, Bolton B. Confirmatory factor analysis of the  Interpersonal Support Evaluation List. Am J 
Community Psychol. 1988;16(1):137-147. 
84. Sarason IG, Levine HM, Basham RB. Assessing social support:  The Social Support Questionnaire. J 
Personality Soc Psychol. 1983;44:127-139. 
85. Williams JBW. A structured interview guide for the Hamilton  Depression Rating Scale. Archives of 
General Psychiatry. 1988;45:742-747. 
86. Victor C, Scambler S, Bond J, Bowling A. Being alone in lat er life: loneliness, social isolation and living 
alone. Reviews in Clinical Gerontology. 2000;10(4):407-417. 
87. Heinrich LM, Gullone E. The clinical significance of loneli ness: a literature review. Clin Psychol Rev. 
2006;26(6):695-718. 
88. Kelley KW, Bluthe RM, Dantzer R, et al. Cytokine-induced si ckness behavior. Brain Behav Immun. 
2003;[ADDRESS_126849] 1:S112-118. 
89. Williams KD, Cheung CK, Choi W. Cyberostracism: effects of being ignored over the Internet. J Pers 
Soc Psychol. 2000;79(5):748-762. 
90. Dodich A, Cerami C, Canessa N, et al. Emotion recognition f rom facial expressions: a normative study 
of the Ekman 60-Faces Test in the Italian population. Neurol Sci. 2014;35(7):1015-1021. 
91. MaRRoquíN B, Nolen-Hoeksema S. Event prediction and affecti ve forecasting in depressive cognition: 
Using emotion as information about the future. Journal of social and clinical psychology. 
2015;34(2):117-134. 
92. Draper A, Koch RM, van der Meer JW, et al. Effort but not r eward sensitivity is altered by [CONTACT_113710]. Neuropsychopharmacology. 
2018;43(5):1107. 
93. Lasselin J, Treadway MT, Lacourt TE, et al. Lipopolysacchar ide Alters Motivated Behavior in a 
Monetary Reward Task: a Randomized Trial. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2016. 
94. Weischer M, Nordestgaard BG, Cawthon RM, Freiberg JJ, Tybja erg-Hansen A, Bojesen SE. Short 
telomere length, cancer survival, and cancer risk in [ADDRESS_126850]. 
2013;105(7):459-468. 
95. Pollak SD, Kistler DJ. Early experience is associated with the development of categorical 
representations for facial expressions of emotion. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 
2002;99(13):9072-9076. 
96. Mathews A, MacLeod C. Cognitive vulnerability to emotional disorders. Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 
2005;1:167-195. 
97. Epstein MM, Breen EC, Magpantay L, et al. Temporal stabilit y of serum concentrations of cytokines and 
soluble receptors measured across two years in low-risk HIV-ser onegative men. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_88657]. 2013;22(11):2009-2015. 
98. Breen EC, Perez C, Olmstead R, Eisenberge N, Irwin MR. Comp arison of multiplex immunoassays and 
ELISAs for the determination of circulating levels of inflammat ory cytokines. Brain Behav Immun. 
2014;40S:e39. 
99. Black DS, Irwin MR, Olmstead R, Ji E, Crabb Breen E, Motiva la SJ. Tai chi meditation effects on 
nuclear factor-kappaB signaling in lonely older adults: a rando mized controlled trial. Psychother 
Psychosom. 2014;83(5):315-317. 
100. Irwin MR, Carrillo C, Olmst ead R. Sleep loss activates cel lular markers of inflammation: sex 
differences. Brain Behav Immun. 2010;24(1):54-57. 
101. Crippa JAS, De Lima Osório F, Del-Ben CM, Filho AS, Da Sil va Freitas MC, Loureiro SR. Comparability 
Between Telephone and Face-to-Face Structured Clinical Intervie w for DSM–IV in Assessing Social 
Anxiety Disorder. Perspectives in Psychiatric Care. 2008;44(4):241-247. 
102. Allen K, Cull A, Sharpe M. Diagnosing major depression in medical outpatients: acceptability of 
telephone interviews. J Psychosom Res. 2003;55(4):385-387. 
103. Irwin MR, Olmstead R, Breen EC, et al. Cognitive behaviora l therapy and tai chi reverse cellular and 
genomic markers of inflammation in late-life insomnia: a random ized controlled trial. Biol Psychiatry. 
2015;78(10):721-729. 
104. Irwin M, Olmstead R, Breen E, et al. Tai Chi, cellular inf lammation, and transcriptome dynamics in 
breast cancer survivors with insomnia:  a randomized controlled  trial. . J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014;50:295-
301. 
105. Sheppard K-A, Phelps KM, Williams AJ, et al. Nuclear Integ ration of Glucocorticoid Receptor and 
Nuclear Factor-κB Signaling by [CONTACT_113711]-binding Protein and Steroid  Receptor Coactivator-1. Journal of 
Biological Chemistry. 1998;273(45):[ZIP_CODE]-[ZIP_CODE]. 
106. Blendy JA. The role of CREB in depression and antidepressa nt treatment. Biol Psychiatry. 
2006;59(12):1144-1150. 
107. Cole SW. Social regulation of human gene expression: mecha nisms and implications for public health. 
Am J Public Health. 2013;[ADDRESS_126851] 1:S84-92. 
108. Miller GE, Chen E, Sze J, et al. A functional genomic fing erprint of chronic stress in humans: blunted 
glucocorticoid and increased NF-kappaB signaling. Biol Psychiatry. 2008;64(4):266-272. 
109. Cole SW, Hawkley LC, Arevalo JM, Cacioppo JT. Transcript o rigin analysis identifies antigen-
presenting cells as primary targets of socially regulated gene expression in leukocytes. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A. 2011;108(7):3080-3085. 
 