   
 PI: [INVESTIGATOR_44002]: Mindful After Cancer Study  
 IRB # 2019- 003 
 
  
Protocol Title  
Mindful After Cancer Study: Fostering positive body image, sexual health, and well -being  
Principal Investigator  
[INVESTIGATOR_44003] R. Gorman, PhD, MPH  
Sponsor  
Oregon Health and Sciences University  
Knight Community Partnership Program  
 
Version date: 08/17/2020 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page [ADDRESS_46085] to Participants  ............................................................................................................................... 7 
8.0 Recruitment Process  ............................................................................................................................. 7 
9.0 Screening and Consent process  ............................................................................................................ 8 
10.0 Compensation  ...................................................................................................................................... 8 
11.0 Data Management  ............................................................................................................................... 9 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
    
Page 4 of 10 
 1.0 Study Objectives  
The study aims are to: 1) Assess the feasibility of the MAC program when delivered via 
videoconference and 2) Assess preliminary effects of the program. The long- term goal is to 
establish a strategy for program sustainability, and to improve quality of life for breast/gynecologic cancer survivors in Oregon.  
2.[ADDRESS_46086] stemmed from the unmet sexual health -related needs and 
concerns  expressed by [CONTACT_44007], which resulted in a partnership 
between OSU and Samaritan Cancer Resource Center to begin filling this gap. Our community’s 
concerns were not surprising given that the sexual health consequences of cancer a re among the 
most common and distressing aspects of survivorship. All participants in our prior pi[INVESTIGATOR_44004] s and dysfunction. Overall, at least half of 
breast and gynecologic cancer survivors experience sexual health difficulties. Concerns extend 
beyond the capacity to have sexual intercourse, and encompass physical, psychological, and 
social aspects related to  physical discomfort, low desire, mood, body image, and worries about 
partners’ satisfaction. Tools such as lubrication and dilators can help with physical challenges, but the emotional and social aspects are equally critical, and all aspects are addressed  in this 
program. Importantly, when sexual health concerns are left unaddressed, there is a negative 
impact on partner relationships and quality of life well after cancer treatment ends.  
 
In the earlier phase of this study, we made initial adaptations to an evidence -based intervention 
based on cancer survivor and stakeholder feedback. There is evidence that the prior version of 
the intervention (MIND) improves sexual function among women in the general population, and 
we made adaptations to the content to meet the needs of women who had survived cancer. We 
conducted interviews with the target audience to understand their characteristics, experiences, 
attitudes, needs, and potential facilitators and barriers to their participation in the intervention. As 
part of the iterative adaptation process, following the ADAPT -ITT model, we pre -tested the 
newly adapted intervention with a group of female cancer survivors. Data from this first phase of research provided evidence for feasibility and acceptability, as well evidence of the intervention's 
capacity to improve sexual and psychosocial health outcomes for female cancer survivors. This process also resulted in adaptations to make the program easier for the facilitator to deliver and 
participant materials tailored to the needs and concerns of cancer survivors. Results pointed 
toward the potential of a videoconference -based  delivery mechanism to help overcome barriers 
associated with time/travel, privacy concerns, and preference for receiving the  intervention in 
home or community settings  (vs. a cancer care setting). The current phase of research will build 
on this prior work to further optimize the intervention for breast and gynecologic cancer 
survivors and to increase the reach of this intervention to survivors across Oregon. This work has 
occurred in consultation with the original developer of the materials . 
 
3.[ADDRESS_46087] copy of all participant materials, which include home activities and educational materials. Each week, we will provide them with an audio -recorded 
medi tation to use at home. 
 At the end of each session, the facilitator will remind participants that they can reach out to her between sessions if needed, and how to reach her (e.g., email, phone). She will also remind participants of the online and telephone -based resources availab le to them should they need extra 
support between sessions. Participants who are experiencing difficulty will be encouraged to seek support via professional counseling/therapy and/or a support group. Participants will be asked to complete weekly tasks (e.g., guided meditation, homework activities) as part of the invention. Data from these tasks will not be analyzed for purposes of this study.  All participants will receive a Qualtrics link after enrolled, and prior to the start of the intervention, so that they can complete a n online baseline survey . They will receive a second link 
to complete a n onl ine survey 1- month after the intervention ends. Surveys will evaluate 
acceptability, credibility, and changes in sexual function, psychosocial health, relationship outcomes, well -being, and sex- related distress .  
 To evaluate quantitative data, we will use a dependent groups t -test or Wilcoxon test to compare  
mean/median scale scores (pre-  and post -test) for each outcome assessed. Our focus for this 
study is on the feasibility and acceptability of the intervention, and implementation using a videoconference format. With the small sample size, we do not anticipa te having sufficient 
power to detect pre -post changes in outcomes.  
 Sampling strategy  for qualita tive interviews : We will use purposeful sampling to select [ADDRESS_46088] this strategy to yield representativeness and diversity in the sample, and to improve documentation of the potential variations and common patterns (e.g., needs, preferences) that cut across cases.  
 This will allow us to gain valuable knowledge about participants’ experiences with the intervention, in behavior, facilitators of change, barriers to change, additional intervention modifications, and the context and meaning for any perceived changes in sexual function, psychosocial health, relationship outcomes and other outcomes of interest. Eliciting t he 
experiences of participants through in- depth post -intervention interviews will improve our 
understanding of how the intervention works.  
Page [ADDRESS_46089] -intervention interviews and will use cross -case, inductive analysis to 
analyze responses and identify themes and patterns in the qualitative data. To enrich our 
understanding of the program’s impact, we will consider quantitative results within the context of qualitative findings. 
 
Participant intervention sessions will be audio recorded for review and assessment of fidelity of  
intervention delivery. This is required for participation. Post -program qualitative interviews will 
be audio recorded for later transcription to ensure the collection of accurate interview data.  
 
In all cases, participants must agree to audio -recording in order to participate. They may choose 
not to answer any of the questions. They may choose to end the interview or leave an intervention session at any time. Audio recording is necessary for the collection of accurate interview data and for the assessment of fidelity (delivery of the intervention as outlined in the protocol). In the case that a participant initially agrees to audio recording an interview and requests that the recording is stopped be fore completing the entire interview, the interview will 
be terminated but the interview data to that point will be included in the study. 
4.[ADDRESS_46090]/gynecologic cancer survivors| This group experiences a direct,  
negative impact on their reproductive systems, leading to concerns about body image and  
sexual function. We focus on females because their sexual concerns are distinct from and  
more poorly addressed than males’ concerns.  
 
Diagnosis [ADDRESS_46091] access to a computer, smart phone, or tablet with internet access . This is  required for those 
who to be eligible to participate in the program.  Ability to spend 15- 30 minutes daily on program activities | This was determined to 
be feasible in the first phase of research, and will be sufficient to complete required intervention activities.  
  4.2 Exclusion Criteria  
Cancer stage: Stage 0 cancer (carcinoma in situ) is excluded.  
5.[ADDRESS_46092]  of the discussion that they are uncomfortable with. Participants may ask for the recording 
to be  stopped at any time. If during an interview a participant appears particularly uncomfortable 
or stressed, the interviewer will remind the participant that she/he does not have to answer the  
question. For  all surveys, participants may choose not to answer any question. 
 During the intervention, participants may choose not to engage or participate in any aspect of the  
program (e.g., activity, discussion), may leave a session early, and may choose not to attend sessions.  Because of the sensitive subject matter, we will provide a listing of “Helpful 
Resources” to all cancer  survivor participants as part of the informed consent procedure.  
6.[ADDRESS_46093] to participants, aside from time, telephone use, and  
Internet use.  
8.0 Recruitment Process  
 We will invite participants via social media and community -based outreach via community 
partners across Oregon. We will invite  community partners (e.g., non- profit organizations, 
clinics, social  services, advocacy organizations) to post flyers describing our project. Interested 
individuals will be asked t o contact [CONTACT_44008].  
  
Page 8 of 10 
 9.0 Screening and Consent process  
Study staff will describe the study to potential participants over the telephone, and will clearly 
present the eligibility criteria to potential participants and then ask if they are still interested in 
participating. After obtaining written informed consent to participate, study staff will con firm 
eligibility criteria and schedule interviews and other study activities.  We will retain de -identified 
screening data for all potential participants so that we can report the number of screened, 
eligible, and enrolled participants by [CONTACT_44009].  
Cancer survivors who are recruited to participate in the 8- week program will be  required to 
review and sign the written consent form prior to completing any study activities (e.g., surveys or 
program meetings). A copy of the signed informed consent will be provided to study participants. Consent forms will be reviewed over the telephone. Each participant will be mailed or emailed the consent form for their signature [CONTACT_44017]. 
 
Those with diminished capacity to consent will not be enrolled. The capacity to consent is initially  judged by [CONTACT_44010]’s ability to 
understand the  research process as demonstrated during the initial description of the study and 
their ability to  engage in the informed consent discussion. Those with limited ability to engage in 
the informed consent discussion or limited comprehension of the study requirements will not be 
enrolled. To assist in determining comprehension, interviewers will ask, “What questions can I 
answer for  you?”  
 
Participants will be asked in the consent form if they are willing to be contact[CONTACT_44011]. They can answer yes or no. Participants may also request that we stop 
contact[CONTACT_44012].  Participants will not be contact[CONTACT_44013]. 
 The consent form will notify participants that we will keep de -identified data from the study  
indefinitely. Data will be stored electronically without any personal identifying information and 
will only be accessible to study personnel. Keepi[INVESTIGATOR_44005]. The consent form includes information about how to withdraw from the study, and how 
to withdraw study data.  
10.0 Compensation  
Aim 1. Intervention Assessments  
Participants in the intervention will receive $20 upon completion of the pre -program survey and 
$[ADDRESS_46094] -program survey.  
 
A sub -group of 10 intervention participants will receive $30 for participating in a follow -up 
qualitative  telephone interview.  
 
Page 9 of 10 
 11.0 Data Management  
All participants will be assigned a study -specific identifier. An electronic database file linking a  
participant to her/his study identifier will be maintained in a password -protected database that 
can be accessed only by [CONTACT_44014]. Personal identifiers will be stored 
securely by  [CONTACT_44015]. 
 
Potential risks related to the loss of confidentiality will be handled by [CONTACT_44016]- recordings, electronic files, and paper files to designated study personnel. All project data  
(digital, audio, paper) will be maintained at OSU in locked file cabinets and/or on a password  
protected computer with fully patched operating systems and applications and current antivirus  
software with current virus definitions in the locked offices of the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_44006]. Data will be stored for a minimum of three years after study termination. A plan for routine  back -ups is in place.  
 In written reports and publications, including information shared funders , personal information 
and identifiers will not be linked to the data. For example, publications may include direct quotes but will only attach a general description of the  participant to the quote, such as “breast cancer 
survivor.” We will not use participant names or other  information that could identify them 
personally in reports and publications. 
 
A link between study code numbers and direct identifiers will be retained until analyses are  
complete, and results have been disseminated via publications and reports. This will allow us to  
verify details if needed (e.g., if there is a discrepancy or missing data). Audio recordings will be retained until all analyses are completed, and results have been disseminated via publications and 
reports. This will  allow us to verify details from  the original data source when creating these 
reports as needed.  
 
11.1 Data Security  
Qualtrics automatically collects IP addresses for survey participants. The survey settings will be  
adjusted to eliminate collection of IP addresses.  Qualtrics will generate personal links to surveys. 
Study staff will send the link to each individual  participant’s email. Participant emails will not be 
shared with Qualtrics. Data are stored separately  from personal identifiers.  
 We will deliver the program remotely, via videoconference. We will audio record  
program sessions to monitor adherence to the curriculum. We will select the box to audio- record  
sessions. We will save a copy for our research purposes  only. 
 
We will follow best practices to maintain security during videoconference meetings. This  
includes locking the room before the meeting, checking names before allowing 
attendees to join, restricting access once all attendees have joined, using a complex password for  
every meeting, confirming attendance with first name [CONTACT_44018], and using password protection for  
audio recordings of the meetings.  
11.[ADDRESS_46095] two members of the team will develop the codebook and  complete initial coding. Once the team fin alizes the codebook, team members will 
independently code each interview . Constant comparison me thod will ensure coding consistency. 
Code s will be grouped into broader thematic categor ies that describe patterns in the data related 
to feasibility . The team will meet frequently to discuss results and employ mem o taking to 
remai n reflexive. 
 
 