Date:    09/20/2021  
Version Number:        12       
Principal Investigator:    [INVESTIGATOR_140356], PhD   
Application Number:   2012262   
Application Title:   The Impact of CBT for Insomnia on Alcohol Treatment Outcomes among Veterans (Project 
SAVE)  
Protocol  
  
• Use the section headings to write the Protocol, inserting the appropriate material in each. If a 
section is not applicable, leave heading in and insert N/A.  
• When submitting Protocol (new or revised), enter the date and version number to the field at the 
top of Protocol.  
 
**********************************************************************************  
1. Abstract  
Alcohol use disorders (AUDs) are p revalent among Veterans and result in significant physical and 
psychological burden. Among those who receive treatment for AUDs, 1 in 3 relapses to problematic drinking 
within one year of treatment. Thus, additional strategies are needed to enhance alcohol  treatment outcomes. One 
promising approach involves providing concurrent treatment for a common complaint – difficulty falling or 
staying asleep. Up to 74% of Veterans seeking treatment for AUD report co -occurring symptoms of insomnia. 
Given the negative impact of insomnia on attention and emotion regulation, insomnia symptoms may decrease 
patients’ abilities to attend to alcohol treatment and manage negative emotions that lead to craving and relapse. 
Moreover, approximately 50% of individuals with AUDs re port using alcohol to help them sleep, making 
relapse more likely for those with no other tools or skills to help them sleep. Indeed, sleep disturbance has been 
identified as a risk factor for relapse among individuals in alcohol treatment. Thus, effective  treatment of sleep 
problems may enhance alcohol treatment. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia (CBT -I) has been 
effective in reducing insomnia severity in individuals with AUDs; however, no investigations have examined 
the efficacy of CBT -I delivere d concurrently with AUD treatment to determine its impact on treatment 
outcomes. This R21 aims to examine the feasibility, acceptability, and initial efficacy of a CBT -I supplement to 
outpatient alcohol treatment. A randomized pi[INVESTIGATOR_124250] 80 Veterans who meet diagnostic criteria for AUD 
and Insomnia Disorder will be conducted. Participants will be randomly assigned to receive Cognitive 
Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia ( CBT -I) or minimal treatment ( sleep hygiene  handout only; SH) in addition to 
alcohol tr eatment as usual. Outcomes will be assessed at the end of the active intervention period (6 weeks) and 
[ADDRESS_159489] include recruitment/retention rates, treatment satisfaction, 
insomnia severity, use of alcohol as a sleep aid, percentage of heavy -drinking days, and alcohol -related 
problems . Anal yses will focus on size of treatment effects. This study will provide initial evidence that 
treatment of insomnia not only improves sleep but also allows participants to derive greater benefit from 
outpatient alcohol treatment.  
 
2. Objectives (include all primary and secondary objectives)  
(1) To test  the feasibility and acceptability of a CBT -I supplement to outpatient alcohol treatment.  
(2) To evaluate the initial efficacy of the CBT -I supplement on alcohol use outcomes.  
 
3. Background  
Up to 74% of Veterans seeking treatment for alcohol use disorder (AUD ) report symptoms of insomnia.1,[ADDRESS_159490] (1), approximately 
50% of individuals with alcohol use disorders report using alcohol to help them sleep;3-[ADDRESS_159491] also been 
associated with significant deficits in (2) attentio n/working memory6,7 and (3) emotion regulation.8-11 Because 
cognitive -behavioral alcohol therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] (CBT) capi[INVESTIGATOR_140357] s’ use of these abilities to identify and 
adapt to the stimuli that lead to alcohol use, CBT -based treatments may have limited effectiveness for patients 
with insomnia. This combination of factors – continued insomnia and limited cognitive/emotional capaci ty to 
respond to treatment – may explain in part why insomnia symptoms precipi[INVESTIGATOR_140358]12 among the 1 in 3 
individuals who relapse to problematic drinking within one year of alcohol treatment.13,14 
 
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT -I) is the first line of treatment for insomnia. It has been associated with 
moderate to large improvements in insomnia outcomes, with effects maintained 24 months after treatment.15 It 
has been effective  in reducing insomnia severity and sleep complaints among U.S. military Veterans, including 
those with comorbid PTSD and depression.16-18 It has also been effective in reducing sy mptoms of insomnia – 
but not subsequent rates of relapse – among alcohol dependent individuals with 1+ months of sobriety.19-[ADDRESS_159492] ively engaged in alcohol 
treatment . Improving sleep is expected to enhance the efficacy of alcohol treatment among Veterans by 
[CONTACT_140380], regulate their emotions, and initiate sleep without alcohol.  
 
Consistent with P A-18-202, the proposed R21 aims to examine the feasibility, acceptability, and initial efficacy 
of a CBT -I supplement to outpatient alcohol treatment. The primary objective  of this study is to enhance 
alcohol treatment to account for the unique needs of Ve terans with sleep disorders. We propose a 6-week 
randomized trial, in which 80 Veterans  will be randomly assigned to receive Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for 
Insomnia ( CBT -I) or minimal treatment ( sleep hygiene  only; SH) in addition to treatme nt as usual. Individuals 
participating in the Addictions Treatment Program at the Truman VA will be eligible to participate if they meet 
DSM -5 criteria for AUD and the epi[INVESTIGATOR_140359] (≥1mo) for Insomnia Disorder. Participants will complete 
assessments at baseline, post -treatment, and 6 -week follow -up. We propose the following specific aims:  
 
Aim 1:  To test the feasibility and acceptability of CBT -I delivered concurrently with alcohol 
treatment. Recruitment (anticipated enrollment of at least 2 Veterans  per month) and retention rates (goal 
≥70% complete 6/6 treatment sessions) will indicate feasibility of the intervention. Treatment satisfaction 
(average score ≥ 3, indicating ‘mostly satisfied’) will serve as an indicator of acceptability. Retention and 
satisfaction will be measured separately for insomnia and alcohol treatments.  
 
Aim 2:  To evaluate the initial efficacy of CBT -I on insomnia and alcohol use outcomes. We 
hypothesize that Veterans receiving CBT -I will demonstrate greater improvements in ins omnia severity, 
sleep efficiency , use of alcohol as a sleep aid, percentage of heavy -drinking days, and alcohol -related 
problems post -treatment and at 6 -week follow -up.  
 
Aim 3 (exploratory):  To e xamine proximal intervention outcomes. We hypothesize that Veterans 
receiving CBT -I will demonstrate greater post -treatment improvements in attention (vigilance), working 
memory, treatment -related learning, negative affect, and emotion regulation.  
 
4. Study Procedures  
This study will examine the feasibility, acceptability, and initial efficacy of Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for 
Insomnia (CBT -I) delivered concurrently with CBT for AUD using a randomized, parallel, two -group design 
(see Figure 1). Eighty Veterans will be randomly assigned to either CBT -I or a sleep hygiene  education control 
(SH). All outcomes will be assessed at baseline, post -treatment, and [ADDRESS_159493] the feasibility and acceptability of CBT -I among those in treatment for AUD ( Aim 1 ); evaluate the 
initial efficacy of CBT -I in improving insomnia and alcohol -related outcomes ( Aim 2 ); and examine CBT -I 
effects on att ention, working memory, learning, negative affect, and emotion regulation, which may be 
examined as mediators in a subsequent trial ( Aim 3 ).  
 
Study site.  Participants will be recruited through the Addictions Treatment Program at the Harry S. Truman 
Memoria l Veterans Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (Truman VA) in Columbia, MO. We will recruit 115 participants over 20 months 
(see Table 2) to obtain a final sample of at least 80 participants .  
 
Participants. Patients in the Addictions Treatment Program at the 
Truman VA will be inclu ded if they meet DSM -5 criteria for 
Alcohol Use Disorder and the epi[INVESTIGATOR_140359] (≥1mo) for 
Insomnia Disorder. Criteria for AUD  include 2+ symptoms in the 
past 12 months that result in distress or impairment related to 
alcohol use (e.g., using more than intended, unsuccessful attempts 
to cut down). Criteria for insomnia  include difficulty (>30min) 
falling asleep, staying asleep, o r waking up too early on 3+ nights 
per week despi[INVESTIGATOR_140360]; 
and daytime impairment in mood, cognitive, social, or occupational 
activities.22 Participants will be exclu ded if they are unable to 
provide informed consent, demonstrate cognitive impairment, 
report continuous sobriety for more than 2 months at baseline 
assessment, report a manic epi[INVESTIGATOR_140361]  (contraindication s for 
sleep restriction )[ADDRESS_159494] a severe psychiatric 
disorder that requires immediate clinical attention (e.g., psychosis , 
suicidal ideation with intent and plan), or began a new sleep medication in the past [ADDRESS_159495] practice, those who endorse symptoms of sleep -related breathing disorders (≥2/8 symptoms on the 
STOP -BANG24), restless leg syndrome, periodic limb movement disorder, or narcolepsy will be referred for 
overnight polysomnography.   
 
Recruitment  and initial screening . Patients in the Addictions Treatment Program  (ATP)  at the Truman VA will 
be recruited via flyers and provider referral. All residential patients at the ATP will receive a flyer about the 
study and complete a brief (9 -item) screener for the study as part of the intake process. Providers will share the 
de-identified results of the screener with PI [INVESTIGATOR_140362]. If participants are interested in the study, they may contact 
[CONTACT_140381]. However, to decrease burden on both providers and participants, providers will also 
have the option of providing the research team with contact [CONTACT_140382]. The research team will then reach out to the patient directly to assess their interest in participating.  
Research staff will reach out to potential participants three times by [CONTACT_648]. Research staff will also attend the 
beginning of treat ment groups/meetings in order to inform individuals about the study and answer any questions 
they may have.  PI [INVESTIGATOR_140363] (i.e., reminding them about  the study, updating them on recruitment progress, and 
answering any questions).  
Phone s creening. A research assistant (RA) will share more details about the study and conduct a brief 
eligibility screen (~15min) with the potential participant in person or over the phone (see Table 1). Those who 
screen eligible will be scheduled for baseline.  
 
Baseline assessment. Participants will provide written informed consent prior to completion of baseline (see 
Table 1). In the case of remote baseline assessments, an RA will walk the participant through an electronic 
version of the written consent form, which they will be asked to sign electronically via the Qualtrics platform. 
The RA will then print and sign the electronic version of the participant’s consent.  The bas eline evaluation will 
involve assessment of substance use and sleep  disorders and full eligibility criteria using the Mini International 
Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) 7.0.2. Consistent with standard practice, those who endorse symptoms of 
sleep -related  breathing disorders, restless legs syndrome, periodic limb movement disorder, or narcolepsy will 
be referred for polysomnography. Given the prevalence of sleep apnea in this population, individuals who meet 
all eligibility criteria but report symptoms of sleep apnea will complete one night of holter monitoring (using an 
Evo Holter Recorder, SpaceLabs Healthcare) at home in their own beds to rule out for sleep apnea.   
 
Eligible participants will complete baseline assessment measures and will be randomly assigned to either the 
CBT -I or SH condition. Participants in both conditions will be oriented to the prospective sleep diary, which 

they will be asked to complete every morning for the next 6 weeks. The RA will provide all participants with a 
general handout on sleep hygiene (from the National Sleep Foundation website) and answer any questions they 
may have about the guidelines.  
 
To confirm diagnosis of insomnia, all eligible participants will complete one week of daily sleep diaries 
(between baseline and treatment session 1), which will be collected electronically and time -stamped each 
morning using the Qualtrics data management system. Participants who have not completed the diary each 
morning by [CONTACT_140383] a reminder text or phone call from study staff. Sleep diaries measure sleep onset 
latency, wake after sleep onset, total sleep time, sleep efficiency, and sleep quality. In this study, sleep diaries 
will also assess use of sleep medication and use of alcohol/other drugs (yes /no) to help with sleep. Sleep 
medication variables will include name, dosage, and time taken and will be converted to lowest recommended 
dosage units for data analysis.25 Participants who are unable to complete the daily sleep diaries by [CONTACT_140384] -and-paper su rveys to fill out 
each day by [CONTACT_35681].  
 
Follow -up. Follow -up assessments (see Table 1) will be 
administered in person by [CONTACT_21118], who will be blind to 
participant condition. Upon completion of the study, SH 
participants will be offered a referral for CBT -I, which is 
available with trained providers at the VA.  
 
Remote appointments.  If needed, treatment and follow -up 
appointments may be completed remotely using Zoom Pro or 
the VA’s Video Connect service. Using their VA email from the 
VA laptops, research staff would send the participant a link to 
launch the session. Participants wanting to use their iPhone or 
iPad for the session would have to download the VA Video 
Connect appl ication onto their device. On all other devices (e.g., 
PCs, laptops, Android devices), the participant will simply open 
the email and click the link to launch the secure video session. 
This service uses encryption to ensure that sessions are private 
and se cure and is designed for Veterans in rural areas with 
limited access to healthcare facilities.  
 
Retention strategies. To enhance follow -up rates, participants 
will receive:  
− Up to $40 for baseline (~2hr):  $10 for completing the assessment, $10 for completi ng all seven daily  
surveys, and $20 for returning the actiwatch.    
− Up to $[ADDRESS_159496] -treatment assessment (~1hr):  $40 for completing the assessment and $10 for 
completing all seven daily surveys  
− Up to $60 for the 6 -week follow -up (~1hr):  $50 for co mpleting the assessment and $10 for completing 
all seven daily surveys  
Participants will also receive reminder texts/calls, have access to free parking, and receive treatment at no cost.  
 
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia (CBT -I). CBT -I will be del ivered individually, in person, in five 
weekly one -hour sessions. A sixth week of treatment will be included – and scheduled for the same date as the 
post-treatment assessment – if the participant and research team agree that it would be beneficial (e.g., if a 
participant has difficulty graspi[INVESTIGATOR_140364]). Study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_140365] 2014 CBT -I in 
Veterans manual developed by [CONTACT_140385] (see Table 3).23 
Intervention components include (1) sleep hygiene : limiting naps; avoiding caffeine, tobacco, alcohol, and 
rich/heavy foods befo re bedtime; exercising; establishing a bedtime routine; and creating a comfortable sleep Table 1. Assessment, therapy, and payment 
schedule  
Week  Assmt  CBT -I Paymt  Bonus  
[ADDRESS_159497]-tx (S6) 40  
8    10 
9     
10     
11     
12 1mo  50  
13    10 
Note.  1mo = 1 month. Assmt  = 
assessment. BL = baseline. Bonus = bonus 
payment for completion of all 7 daily 
surveys. Paymt = standard payment.  
Tx = treatment.  
environment; (2) sleep restriction : limiting time in bed in order to improve sleep efficiency, or the percentage of 
time in bed that is actually spent sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]; time i n bed will be titrated each week based on sleep efficiency; (3) 
stimulus control : strengthening association between bedroom and sleep to decrease conditioned arousal; (4) 
relaxation : diaphragmatic breathing, progressive muscle relaxation, and visual imager y to reduce arousal; and 
(5) cognitive therapy : identifying and challenging thoughts that interfere with sleep.  
 
Sleep hygiene  (SH). All participants will receive a one -page handout on sleep hygiene. This is the only 
intervention that participants assigned to the SH condition will receive and is consistent with what may be 
expected as standard care in a doctor’s visit with a primary care physician.  
 
Table 2. Survey Instruments and Schedule of Administration  
Use Construct  Measure(s)  Cut-score  
Screen  Insomnia severity , past 2 weeks  Insomnia Severity Index  
(Morin et al., 2011)  ≤ [ADDRESS_159498] month  STOP questionnaire  
(Chung et al., 2008)  ≥ [ADDRESS_159499]  Measure(s)  BL Post  6wk 
Cov Demographics  See instruments  X   
 Other drug use , past 6 weeks  Drug Use Screening Inventory  X X X 
 Use of sleep medication  Daily Sleep Diary (Carney et al., 2012)  X X X 
Aim 1  Recruitment  Completion of ≥ 1 session of CBT -I  X  
 Retention  Completion of 6/6 sessions of CBT -I  X  
 Treatment satisfaction , measured 
separately for CBT -I and CBT -AUD  Client Satisfaction Questionnaire  
(Larsen et al., 1979)   X  
Aim 2  % abstinent days , past 6 weeks  
% heavy -drinking days (≥4/5 
drinks/day for women/men)  Timeline Follow -back (TLFB) for alcohol  
(Sobell & Sobell, 1996)  X X X 
 Alcohol problems , past 6 weeks  Short Inventory of Problems (Miller et al., 1995)  X X X 
 Use of alcohol or other drugs to 
help with sleep , past 6 weeks  Daily Sleep Diary (Carney et al., 2012)  X X X 
 Insomnia severity , past 2 weeks  Insomnia Severity Index (Morin et al., 2011)  X X X 
 Total wake time , average past week  Daily Sleep Diary (Carney et al., 2012)  X X X 
 Sleep quality , average past week  Daily Sleep Diary (Carney et al., 2012)  X X X 
 Dysfunctional beliefs, past month  Dysfunctional Beliefs about Sleep Scale  X X X 
Aim [ADDRESS_159500] Alcohol Vignette  X X X 
 Executive functioning  Psychomotor Vigilance Task  
(Dinges et al., 1985)  
N-back Task (Schmiedek et al., 2014)  
Monetary Choice Questionnaire  
UPPS Measure of Impulsivity  
Cognitive Failures Questionnaire  X X X 
 Negative affect , past week  Positive and Negative Affect Schedule  X X X 
 Emotion regulation , past 30 days  Brief Difficulties in Emotion Regulation Scale  
(Bjureberg et al., 2016)  X X X 
 Alcohol craving , past week  Penn Alcohol Craving Scale  X X X 
 Mental health symptoms  PTSD Checklist for DSM -5 
Patient Health Questionnaire -9 for depression  
GAD -7 measure of anxiety  
Satisfaction with Life Scale  X X X 
Note.  BL=baseline. Cov  = potential covariates. Post = post treatment. Wk = week.  
 
Blinding.  PI [INVESTIGATOR_140366]. However, PI [INVESTIGATOR_140367], and the assessment RA will be blinded to participant condition.  
 
Treatment integrity.  Treatment integrity will be assured in three steps. (1) Delivery . The study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_140368] t reatment manual via audio -recorded mock therapy sessions. PI [INVESTIGATOR_140369] -I 
McCrae, both of whom are licensed clinical psychologists, will evaluate audiotapes of mock sessions and 
provide corrective feedback. All intervention sessions will be audio -record ed, given participant permission. PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_140369] -I McCrae will review session audiotapes for ongoing training and supervision. PI [INVESTIGATOR_140370] a checklist of treatment elements. 
Descrip tive analyses will be used to determine the proportion of intended treatment elements covered in 
intervention sessions. (2) Comprehension . Participants will be provided with a workbook detailing treatment 
instructions, rationale, and handouts and encourage d to ask questions. (3) Enactment . Workbooks will contain 
written instructions on home assignments, and therapi[INVESTIGATOR_140371].  
 
Early termination.  All participants will receive sleep hygiene recommendations immediately following baseline 
assessment, so every participant who attends baseline will receive some form of treatment for insomnia. 
However, participants may decide to stop participating in the study at any time without penalty. If they decide 
to withdraw their participation , therapy will be terminated. This will be discussed as part of the informed 
consent process.  
 
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
Eligibility criteria include (a) participation in the Addictions Treatment Program at the Truman VA, (b) DSM -5 
criteria for moderate to severe Alcohol Use Disorder, (c) alcohol use in the past 2 months at baseline, and  
(d) the DSM -5 epi[INVESTIGATOR_140359] (du ration at least 1 month) for Insomnia Disorder.  
 
Participants will be excluded if they are unable to provide informed consent, demonstrate cognitive impairment 
(Mini Mental Status Exam score <26), report a manic epi[INVESTIGATOR_140372] (contra indication s for 
CBT -I),[ADDRESS_159501] a severe psychiatric disorder that requires immediate clinical attention (e.g., psychosis, suicidal 
ideation with intent and plan), or began a sleep medication in the past [ADDRESS_159502] 
practice, those who endorse symptoms of sleep -related breathing disorders (≥2/8 symptoms on the STOP -
BANG24), restless leg syndrome, periodic limb movement disorder, or narcolepsy will be referred for 
polysomnography.  
 
6. Drugs/ Substances/Devices  
N/A 
 
7. Study Statistics  
 
Outcome measures. Outcome measures are listed in Table 1 above. Primary outcomes include recruitment, 
retention, and  treatment satisfaction (Aim 1) as well as insomnia severity, total wake time, sleep quality, 
percent days abstinent, percent heavy -drinking days, alcohol problems, and use of alcohol or other dru gs as a 
sleep aid (Aim 2). Secondary (Aim 3) outcomes include treatment -related learning, executive function 
(attention, working memory, delayed discounting, impulsivity), negative affect, emotion regulation, craving, 
and mental health symptoms (PTSD, depr ession, anxiety, life satisfaction).  
 
Aim 1 analyses.  Recruitment (goal ≥4pts/mo) and retention rates (≥70% complete 5/5 sessions) will indicate 
feasibility of the intervention. Treatment satisfaction (average score ≥3, indicating ‘good’ quality) will serv e as 
an indicator of acceptability. Recruitment, retention, and satisfaction will be measured separately for insomnia 
and alcohol treatments. We do not expect group differences in recruitment. Descriptive statistics, chi -square, 
and t -tests will be used to  determine between -group differences in retention and satisfaction.  
 
Aims 2 -3 analyses.   Cohen’s d (adjusted for baseline scores) and 95% CIs will be used to examine the 
magnitude of between -group differences at post -treatment and [ADDRESS_159503] -treatmen t and 6 weeks. We chose HLM over other statistical approaches (e.g., ANOVA) 
because it requires fewer assumptions, has superior ability to handle missing data, and will yield greater 
statistical power. In each model, the Level [ADDRESS_159504]-hoc power analyses conducted in G*Power 3.0.10 indicate that 80 participants will 
provide strong power (1 – β = .99) to detect within -between interactions of moderate magnitude (f = .25).  
 
Early stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_004].  PI [INVESTIGATOR_140373]. All serious and unexpected 
adverse events will be reported to the IRB within 24 hours of receipt of information. Other adverse or 
potentially adverse events will be monitored and reported at annual continuing reviews. After discussion with 
the IRB, we will discontinue the trial if there is (a) compelling evidence from this or another study of a serious 
adverse effect of CBT -I that has potential to override potential benefit, (b) compelling evidence from this or 
another study of a significant beneficial effect of CBT -I, such that continued denial to other groups would be 
unethical, or (c) low pr obability of addressing study aims within a feasible time frame.  
 
8. Risks  
We believe the risks associated with completing assessments and participating in the intervention are minimal. 
Potential risks include: temporary daytime fatigue (due to restrictio n of time in bed), subjective discomfort from 
answering questionnaires, coercion, and the possibility of a breach of confidentiality.  Because the sleep 
restriction component of CBT -I places individuals with a history of mania at risk for additional manic e pi[INVESTIGATOR_1841], 
the treatment will be modified for these individuals.  Participants will not incur financial risk. There are no other 
known iatrogenic effects of CBT -I or completion of sleep diaries. However, if any emerge, they will be 
addressed immediately by [CONTACT_140386]/or clinical staff.  
 
The following safeguards will be implemented to protect participants from risks related to study participation:  
Temporary fatigue . Participants will be informed as part of the consent process that restricting their time 
in bed may increase daytime fatigue for the first few weeks of treatment (although this will be temporary, as 
time in bed will be expanded as sleep efficiency improves). Consistent with standard insomnia treatment 
procedures, time in bed will never be restrict ed to less than 5 hours in order to avoid impaired vigilance and 
significant daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008]. Participants will also be provided with recommendations on ways to increase 
alertness and counter daytime fatigue (e.g., staying active, engaging in social act ivities).  
Discomfort.  Participants will be informed of the types of questions that they will be asked to answer as 
part of the informed consent process, and they will have the opportunity to skip questionnaire items or 
discontinue participation in the stu dy at any time without penalty. Referrals will be provided to participants 
during the consent and throughout the study, in the event that participants report experiencing distress.  
Coercion.  Participants will be provided with modest compensation for their participation in the study 
(up to $150 for 3 assessments and 3 complete weeks of daily sleep surveys). We believe these compensation 
rates are commensurate with the time and effort involved in these tasks, and the amounts are consistent with 
compensation p rovided for other clinical studies with Veterans. Participants are free to discontinue at any time 
and will receive compensation for any and all assessments that they complete.  
Confidentiality.  Study data will be handled only by [CONTACT_140387]. All research staff will be trained in responsible research conduct and the handling of private and 
confidential information. Identifying information will not be recorded in computerized or paper -and-pencil 
assessments;  rather, assessment instruments and related study data will be identified and tracked using a unique 
study identification number. The database containing identification numbers and contact [CONTACT_140388] u sed to link baseline, post -treatment, and [ADDRESS_159505] -protected computer accessible only to research staff 
and will be destroyed immediately upon completion of the study. Study computers will als o be stored in a 
locked office accessible only to research staff (PI [INVESTIGATOR_140362]’s laboratory space in the Department of Psychiatry). 
Identifying information (names and dates) will appear only on consent forms, payment receipts, and the contact 
[CONTACT_33655] . All paper forms containing identifying information will be kept in a locked filing cabinet in 
Toni Maraldo’s office (C201E) at the VA, separate from any data; and only research staff will have access to 
these filing cabinets. Audiotaped sessions , which w ill be used in fidelity coding, will not be labeled with 
identifying information and will be deleted permanently once fidelity coding is complete. Data collected using 
computer  software will be stored electronically and identified by [CONTACT_140389]. No personally 
identifying information will be included in the data. A password will be required to access data that are stored 
electronically, and only personnel involved with the project will have access to the electronic data. The 
computer -administer ed surveys  provide an additional layer of confidentiality protection relative to paper and 
pencil surveys where staff would see a participant’s data as they were entering or storing it.  
Participants will be informed verbally and in writing during the cons ent process that mandatory 
reporting laws will be followed. Subjects who indicate danger to themselves or others will be escorted to the 
emergency room.  
Given the sensitive nature of information being collected, all data will be protected by a Certificate of 
Confidentiality and identified using unique ID numbers assigned to participants specifically for this project. 
Names and identifying information required for follow -up reminders will always be kept separate from research 
data and will not be  used as study data. Computerized survey data will be stored electronically on the secure VA 
server. Digital audio recordings of sessions, which will be used to determine treatment fidelity, will be stored on 
password -protected computers to which only proj ect staff will have access. All research staff will be trained in 
procedures for maintaining data and participant confidentiality. Study personnel will no longer have access to 
the study data when they are no longer part of the research team. Data will not  be removed from the VA.  
Protocol modifications for individuals with a history of mania or bipolar disorder.  Because the sleep 
restriction component of CBT -I places individuals with a history of mania at risk for additional manic epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841], 
the treatment wi ll be modified for these individuals (see Section 4 above)  and individuals with a recent (past 
year) history of mania will be excluded.  
 
Data safety and monitoring plan. PI [INVESTIGATOR_140374] . Specifically, she will monitor (a) the progress of the research, including participant recruitment and 
retention and assessments of data quality; (b) adverse events and procedures for making determinations that 
there may be a change to the benefit -to-risk ratio of research participation; and (c) procedures to protect 
participant privacy and confidentiality. She will monitor all serious, unexpected, and other adverse or 
potentially adverse events. Serious adverse events  include those resulting in death, in patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], a 
threat to life, persistent or significant disability or incapacity, congenital anomalies/birth defects, or serious 
health risk. Unexpected adverse events  are those that were unforeseen based on the anticipated potential risks 
outlined in the study protocol and informed consent. Other adverse or potentially adverse events  include those 
that may be causally related to study participation and lead to participant distress or drop -out.  
 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_140375]. All serious and unexpected adverse 
events will be reported to the IRB within 24 hours of receipt of information. Other adverse or potentially 
adverse events will be monitored and reported at annual continuing reviews.  
 
9. Benefi ts 
Participants in the CBT -I and SH conditions may benefit from the sleep -related information provided. 
Participants may also appreciate the opportunity to engage in research that may help others benefit from 
treatment. Beyond these potential benefits to subjects, this research is expected to inform future research and 
clinical efforts to treat insomnia and reduce the consequences associated with alcohol use among Veterans. As 
noted above, we believe the risks of this research to participants are minimal a nd the overall benefits of this 
research to subjects and society outweigh these risks.  
 
10. Payment and Remuneration  
To enhance follow -up rates, participants will receive up to $40  for completion of the baseline assessment ($10 
for the in -person assessment , $10 for completing all seven daily surveys, and $20 for returning the actiwatch), 
up to $[ADDRESS_159506] -treatment assessment ($40 for assessment, $10 for all daily surveys), and up to $60  for the 
6-week follow -up ($50 for assessment, $10 for all daily s urveys), with the potential to earn up to $150. 
Participants will also receive reminder texts/calls, have access to free parking, and receive treatment at no cost. 
Participants who choose not to complete an assessment will not receive payment for that asse ssment; however, 
they will be invited to participate in any subsequent assessments (e.g., if they decline the post -treatment 
assessment, they will still be invited to complete follow -up).  
 
11. Costs  
Participants will be expected to travel to the VA for assessment and therapy appointments. It is unlikely that the 
expense of this travel will be a burden to participants, as the VA is easily accessible by [CONTACT_140390], car, and public 
transportation. However, par ticipants will be expected to cover the cost of these expenses. Participants will not 
be charged for other study procedures or for treatment.  
 
12. Data Use  
PI [INVESTIGATOR_140376], treatment, and data analysis. C o-I McCrae 
will access audio data to provide clinical supervision (i.e., feedback on treatment integrity). Co -I Maddoux will 
access outcome data for data analysis.  
 
13. Software  
The computer program Inquisit will be required for assessments of executive fu nctioning. Funds for Inquisit 
were included in the NIH application budget; thus, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_140377]. Participants’ 
performance on executive functioning tasks will be saved on the computer’s hard drive. However, these data 
will be t racked using unique participant identification numbers, rather than identifying information. All data 
will be transferred to the VA secure server as soon as possible.  
 
SPSS will be required for data analysis. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_140378].  
 
All software will be approved through the One VA Technical Reference Model for installation and use on the 
VA network.  
 
14. Web applications  
All eligible participants will also complete sleep diaries, which will be collected electronically and  time-
stamped each morning using the Qualtrics data management system. As a company, Qualtrics is familiar with 
the nature of academic research and the importance of confidentiality, and their data handling procedures meet 
strict privacy standards (https:/ /www.qualtrics.com/privacy -statement/). All data will be identified using unique 
participant IDs. The Qualtrics data centers utilize many security measures. Qualtrics’ database access is 
restricted and requires authorization. All computer equipment (server s, SANs, switches, routers, etc.) is 
redundant and is located in secure, environmentally controlled data centers with 24/[ADDRESS_159507] firewalls, 24/[ADDRESS_159508] will opt out of IP address tracking to ensure the survey responses remain  
confidential. Once downloaded, the data will be stored securely on the VA's network server . 
 
The VA’s Video Connect service will be used for remote appointments, if necessary. This service uses 
encryption to ensure that sessions are private and secure and  is designed for Veterans in rural areas with limited 
access to healthcare facilities.  Additionally, Zoom Pro will be an alternate videoconferencing resource for 
remote appointments. This service has end -to-end encryption and password -protected meetings. Data from these 
sessions will not be recorded or downloaded  
 
15. References  
1. Chaudhary NS, Kampman KM, Kranzler HR, Grandner MA, Debbarma S, Chakravorty S. Insomnia in 
alcohol dependent subjects is associated with greater psychosocial pr oblem severity. Addictive 
Behaviors. 2015;50:165 -172.  
2. Chakravorty S, Chaudhary NS, Brower KJ. Alcohol dependence and its relationship with insomnia 
and other sleep disorders. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research. 2016;40(11):2271 -
2282.  
3. Brower KJ, Aldrich MS, Robinson EA, Zucker RA, Greden JF. Ins omnia, self -medication, and relapse 
to alcoholism. Am J Psychiatry. 2001;158(3):399 -404.  
4. Kolla BP, Schneekloth T, Mansukhani MP, et al. The association between sleep disturbances and 
alcohol relapse: A 12 -month observational cohort study. The American J ournal on Addictions. 
2015;24(4):362 -367.  
5. Cucciare MA, Darrow M, Weingardt KR. Characterizing binge drinking among U.S. military 
veterans receiving a brief alcohol intervention. Addictive Behaviors. 2011;36:362 -367.  
6. Fortier -Brochu E, Morin CM. Cognit ive impairment in individuals with insomnia: Clinical 
significance and correlates. SLEEP. 2014;37:1787 -1798.  
7. Soehner AM, Harvey AG. Prevalence and functional consequences of severe insomnia symptoms in 
mood and anxiety disorders: Results from a nationally representative sample. Sleep: Journal of 
Sleep and Sleep Disorders Research. 2012;35:1367 -1375.  
8. Sandru C, Voinescu BI. The relationship between emotion regulation, dysfunctional beliefs about 
sleep, and sleep quality - An exploratory study. Journal of Evidence -Based Psychotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. 
2014;14:249 -257.  
9. Baum KT, Desai A, Field J, Miller LE, Rausch J, Beebe DW. Sleep restriction worsens mood and 
emotion regulation in adolescents. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry. 2014;55:180 -190.  
10. Fairholme CP, Nosen EL, Nillni YI, Schumacher JA, Tull MT, Coffey SF. Sleep disturbance and 
emotion dysregulation as tran sdiagnostic processes in a comorbid sample. Behavior Research and 
Therapy. 2013;51:540 -546.  
11. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_140379], Barbaro N, Mello D. The Relationship Between Subjective Sleep Disturbance, Sleep 
Quality, and Emotion Regulation Difficulties in a Sample of College  Students Reporting Trauma 
Exposure. Psychol Trauma. 2015.  
12. Brower KJ. Assessment and treatment of insomnia in adult patients with alcohol use disorders. 
Alcohol. 2015;49:417 -427.  
13. Anton RF, O'Malley SS, Ciraulo DA, et al. Combined pharmacotherapi[INVESTIGATOR_9834]:  The COMBINE Study:  A randomized controlled trial. 
Journal of the American Medical Association. 2006;295:[ADDRESS_159509], Bennett ME. How effective is alcoholism treatment in the Un ited States? 
Journal of Studies on Alcohol. 2001;62:[ADDRESS_159510] -line 
treatment of insomnia. Journal of Psychology Research and Behavior Management. 2011;4:[ADDRESS_159511] -traumatic stress disorder nightmares 
and sleep disturbance in Iraq War Veterans:  A feasible and promising treatment combination. 
Journal of Aggression, Maltreatment & Trauma. 2009;18:516 -531.  
17. Germain A , Richardson R, Stocker R, et al. Treatment for insomnia in combat -exposed 
OEF/OIF/OND military Veterans:  Preliminary randomized controlled trial. Behaviour Research 
and Therapy. 2014;61:78 -88. 
18. Germain A, Richardson R, Moul DE, et al. Placebo -controll ed comparison of prazosin and cognitive -
behavioral treatments for sleep disturbances in US military Veterans. Journal of Psychosomatic 
Research. 2012;72:89 -96. 
19. Arnedt JT, Conroy DA, Armitage R, Brower KJ. Cognitive -behavioral therapy for insomnia in 
alcohol dependent patients: A randomized controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251]. Behavior Research & Therapy. 
2011;49(4):227 -233.  
20. Currie SR, Clark S, Hodgins DC, El -Guebaly N. Randomized controlled trial of brief cognitive -
behavioural interventions for insomnia in recovering alcoholics. Addiction. 2004;99:1121 -1132.  
21. Sturgis EB, Perlis ML, Arnedt JT, Kranzler HR, Grandner MA, Chak ravorty S. The effects of an 8 -
week CBT -I treatment on psychiatric symptoms, alcohol craving, and relapse to drinking in 
patients with co -occurring insomnia and alcohol dependence. SLEEP; 2016; Denver, CO.  
22. Edinger JD, Bonnet MH, Bootzin RR, et al. Deri vation of research diagnostic criteria for insomnia: 
Report of an American Academy of Sleep Medicine work group. Sleep. 2004;27:1567 -1596.  
23. Manber R, Friedman L, Siebern AT, et al. Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia in Veterans:  
Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_34712] . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs; 2014.  
24. Chung F, Yegneswaran B, Liao P, et al. STOP questionnaire: A tool to screen patients for 
obstructive sleep apnea. Anesthesiology. 2008;108:812 -821.  
25. Lichstein KL, Nau SD, Wilson NM, et al.  Psychological treatment of hypnotic -dependent insomnia 
in a primarily older adult sample. Behav Res Ther. 2013;51:787 -796.  
 
 
 