PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 1 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  PROTOCOL TITLE: 
TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
[INVESTIGATOR_856927]  
[PHONE_17773]  
[EMAIL_16215]  
VERSION NUMBER/DATE : 
Include the version number and date of this protocol. 
REVISION HISTORY  
 
Revision 
# Version Date  Summary of Changes  Consent 
Change?  
1 9/30/19  Previously approved protocol changed to 
RAMP  no 
2 6/10/20 Added COVID -19 precautions  yes 
3 12/15/20  Added follow -up procedures  yes 
4 4/30/2021  Revised COVID -19 precautions  no 
5 7/26/2021  Added NDA surveys  no 
6 8/16/2021  Revised Section 6.0  no 
7 8/24/2021  Added New COVID -19 precautions  yes 
8 5/16/2022  Added dizziness, lightheadedness,  and syncope 
to risks  yes 
9 2/21/2023  Added community recruitment to section 13.1  no 
10 6/28/2024  Added recruitment site  no 
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 2 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  Table of Contents  
1.0 Study Summary  ........................................................................................................ 3 
2.0 Objectives*  .............................................................................................................. 4 
3.0 Background*  ............................................................................................................ 4 
4.0 Study Endpoints*  ..................................................................................................... 5 
5.0 Study Intervention/Investigational Agent  ................................................................ 5 
6.0 Procedures Involved* ............................................................................................... 5 
7.0 Data and Specimen Banking* ................................................................................ 15 
8.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects* ......................................................................... 15 
9.0 Study Timelines*  ................................................................................................... 16 
10.0  Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria* .......................................................................... 16 
11.0  Vulnerable Populations*  ........................................................................................ 18 
12.0  Local Number of Subjects  ..................................................................................... 18 
13.0  Recruitment Methods  ............................................................................................. 18 
14.0  Withdrawal of Subjects* ........................................................................................ 20 
15.0  Risks to Subjects*  .................................................................................................. 20 
16.0  Potential Benefits to Subjects*  .............................................................................. 25 
17.0  Data Management* and Confidentiality  ................................................................ 25 
18.0  Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects* ........................ [ADDRESS_1193442] the Privacy Interests of Subjects  .......................................... 27 
20.0  Compensation for Research -Related Injury  ........................................................... 28 
21.0  Economic Burden to Subjects  ................................................................................ 28 
22.0  Consent Process  ..................................................................................................... 28 
23.0  Process to Document Consent in Writing .............................................................. 30 
24.0  Setting  .................................................................................................................... 30 
25.0  Resources A vailable ............................................................................................... 31 
26.0  Multi- Site Research*  ............................................................................................. 31 
 
  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 3 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  1.0 Study Summary  
 
Study Title  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
Study Design  Experimental/Control Design  
Primary Objective  The purpose of the proposed research is to identify brain 
areas that correlate with working memory and cognitive 
control using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS).  
Secondary 
Objective(s)   
Research 
Intervention(s)/ 
Investigational 
Agent(s)  NA 
IND/IDE #  NA 
Study Population  Healthy young adults  
Sample Size  400 
Study Duration for 
individual 
participants  1-2 hours  
Study Specific 
Abbreviations/ 
Definitions  TMS  – transcranial magnetic stimulation  
  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 4 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  2.0 Objectives * 
2.1 Describe the purpose, specific aims, or objectives.  
The purpose of the proposed research is to further our understanding 
in the mechanistic operations of working memory and cognitive control. We are interested in the brain mechanisms underlying working memory and cognitive cont rol abilities. Our goal is to 
identify brain areas that directly correlate with working memory and cognitive control through the use of transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) . TMS is a well -established, non- invasive 
technique used by [CONTACT_856936].  
2.[ADDRESS_1193443] the hypothesis that brain regions that are shown to correlated with a cognitive process are causally relevant to that process such that stimulating those brain regions produces a change in behaviors reflective of the cognitive process.  
3.0 Background * 
3.1 Describe the relevant prior experience and gaps in current knowledge.  
Cognitive control refers to the ability to align behaviors in accordance with goals an d contextual circumstances. This ability 
often depends upon maintaining information (e.g. instructions, goals) when it is no longer available to the senses – referred to as working memory. Cognitive control and working memory are central to higher -level co gnition, but their mechanistic operations are poorly 
understood. In particular, little causal data is available regarding 
whether and how particular brain regions support cognitive control and working memory. The purpose of the proposed study is to further our understanding of these abilities. 
3.[ADDRESS_1193444] for studying human brain function. The abil ity to 
causally associate brain regions with cognition is of central importance for our understanding of mental and neural function. 
Furthermore, basic understanding of mental and neural function will 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 5 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  improve our understanding of impairments observed in ps ychiatric 
and neurological disorders. 
4.0 Study Endpoints * 
4.1 Describe the primary and secondary study endpoints. 
NA 
4.2 Describe any primary or secondary safety endpoints. NA 
5.0 Study Intervention/Investigational Agent  
1.1 Description: Describe the study intervention and/or investigational 
agent (e.g., drug, device) that is being evaluated. 
NA 
5.1 Drug/Device Handling: If the research  involves drugs or device, 
describe your plans to store, handle, and administer those drugs or 
devices so that they will be used only on subjects and be used only by [CONTACT_10733]. 
NA 
5.2 If the drug is investigational (has an IND) or the device has  an IDE 
or a claim of abbreviated IDE (non- significant risk device), include 
the following information:  
 NA 
 
6.0 Procedures Involved * 
6.1 Describe and explain the study design. 
In the proposed research, we will used computer -based tasks that 
engage cognitive contr ol and/or working memory. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_856928], letters, 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_499], or sounds. In tasks involving working memory, participants will be asked to retain in mind some aspect of the stimulus after it is no longer prese nt on the monitor. In tasks involving working 
memory and/or cognitive control, participants will make decisions on stimuli that are based on previous instruction and previous stimuli. Since cognitive control interacts with the reward system (i.e. to motiva te cognitive control), we will also examine reward -related 
tasks either in tandem with cognitive control, or in isolation.  
TMS will be delivered in one of two modes: 1) In "online" studies, TMS will be time -locked to the task (for example, a single pulse m ay 
be delivered 20, 60, or 100 ms after the onset of the stimulus) and we will investigate the critical period of involvement of a given region. Such studies will involve either single pulses of TMS or short burst 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 6 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  of pulses. Bursts will contain 5 or fewer pulses with bursts spaced by 
[CONTACT_479271] 3 seconds or more. All studies will conform to the safety 
limits established by [CONTACT_291339]. (2009). 2) In "offline" studies, longer duration TMS will be administered prior to the task. This 
TMS will transiently su ppress or excite the region resulting in 
decreased or increased performance on the task. Three types of offline designs may be used: A) Continuous Theta -Burst stimulation 
(TBS), which is one of the most widely used offline techniques in 
which 600 pulses ar e delivered in bursts of 3 pulses (at 50 Hz) 
repeated at a rate of 5 Hz. This technique was introduced in 2005 by [CONTACT_26134]. and has been used in hundreds of studies since. B) Intermittent TBS, which is another widely used offline technique 
introduced by [CONTACT_26134]., 2005. As in continuous thetaburst 
stimulation, 600 pulses are delivered in 50 Hz bursts every 5 Hz. 
However, in intermittent TBS, 2 seconds of stimulation is alternated 
with 8 seconds of no stimulation. Hence, the entire set of pulses is 
delivered over 190 seconds. C) [ADDRESS_1193445] until the invention 
of TBS and has been used in hundreds of studies too. Again, all 
procedures will conform to safety limits established by [CONTACT_856937]. 
(2009). It is important to note that these stimulation parameters differ 
from those that are typi[INVESTIGATOR_856929] (e.g. depression) in 
clinical settings. These stimulation parameters are for research 
purposes designed at producing transient, not chronic, effects and to 
ensure the safety of the participant. With the exception of TBS, all of 
our stimulation protocols fall under the heading of either single pulse 
or low frequency rTMS, for which adverse effects are rare (classified 
as Class 3,  low risk under Rossi et al., 2009). The versions of TBS 
that we administer are short lasting and have especially low rates of adverse effects (Oberman et al., 2011). In general, analyses will 
focus on the accuracy and speed with which participants perform ed 
the task. The critical analyses will compare these variable as a 
function of TMS parameters (e.g. timing, location, frequency).    
In order to dose appropriately the TMS stimulation, it is necessary to determine an individual’s sensitivity to TMS. This is done by 
[CONTACT_856938] (MT). MT is the standard 
in the field for determining the intensity of TMS for each individual 
to ensure participant safety.  
MT will be determined in one of two ways: 1) Recording 
electromyography (EMG) of the first dorsal interosseus muscle of 
the hand contralateral to TMS to monitor muscle activity. In this 
case, persistent muscle activity will be elicited by [CONTACT_856939], and the effect of TMS on the muscle will be observed as 
a brief cessation of EMG activity. This is referred to as the active 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 7 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  motor threshold (AMT). 2) Observing a visually- identified hand 
twitch in the hand contralateral to TMS (e.g. if applying TMS to the 
left hemisphere of the brain, a twitch will be observed in the right hand). This is referred to as the resting motor threshold (RMT). In 
most cases, the AMT will be determined. However, if EMG cannot 
be recorded due to technical issues (e.g. the participant’s hand is too 
sweaty to record a strong signal), RMT will be recorded. In both 
cases, the scalp region producing the largest hand twitch will be 
identified. To identify this region, TMS will be s et to 30% of the 
maximal stimulator output, which is well below the motor threshold for most, if not all, individuals. TMS will be delivered to a scalp location approximating the location of motor cortex based upon 
surface features using the nose and ears as landmarks. From this 
initial location, TMS will be delivered. If ineffective to produce a 
hand twitch, the TMS coil will be moved to a new, nearby [CONTACT_3725], 
which will subsequently be tested. This process will continue until a 
grid of locations has been tes ted around the starting location, 
approximating 5 cm2. If a hand twitch has not been produced, this 
indicates that the stimulation is below threshold and the stimulator 
output will be raised by 5% of the maximum stimulator output. The 
process will then rep eat until the maximal hand twitch at a given 
stimulation level is observed, thereby [CONTACT_856940]. During this process, the participant will be closely 
monitored and periodically asked whether the stimulation is 
producing any discomfort or unusual symptoms (e.g. dizziness). At 
the scalp location of interest, the  lowest TMS intensity able to elicit 
5 visible cessations of EMG activity in 10 trials (AMT), or 5 visible 
twitches in 10 trials (RMT) at this site will be determined. Individua l 
MT will be used to determine the intensity of stimulation for each individual, as recommended by [CONTACT_442438]. This procedure 
usually takes about 5 minutes and also serves the purpose of 
acquainting participants to TMS stimulation. Once MT is determ ined, TMS will be administered within the limits of the safety 
guidelines recently updated in Rossi et al., 2021. An additional 12 years of research using TBS ranging between 80% and 100% RMT 
was examined to determine the continued efficacy of previously 
established guidelines in Rossi et al., 2009. Since the 2009 
publication, the scientific community has gained a better understanding of safety risks and the rarity of adverse events (such as seizure) associated with TMS. To reflect current safety guidelines  
for offline studies using TBS, TMS will never exceed 100% of RMT or 120% of AMT. For offline studies using 1Hz stimulation, TMS 
will never exceed 110% of RMT or 130% of AMT. For online studies, TMS will never exceed 110% of RMT or 130% of AMT.  
Electroencephalography (EEG) will be used to either guide TMS 
frequencies and/or targets, measure changes in brain activity 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 8 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  following TMS, or both. The EEG assesses electrical brain activity 
through surface recording disks (electrodes) which are placed near 
the parti cipant's head. The electrodes transmit the signals, which are 
then amplified (via an 8 channel Brain Vision LiveAmp) and stored 
on a computer. The procedure is entirely non -invasive. 
An electrode cap will be placed on the participant's head. In order to record brain activity, these disks need to be filled will a gel which 
allows the electrodes to better record brain activity at the scalp. 
Therefore, the participants in this study will need to clean their hair 
after participation. The gel is completely water  soluble, and the 
procedure is painless. The MRI facility has sinks and towels, and the 
investigators will help to make sure the participant has thoroughly 
rinsed all the gel from their hair. After an accurate signal is assured, 
the signal derived from the  electrode cap is then amplified, 
transmitted to a computer, and stored for later analysis.  
In addition to the EEG recording, muscle activity from around the eyes may be recorded from the subjects. Muscle activity from around 
the eyes is recorded by [CONTACT_856941]’s left eye, as well as behind the ears. These procedures are completely noninvasive and painless. 
6.[ADDRESS_1193446] already completed.  
• Computer -based Tasks  
o Short -term memory  
a. In this task, participants are presented with a set of stimuli to remember. After a delay, participants will receive a test item. The test 
item can either be an old/new stimulus 
requiring a recognition decision (i.e. was the 
stimulus a member of the set?) or it can be a stimulus to be transformed to match a 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 9 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  stimulus in the set (e.g. rotate a grating until 
it matches a grating in memory).  
o Span  
a.  In this task, participants will be presented 
with a list of stimuli to remember. In some 
cases, they will be asked to make judgments 
in-between the presentation of memoranda 
(e.g. assess the validity of a simple 
arithmetic expression). Upon termination of the list, participants will be  asked to 
reproduce the list.  
o Change -detection  
a.  In this task, participants will see a collection of stimuli, followed by [CONTACT_856942]. They will respond with whether the collection changed or not.  
o Sequence Memory  
a. In this task, participants will learn a predefined stimulus sequence. Participants will make judgements regarding whether the presented stimuli follow the predefined sequence or not.  
o Alternative forced choice  
a.  In this task, participants will judge the categorical status of stimuli. Categories include word/non- word judgements, 
semantic judgements, number judgements (e.g. is the number odd or even), object category judgments (e.g. face, scene), and spatial judgments (e.g. which direction does an arrow point).  
o Cued attention  
a. In this task, particip ants will be directed to 
attend to a particular stimuli, regions of space, or location of sound. Participants will make either alternative forced choice or memory judgements regarding the attended 
stimuli.  
o Task -switching  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 10 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, [ADDRESS_1193447] on that trial. The participants’ goal is to do their best to win as much money as possible. In this task, participants will receive a monetary bonus for correct guesses, which will total between $0.00 and $10.[ADDRESS_1193448]. Trials will entail trials of the tasks described above or other simple cognitive tasks such as arithmetic.  
• Written tasks  
o DSM -5 Crosscutting Assessment  (Adult)  
a. This is an assessment requested by [CONTACT_856943]. This assessment in particular is used to assess a participant for any psychiatric diagnose s that the study can 
impact. The version being used asks adult 
participants if certain symptoms related to 
psychiatric disorders have been bothering 
them in the past two weeks. 
o WHODAS 2.0  
a. This is an assessment requested by [CONTACT_856944]. This assessment in 
particular is used to determine the disability 
status of a participant. The questionnaire asks the participant about difficulties due to a health condition. Health conditions include 
injuries, mental/emotional issues, and 
substance use issues. The questions are 
answered in the perspective of difficulty 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 11 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, [ADDRESS_1193449] two weeks in the form of a Likert scale.  
o Raven’s Progressive Matrices  
a. In this standardized measure of intelligence, participants decide which among several images completes a logical matrix of images  
o Self-reported tasks  
a. At the end of an experimental session, we may ask participants to answer questions regard ing their strategic approach to tasks. 
Examples of questions include whether participants verbally rehearsed material to themselves, whether they named images, and whether they maintained vigilance. In all cases, questions will be about task performance. N o personal information will 
be requested for these tasks.  
o Screening  
a. Participants will be screened to be fluent in English, between the ages of 18- 30, and to 
have no contraindications for TMS . 
Participants will also be screened such that 
they do not belong to populations vulnerable 
to the Coronavirus Disease (COVID -19) and 
have not been exposed. They will also be asked to indicate whether they have received 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 12 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, [ADDRESS_1193450] had that may be attributable to TMS. This information will be used to assess any possible risks of TMS.  
6.3 Describe:  
• Procedures performed  to lessen the probability or magnitude 
of risks.  
• All drugs and devices used in the research and the purpose of 
their use, and their regul atory approval status. 
• The source records that will be used to collect data about 
subjects. ( Attach all surveys, scri pts, and data collection 
forms.)  
To lessen the probability or magnitude of risks, researchers will stop testing or administer breaks if participants feel frustrated, tired, and/or uncomfortable. Additionally, the occurrence of 
any adverse events associated with this study and its 
procedur es, as well as any changes in risk level, will be 
monitored by [CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_6254]- investigators.  
The most severe risk is that of seizure. The risk of seizure will be minimized in two ways 1) Using stimulation parameters that 
are within the s afety guidelines reported by [CONTACT_291339]., 2009, 
and 2) Excluding participants at increased risk for seizure as 
indicated in the exclusion criteria. Within the stimulation 
parameters to be used in the present protocol, no seizures have 
been reported result ing from TMS in the populations that we 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 13 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, [ADDRESS_1193451] responders 
in order to administer appropriate initial care. In addition, all 
study personnel will be  trained in CPR usage. However, we 
wish to emphasize that there are no known cases where 
individuals required the use of CPR during a TMS session. The 
major physical signs the study personnel will look out for in 
detecting a potential seizure include chewi ng movements, 
convulsions/tremor/shaking, difficulty talking, a blank stare, 
eyes rolling up, and profuse sweating. If any of these signs are observed, study personnel will stop the research procedure and inquire whether the subject feels okay. If the subj ect is 
unresponsive (and therefore likely experiencing a seizure), first-aid will be supplied. The first -aid response consists of 
making sure the subject is physically safe for the duration of 
the seizure. This involves moving the subjects out of the TMS 
chair and onto the floor lying down on their left side. The 
subject will be kept lying down on their left side, while the 
staff call emergency medical help, via a [ADDRESS_1193452] -aid kit and immediate 
phone ac cess. In the extremely unlikely event of an actual 
occurrence of a seizure, it will be immediately reported to the 
IRB. To minimize headaches and/or other forms of discomfort, 
the experimenter will encourage participants to report any form 
of discomfort during the procedure. The experimenter will 
periodically directly query the participant regarding whether or 
not they are experiencing discomfort. In addition, an arm will 
be used to help support the coil to reduce downward pressure 
on the subject that could lead to neck discomfort. The 
experimental procedure will be immediately terminated whenever anyone reports experiencing discomfort. To prevent 
adverse effects on hearing due to the sound produced by [CONTACT_7712], all experimental participants will wear ear plugs . 
In order to ensure that personnel are qualified to administer TMS, all personnel to be added to this protocol will receive a 
minimum of [ADDRESS_1193453]. Derek Nee to ensure understanding of the TMS procedure and all potential 
contraindications. All pe rsonnel will receive CPR training and 
CITI training. Additionally, all personnel will be instructed on 
how to deal with a seizure.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 14 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, [ADDRESS_1193454] 14 days before 
the study session, researchers will also apply the following 
precautions in conducting this research:  
• No persons deemed as higher risk by [CONTACT_856945]. Partici pants will be screened such 
that they meet these requirements.  
• COVID- 19 related risks will be mitigated as much as 
possible. This will be done through screening for exposure 
to COVID -19, regular cleaning and disinfecting study 
areas, reducing in -person in teractions, and use of personal 
protection equipment.  
• To prevent the spread of pathogens during TMS, 
participants may be given a disposable face mask. 
Administered masks will contain no metal so as to be 
compatible with TMS.  
• Unvaccinated participants will  be unable to participate in 
this study if they have tested positive or if they were in 
close contact [CONTACT_4490] a positive COVID -[ADDRESS_1193455] 
ten days.  
For in -person study activities involving prospective subjects and 
study staff, we will as part of  our screening and eligibility 
procedures implement the option of informing subjects and staff 
that their voluntary disclosure of their full COVID -19 
vaccination status is an alternative to the requirement for 
COVID- 19 precautions such as social distancing, use of masks, 
and other safety precautions. In doing so, we will use the 
following language: “ In order to protect against COVID -19 or 
Coronavirus, if you come to the lab we are required to follow 
certain precautions like social distancing and use of masks. 
However, we don’t have to do this for persons who have 
completed a full COVID -19 vaccination. You may if you’d like 
share with us information about your COVID -19 vaccination, 
but this is your decision and is not required. You can still come to the lab a nd we will follow our usual COVID -19 precautions."  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 15 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  To implement this COVID -19 vaccination option, we will make 
a note in our study records for each prospective subjects and 
staff who choose to disclose their COVID -19 vaccination 
information.  
 
 
6.4 What data w ill be collected during the study and how that data will 
be obtained. 
The data that will be collected during the study includes identifying 
information. Additionally, brain activations, accuracies and reaction 
times to tasks will be collected. The data will be obtained using 
computerized -based tasks or written tasks.  
6.5 If there are plans for long- term follow -up (once all research related 
procedures are complete), what data will be collected during this 
period.  
In some cases, performance in some tasks will  trigger eligibility for 
other tasks. In these cases, procedures will be identical to those 
described above.  
6.6 For Humanitarian Use Device  (HUD ) uses provide a description of 
the device, a summary of how you propose to use the device, 
including a description of any screening procedures, the HUD 
procedure, and any patient follow -up visits, tests or procedures.  
NA 
7.0 Data and Specimen Banking * 
7.[ADDRESS_1193456] the data to be stored or associated with each specimen.  
NA 
7.3 Describe the procedures to release data or specimens, including: the process to request a release, approv als required for release, who 
can obtain data or specimens, and the data to be provided with specimens.  
NA 
8.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects * 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 16 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  8.1 Describe whether results (study results or individual subject results, 
such as results of investigational diagnosti c tests, genetic tests, or 
incidental findings) will be shared with subjects or others (e.g., the 
subject’s primary care physicians) and if so, describe how the results  
will be shared. 
9.0 Study Timelines*  
9.1 Describe:  
• The duration of an individual subject’s participation in the study. 
• The duration anticipated to enroll all study subjects. 
• The estimated date for the investigators to complete this study 
(complete primary analyses)  
The duration for each individual’s participation will be between [ADDRESS_1193457] 1, and potentially several sessions. It may take up to several weeks to complete an entire task. The duration anticipated to enroll all study subjects is 72 months.  
10.0 Inclusion  and Exclusion Crit eria* 
10.[ADDRESS_1193458], the screening 
form will be sent to the participant via e -mail (see Appendix). The 
participant will be asked to respond with whether the answer to any question on the screening form is “yes.” At this phase, the participant does not need to indicate to which question the answer is “yes.” If the response is “yes” to any  question, the participant will be 
excluded. If the participant passes the first phase of screening and remains interested in participating, the participant will be invited to perform the study. Participants will read the consent form and any questions wil l be answered. After answering questions, the 
participant will once again be presented with the screening form. In this case, the participant will fill- out the screening form. If the 
answer is “yes” to a given question, the participant may be asked to elaborate. A “yes” response may occur in the second screening, but 
not the first, if circumstances changed since the initial screening. The individuals included in this study will be adults from ages [ADDRESS_1193459] not been fully vaccinated provided that they pass the screening 
process. As with the other screening forms, the COVID -19 screening 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 17 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  form will be sent to the participant via e -mail (see Appendix). The 
participant will be asked to respond with whether the answer to 
question #1 on the form is “yes” or if, alternatively the answer to #1 is “no” and the answer to any other question on the screening form  
(#2 through #8)  is “yes.” Question #[ADDRESS_1193460] they received, and the date of vaccination. 
At this phase, the participant does not need to indicate which to which of the other questions  the answer is “yes.” If the response is 
“yes” to any questions including #2 through #8, the participant wi ll 
be excluded. If the participant passes the first phase of screening and remains interested in participating, the participant will be invited to 
perform the study. Participants will read the consent form and any 
questions will be answered. After answering questions, the 
participant will once again be presented with the screening form. In 
this case, the participant will fill- out the screening form. If the 
answer is “no” to #1 and “yes” to any of the other questions (#2 
through #8) , the participant may be a sked to elaborate. A “yes” 
response may occur in the second screening, but not the first, if 
circumstances changed since the initial screening.  
 
10.2 Describe the criteria that define who will be included or excluded in your final study sample. 
Inclusion: Becau se we are interested in the mental function of adults 
prior to any age -related decline, participants will be between the ages 
of 18- 30. Participants will also need to be fluent in English and have 
acquired fluency prior to the age of 6 since English is required to 
understand the instructions and some tasks will use English 
words/letters as stimuli.  
Exclusion: Left -handed people will be excluded. Many brain 
functions are lateralized (e.g. language is often processed by [CONTACT_856946]).  
Based on recomm endations of the International Workshop on the 
Safety of Repetitive Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (reported in Wassermann, 1998), as well as the recommendations of Rossi et al., 
2009, we will exclude subjects on any of the following grounds: 
Metal anyw here in the head, excluding the mouth, History of 
seizures, Family history of epi[INVESTIGATOR_002], Vascular, traumatic, tumoral, infectious, or metabolic lesion of the brain, Stroke, Chronic, or transient insomnia (e.g. jet lag), Alcoholism, Severe headaches, 
Cardiac pacemakers, Current use of medication for neurological or 
psychiatric conditions, Tinnitus, and Pregnancy. While the health 
risks to the fetus are unknown, magnetic field strength decreases 
approximately with the cube -root of the distance from the magneti c 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 18 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, [ADDRESS_1193461]. Nevertheless, any person who is pregnant will be excluded from the study. 
Additionally, people with the following will be excluded: hearing 
impairments and permanent retainers on the top portion of their jaw. 
A screening form (attached) will be used to assess each subject's 
eligibility for participation.  
10.3 Indicate specifically whether you will include or exclude each of the 
following special populations:  (You may not include members of the 
above populations as subjects in your research unless you indicate 
this in your inclusion criteria.)  
• Adults unable to c onsent  
• Individuals who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers)  
• Pregnant women  
• Prisoners 
Special populations will not be studied. 
11.0 Vulnerable Populations * 
11.[ADDRESS_1193462] their rights and welfare. 
NA 
12.0 Local Number of Subjects  
12.1 Indicate the total number of subjects to be accrued locally. The total number of subjects to be accrued locally is 400. 
12.2 If applicable, distinguish between t he number of subjects who are 
expected to be enrolled and screen ed, and the number of subjects 
needed to complete the research procedures (i.e., numbers of 
subjects excluding screen failures.)  
NA 
13.[ADDRESS_1193463] one hour before testing. Potential subjects will be recruited via voluntary responses to flyers posted around campus and responses to approved electronic postings (see Appendix). Flyers will also be posted around local areas (e.g. coffee shops, restaurants) . 
Additionally, flyers will be given to participants who have 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 19 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  volunteered for similar studies.  (A paper flyer will be given to 
participants who have volunteered for similar studies after they have 
completed the study. These participants will have completed a study in a lab at [LOCATION_012] State University that uses similar methods to us 
and has agreed to hand out flyers for our studies to their 
participants ). Volunteers will email or call a trained research 
technician who will screen the subject by [CONTACT_856947]. Potential subjects will be instructed to meet either in the Nee lab in the 
Psychology Building, Hajcak lab in the Psychology Building, or the  
MRI facility at the College of Medicine. All of these are private and secure locations requiring key card access.  
13.2 Describe the source of subjects.  
The source of subjects will be from [LOCATION_012] State University or the local community as long as subjects are eligible based on inclusion 
and exclusion criteria.  
13.3 Describe the methods that will be used to identify potential subjects. 
The methods used to ident ify potential subjects include the inclusion 
criteria and “no” responses to TMS  screening questions.  
13.4 Describe materials that will be used to recruit subjects. (Attach  
copi[INVESTIGATOR_52963]. For advertisements, 
attach the final copy  of printed advertisements. When advertisements 
are taped for broadcast, attach the final audio/video tape. You may 
submit the wording of the advertisement prior to tapi[INVESTIGATOR_73153]-tapi[INVESTIGATOR_47223], provided the IRB 
reviews the final audio/video tape.)  
Materials to recruit subjects include an online advertisement and 
recruitment advertisements posted throughout [LOCATION_012] State 
University. These documents are attached, along with a sample 
recruitment email response from a researcher . 
13.5 Describe the amount and timing of any payments to subjects. 
Participants will receive $[ADDRESS_1193464] of their ability. Such incentives will only be available to 
paid participants and will be based upon accuracy and speed on the 
tasks and will tend to total $0 -$5 per hour. In the event of a 
multisession study, paid participants may als o receive a completion 
bonus. Participants that withdraw from the study prior to completion 
will receive prorated compensation (either monetary or credit hours) commensurate with the duration of participation. Lastly, monetary 
compensation or credit hours will be awarded once the study is 
complete, or after the subject withdraws from the study. 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 20 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  14.0 Withdrawal of Subjects*  
14.[ADDRESS_1193465].  
15.0 Risks to Subjects * 
15.[ADDRESS_1193466] the reasonably foreseeable risks, discomforts, hazards, or inconveniences to the sub jects related the subjects’ participation in 
the research. Include as may be useful for the IRB’s consideration, a description of  the probability, magnitude, duration, and reversibility 
of the risks. Consider physical, psychological, social, legal, and economic risks.  
Risks for the study include:  
GENERAL INFORMATION TMS is applied through a magnetic stimulator. This device consists of a set of electrical capacitors which can store and rapi[INVESTIGATOR_856930] a coil of electrical wire that is enca sed in shielded  plastic. We will use MagPro X100 
Magnetic Stimulator equipped for a figure 8 (i.e. butterfly) coil (MCF -B65) and a flex arm for coil positioning. The stimulator is 
manufactured by [CONTACT_351253], which is one of the most established manufacturers of TMS equipment with arguably the best currently available products and an excellent safety record. The coil is placed adjacent to the scalp above the targeted region. As the electrical current flows through the coil, a magnetic field is generated. The  
field passes through the skin and skull, inducing a brief change in the electrical flow of current in the brain. The magnetic pulse briefly alters neural activity in brain areas lying directly beneath the coil, presumably by [CONTACT_856948] t o a depth of 1.5 to 2.0 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 21 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, [ADDRESS_1193467] under the 
proposed stimulation conditions. The primary sources for this 
information come from the r ecommendations of the International 
Workshop on the Safety of Repetitive Magnetic Stimulation, June 
57, 1996 (reported in Wassermann, 1998). A new set of guidelines 
was published in 2009 (Rossi et al., 2009) based on a consensus conference which took place  in Certosa di Pontignano, Siena (Italy) 
in 2008. Our proposed studies fall firmly within these established safety guidelines. There are no known long- term health risks to the 
use of TMS per se when operated within consensus safety guidelines 
(Rossi et al. , 2009). In 2008, the FDA approved the use of high 
frequency TMS in the treatment of depression. Also in 2008, an 
international consensus conference on safety guidelines for TMS 
met. Their report (Rossi et al., 2009) systematically reviewed the 
thousands of healthy subjects and patients who have undergone TMS 
in order to allow for a better assessment of relative risks. The relative 
infrequency of adverse events using TMS was noted. They 
concluded that in the case of Class 3 studies (studies involving 
indire ct benefit and low risk in normal subjects and patients that are 
expected to yield important data on brain physiology or safety, but have no immediate relevance to clinical problems), normal 
volunteers should be permitted to participate in TMS research. They 
also concluded that this research can be performed in a nonmedical 
setting (i.e., psychology labs, robotics labs, research institutions, etc. as opposed to a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_856931]). 
The Rossi et al. (2009) consensus report  went on to suggest safety 
guidelines based on the now rather extensive international 
experience with TMS. These guidelines include the TMS intensity and timing parameters considered safe, training, and planning for and managing emergencies. We will follow  these guidelines, and 
have incorporated them into our screening and session procedures. The consensus safety guidelines (Rossi et al., 2009) are included as a 
supporting document attachment with this IRB application. 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_32729] ([CONTACT_856957]) has e xtensive experience with TMS 
during both graduate school and post -doctoral studies. He received 
formal training in the administration of TMS through an intensive 
course offered by [CONTACT_856949] 
(http://tmslab.org/educationintensive.php) lead by [INVESTIGATOR_124] . Alvaro 
Pascual -Leone, a world leader in non -invasive brain stimulation. He 
has delivered or directly supervised over 100 sessions of TMS with 
no serious adverse effects. Over the course of these sessions, one 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 22 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, [ADDRESS_1193468] to stimulation 
intensity, frequency, and durat ion. Adverse effects increase as each 
of these variables increases. The TMS protocols to be used in this study are reflective of the PI’s previous studies and are suggestive of 
a low incidence of adverse effects with the planned stimulation 
parameters. Her e I list the documented risks associated with TMS: 
Seizure. Seizure is a theoretical risk with TMS. In a workshop convened by [CONTACT_28930] (NINDS) in 1996, researchers in the field agreed upon a set of 
TMS co nsensus safety guidelines, including recommended 
stimulation parameters and contraindications (Wasserman, 1998), 
and these consensus guidelines have been recently updated (Rossi et 
al., 2009). Widespread adherence to the 1996 guidelines has resulted 
in the  virtual elimination of inadvertent seizures in TMS studies 
(Rossi et al., 2009). The levels of stimulation used in this protocol 
are well within safety guidelines (Rossi et al., 2009; Wassermann et 
al. 1998). In the Rossi et al. (2009) report it was state d that "the 
occurrence of seizures has been extremely rare, with most of the few 
new cases receiving rTMS protocols exceeding previous guidelines, 
often in patients under treatment with drugs which potentially 
lowered the seizure threshold. A total of [ADDRESS_1193469] been 
identified to date (from tens of thousands on participants tested). Seven of these cases were included in the previous 1998 safety 
guidelines and 9 had been reported subsequent to the 1996 report. 
The majority of the seizures were in duced in studies 1) using 
parameters outside the safety guidelines 2) examining patients with neurological or psychiatric conditions taking pro- epi[INVESTIGATOR_856932], or 3) both. Our protocol excludes patients taking pro-  
epi[INVESTIGATOR_856933] (Rossi et al., 2009). Four of the new seizures (two following single -pulse and two following repetitive 
TMS, rTMS) appear to have been induced in studies using "safe" 
stimulation parameters. The two rTMS incidents involved patients 
with either major depression (Figiel et al., 1998) or tinnitus (Nowak 
et al., 2006). The single -pulse incidents involved a patient with 
multiple sclerosis (Haupts et al., 2004) and a patient with bipolar 
depression (Tharayil et al., 2005). In summary, all of the new seizure 
incidents involved patients that would be excluded by [CONTACT_409849], 
and in three of the cases, the patients were TAKING 
proepi[INVESTIGATOR_856934]. Since 2009, only one more seizure has 
been reported (Katz et al., 2011). This occurred in a healthy subject who developed symptoms of a seizure after single pulse TMS during 
initial motor threshold estimation. The initial stimulation setting was 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 23 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  at 50% of the maximum stimulator output (MSO) and produced a 
very large motor evoked potential signal (peak- to-peak amplitude 9.2 
mV), with observable movement of the whole right hand. The 
stimulation was lowered until the movements were restricted to the 
fingers. The subject  then reported nausea and became unresponsive 
with involuntary limb movements and loud breathing. These reactions persisted for about 90 s. Given the unusual nature of this 
case, it has been questioned whether this reaction should be 
considered a seizure ( Alonso -Alonso et al., 2011). The event lacks 
unequivocal features to be diagnosed as a seizure, and may be better considered as convulsive syncope. In summary, with over [ADDRESS_1193470] never been reported to induce a 
seizure and are well within the limits recommended by [CONTACT_856950] (Rossi et al., 
2009). Personnel who administer TMS will be trained to recognize a 
potential seizure event and to act as first responders i n order to 
administer appropriate initial care. In addition, all study personnel 
will be trained in CPR usage. However, we wish to emphasize that 
there are no known cases where individuals required the use of CPR 
during a TMS session. The major physical si gns the study personnel 
will look out for in detecting a potential seizure include chewing movements, convulsions/tremor/shaking, difficulty talking, a blank 
stare, eyes rolling up, and profuse sweating. If any of these signs are 
observed, study personnel will stop the research procedure and 
inquire whether the subject feels okay. If the subject is unresponsive (and therefore likely experiencing a seizure), first -aid will be 
supplied. The first -aid response consists of making sure the subject is  
physically safe for the duration of the seizure. This involves moving 
the subjects out of the TMS chair and onto the floor lying down on their left side. The subject will be kept lying down on their left side, while the staff call emergency medical help, via a [ADDRESS_1193471] for minutes to hours following the end 
of the stimulation. It is typi[INVESTIGATOR_442429]. 
Neck pain or scalp pain may also occur. Both are usually managed easily with over -the-counter analgesics. The experimental procedure 
will be immediately terminated whenever anyone reports 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 24 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, [ADDRESS_1193472] experienced. 
On some occasions, TMS might cross the threshold to the point 
where it would actually be described as producing a slightly painful 
scalp sensation. We will closely monitor subjects' comfort and will 
request them to  tell us if the stimulation ever feels painful. If this 
occurs, we will immediately decrease TMS intensity to a level that is not painful. It is important to note that the likelihood of headache and other discomfort depends upon the stimulation parameters. 
Parameters for clinical applications for depression note a rate of 28% 
for pain, which is greater than the 16% observed for sham (i.e. no 
true stimulation; Loo et al., 2008). However, for TBS, the rate is less 
than 3% (Oberman et al., 2011). In many cases , discomfort can be 
due to neck pain resulting from holding one’s head still against the 
coil. The figure 8 coil (MCF -B65) is lightweight compared to most 
coils and will be supported by [CONTACT_856951] t. Therefore, we anticipate rates of 
adverse effects due to pain and discomfort will be low and in 
accordance with the PI’s previous history with the technique. 
Transient hearing changes. TMS produces an audible clicking noise 
when the current passes through the coil. This click can result in 
tinnitus and transient decreased hearing if no protection is used. To 
prevent this adverse effect, all experimental participants will wear 
ear plugs. Animal and human studies have demonstrated that 
earplugs can effecti vely prevent the risk of hearing disturbances or 
discomfort due to TMS. 
Participants may experience lightheadedness or dizziness. In rare 
cases, a syncope may occur  (Rossi et al., 2021) . Participants will be 
verbally queried for any feelings of lightheadedness or dizziness immediately after stimulation. Since these symptoms typi[INVESTIGATOR_856935] (i.e. reduced blood flow to the brain), steps will be taken to facilitate cerebral perfusion including 
hydration (offering the participant wa ter), cold compress to reduce 
vasodilation, and lowering the head of the participant. The procedure 
chair can recline to facilitate the latter. In the event of dizziness, 
experimental procedures will be paused until symptoms resolve. In the rare event of a syncope, participants will be monitored until they 
regain consciousness. Experimenta l procedures will be terminated, 
and the IRB will be informed. 
The experimenters will also be provided with ear protection devices 
to minimize any discomfort they might ex perience from the clicks. 
Transient cognitive/neuropsychological changes. Some repetitive 
TMS protocols have been shown to affect cognitive processing for 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 25 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  up to one hour following stimulation. Specifically, this is the case for 
"offline" techniques such as  [ADDRESS_1193473] 
stimulation (TBS; Huang et al., 2005). These changes are small, but 
could in theory affect the subject's ability to drive home safely. 
However, our use of offline TMS always precedes the actual 
experimental task that subje cts are performing. Since the effects of 
the TMS parameters we are proposing to use have never been observed to last more than [ADDRESS_1193474]. 
15.4 If applicable, describe risks to others who are not subjects. 
NA 
16.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects * 
16.1 Describe the potential benefits that individual subjects may 
experience from taking part in the research. Include as may be useful for the IRB’s consideration, t he probability, magnitude, and 
duration of the potential benefits. 
No direct benefit.  
16.[ADDRESS_1193475] benefit.  
17.0 Data Management * and Confidentiality  
17.[ADDRESS_1193476] and/or 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 26 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, [ADDRESS_1193477] sizes . 
17.2 Describe the steps that will be taken  to secure the data (e.g., 
training, authorization of acce ss, password protection, encryption, 
physical controls, certificates of confidentiality, and separation of 
identifiers and data) during storage, use, and transmission. 
The steps that will be taken to secure the data (e.g., training, 
authorization of access , password protection, encryption, physical 
controls, certificates of confidentiality, and separation of identifiers and data) during storage, use, and transmission include retaining information in digital format. Digital information will be stored on 
password protected local machines, or on secure cloud based 
services such as Google Docs also requiring a password. 
17.3 Describe any procedures that will be used for quality control of collected data.  
NA 
17.4 Describe how data or  specimens will be handled study -wide:  
• What information will be included in that data or associated 
with the specimens?  
• Where and how data or specimens will be stored?  
• How long the data or specimens will be stored? 
• Who will have access to the data or speci mens?  
• Who is responsible for receipt or transmission of the data or 
specimens?  
• How data or  specimens will be transported?  
NA 
18.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety  of Subjects*  
This section is required when research  involves more than Minimal Risk  
to subjects. 
18.1 Describe:  
• The plan to periodically evaluate the data collected regarding 
both harms and benefits to determine whether subjects remain safe.  The plan might include establishing a data monitoring 
committee and a plan for reporting data monitoring committee findings to the IRB and the sponsor. 
• What data are reviewed, including safety data, untoward events, and efficacy data.  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 27 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  • How the safety information will be collected (e.g., with case 
report forms, at study visit s, by [CONTACT_856952]). 
• The frequency of data collection, including when safety data collection starts.  
• Who will review the data. 
• The frequency or periodicity of review of cumulative data.  
• The statistical tests for analyzing the safety da ta to determine 
whether harm is occurring. 
• Any conditions that trigger an immediate suspension of the 
research.  
 The primary safety risk of TMS is seizure. Any seizures resulting from TMS will be reported to the IRB. The incidences of seizures will be monitored. If it appears that the incidences of seizures 
observed in the study are statistically higher than those reported in 
the literature (e.g. through the use of a chi -square test), the IRB 
will be alerted and the safety protocol will be revisited.  
19.[ADDRESS_1193478] subjects’ privacy 
interests. “Privacy interest” refers to a person’s desire to place limits on whom they interact or whom they provide personal information.  
The steps taken to protect subjects’ privacy interests include testing in a private and secure location requiring keycard access. Subjects will be consented and screened individually in a testing room, where he or she will have contact [CONTACT_856953].  During the consenting process, the participant will only have contact [CONTACT_856954]. 
19.2 Describe what steps you will take to make the subjects feel at ease with the resea rch situation in terms of the questions being asked and 
the procedures being performed. “At ease” does not refer to physical discomfort, but the sense of intrusiveness a subject might experience in response to questions, examinations, and procedures.  
Subje cts will be able to stop or leave at any moment. Additionally, 
trained personnel will deliver instructions and provide information regarding where to go if they have questions. 
19.[ADDRESS_1193479] 
access to view the information. 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 28 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, [ADDRESS_1193480] wages and other damages caused by [CONTACT_201335]. 
21.0 Economic Burden to Subjects  
21.1 Describe any costs that subjects may be responsible for because of participation in the research. 
NA 
22.0 Consent Process  
22.1 Consent will be obtained:  
• In person, onsite in the Nee lab or Hajcak lab, prior to the 
collection of data.  
• There will be no waiting period available  between informing 
the prospective subject and obtaining consent. 
• There will be no process to ensure ongoing consent  
• HRP -090 consent will not be used. 
• The individuals listed in the application will tell subjects that 
the purpose of the study is to understand the mental processes involved in retaining information in mind when it is no longer available to the senses, and using retained information to guide  
behavior. The participants will also be informed of the duration of the experiment, use of TMS, use of EEG, and inclusion and exclusion criteria.  
• Additionally, participants will be screened in order to minimize risks associated with fMRI. Screening will p roceed in two 
phases. First, the screening form will be sent to the participant via email (see Appendix). The participant will be asked to respond with whether the answer to any question on the screening form is “yes”. If the response is “yes” to any quest ion, the participant will be excluded. If the participant 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 29 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, [ADDRESS_1193481] phase of screening and remains interested in 
participating, the participant will be invited to perform the 
study. Participants will read the consent form and any 
questions will be a nswered. After answering questions, the 
participant will once again be presented with the screening 
form. If the answer is “yes” to a given question, the participant 
may be asked to elaborate. A “yes” response may occur in the 
second screening, but not the  first, if circumstances changed 
since the initial screening.  
• Consent discussion will occur prior to data collection. Data 
collection will not occur until subjects understand the study 
outlines and protocol. 
• Researchers will inform subjects that participa tion is voluntary 
and they can leave at any moment.  
• Researchers will ask participants questions regarding understanding of the study before proceeding.  
• The consenting process will take as long as any subject needs 
to understand the experiment. 
• Steps that w ill be taken to minimize the possibility of coercion 
or undue influence include understanding the task and a formal 
signature [CONTACT_856956] . 
 
Non-English Speaking Subjects  
• NA 
Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process  (consent will not be 
obtained, required information will not be disclosed, or the 
research involves deception)  
• NA 
Subjects  who are not yet adults (infants, children, teenagers)  
• NA 
Cognitively Impaired Adults  
• NA 
Adults Unable to Consent  
• NA  
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 30 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, 2018  Adults Unable to Consent  
• NA 
23.0 Process to Document Consent in Writing  
23.1 Describe whether you will be following “ SOP: Written 
Documentation of Consent (HRP -091).” If not, describe whether and 
how consent of the subject will be documented in writing.  
Yes, written  consent will be obtained.  
23.2 If your research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to 
subjects and involves no procedures for which written documentation of consent is normally required outside of the research context, the IRB will generally waive the requirement to obtain written documentation of consent. 
23.3 (If you will document consent in writing, attach a consent document. If you will obtain consent, but not document consent in writing, attach a consent script. R eview “CHECKLIST: Waiver of Written 
Docu mentation of Consent  (HRP -411)” to ensure that you have 
provided sufficient information. You may use “ TEMPLATE 
CONSENT DOCUMENT  (HRP -502)”to create the consent 
document or script.)  
A consent document is attached.  
24.[ADDRESS_1193482] the research.  
• Identify where your research team will identify and recruit potential subjects. 
• Identify where research procedures will be performed.  
• Describe the composition and involvement of any community advisory board. 
• For research conducted outside of the organization and its 
affiliates  describe:  
o Site-specific regulations or customs affecting the 
research for research outside the organization. 
o Local scientific and ethical review structure outside the 
organization.  
 The research team will identify and recruit potential subjects in the Nee lab or Hajcak lab in the Psychology Building at [LOCATION_012] State University. Consent and TMS  screening will occur in the Nee lab 
or Hajcak lab in the Psychology building at [LOCATION_012] State University. The research procedures will be performed in the College of Medicine at [LOCATION_012] State University. This is where the 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  TMS  Studies of Working Memory and Cognitive Control  
 
 Page 31 of 31  Revis ed: December 1, [ADDRESS_1193483] the research: For 
example, as appropriate:  
• Justify the feasibility of recruiting the required number of 
suitable subjects within the agreed recruitment period. For example, how many potential subjects do you have access to? What percentage of those potential subjects do you need to recruit?  
Much of the student population of [LOCATION_012] State University will be eligible for our studies. This is a large pool from which to draw which will ensure the abi lity to recruit and test the 
required number of participants. 
• Describe the time that you will devote to conducting and completing the research . 
The research will be conducted over the next several years  
• Describe your facilities.  
The Nee lab and Hajcak lab are equipped with testing rooms with computers designated for testing subjects and privacy for 
consenting and screening participants. The College of 
Medicine houses the TMS equipment  where TMS studies will 
be performed.  
• Describe the availability of medical or psychological resources 
that subjects might need as a result of an anticipated 
consequences of the human research.  
A CPR kit and AED are available at the TMS suite. Emergent 
medical care is available through standard sources (e.g. 911).  
• Describe your process to ensure that all persons assisting with the research  are adequately informed about the protocol, the 
research procedures , and their duties and functions. 
All persons assisting with the research are adequately informed about the protocol, the research procedures, and their duties 
and functions by [CONTACT_856955] , shadowing trained researchers, and 
training in seizures and CPR.  
26.0 Multi -Site Research * 
26.[ADDRESS_1193484] s* 
If this is a multicenter study, indicate the total number of subjects to be accrued across all sites.  
NA 