Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 1 of 30   Research Protocol  
 
Principal Investigator:  
 
[INVESTIGATOR_36009] M. Venditti, PhD, Associate Professor of Psychiatry and Epi[INVESTIGATOR_29711], Diabetes Prevention Support Center, University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_99601]  
[EMAIL_11378] 
(412) 302- 5228  
 
Co-Investigators:  
Marsha D. Marcus , PhD , Emeritus Professor of Psychiatry and Psychology ,  
Anne B. Newman, MD, MPH , Distinguished [CONTACT_595686][INVESTIGATOR_623], Professor, Medicine and 
Clinical and Translational Science  
Steve Albert PhD , MA, MS, Philip B. Hallen Endowed Chair in Community Health and Social Justice  
Lan Yu, PhD , Associate Professor of Medicine, Psychiatry, and Clinical and Translational Science  
Kelly R. Williams, PhD , MPH,  UPMC Center for High Value Health Care  
 
Study Location(s):  University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9109] (UPi[INVESTIGATOR_32887])  
 Sponsor:  National Institute on Diabetes, Digestive, and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK)   
Version:  2 
Date:  1-2-2024  
  
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 2 of 30   REVISION HISTORY 
 
Revision #  Version 
Date  Summary of Changes  Consent 
Change?  
Version 2  Effective 
1/5/2021 Initial sessions during the 6-month base intervention 
protocol  (in-person group s essions 1-  4, and one 
transition session to prepare for  teleconference 
follow -up) were stopped as of April  2020 due to the 
Coronavirus disease (Covid- 19) pandemic . All 
sessions were thereby [CONTACT_595659]. A s ession “0” was added  for 
tele-orientation to the program . The learning content 
remained the same . Yes/approved  
   
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 3 of 30   Table of Contents  
1.0 Study Summary  ................................................................................................................................ 4 
2.0 Objectives  ........................................................................................................................................ 4 
3.0 Background  ...................................................................................................................................... 6 
4.0 Study Endpoints  ............................................................................................................................. 10 
5.0 Study Intervention .......................................................................................................................... 10 
6.0 Study Design/Timeline  .................................................................................................................. 12 
7.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  .................................................................................................... 13 
8.0 Vulnerable Populations  .................................................................................................................. 14 
9.0 Number of Subjects ........................................................................................................................ 14 
10.0  Recruitment/Enrollment Methods  .................................................................................................. [ADDRESS_786296] the Privacy Interests of Subjects  .................................................................. 23 
21.0  Compensation for Research -Related Injury  ................................................................................... 23 
22.0  Economic Burden to Subjects  ........................................................................................................ 23 
23.0  Consent Process  ............................................................................................................................. 23 
 
  
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 4 of 30   1.0 Study Summary  
The confluence of obesity and pre -diabetes in older adults substantially increases the risk of 
diabetes, and accelerates functional decline, multimorbidity, disability, and death. More research is 
needed to refine and extend preventive interventions to reduce burden for elders and society. For over a decade efficacious 6 - and 12- month Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) based lifestyle interventions 
have been translated successfully and demonstrated positive impact. However, efforts to develop and 
evaluate mo re scalable programs conforming to current Medicare guidelines (MDPP) for longer term 
DPP interventions (up to 18-  or 24- months) and help a greater proportion of enrollees achieve and 
sustain the recommended weight loss target of ≥ 5% are lacking. Our scientific premise is that the 
evaluation of translational DPP interventions, which has centered largely on strategies for we ight loss 
induction, must be extended to include longer -term interventions that clearly demonstrate durable 
weight, cardiometabolic and functional health benefits for vulnerable elders in community- based 
settings. Our previous DPP -adapted  research has documented the utility of group telephone follow -up 
after a 6 -month DPP weight loss induction and shown that 63% of a 65–80 -year-old volunteer sample 
with obesity and other risk factors were able to sustain ≥ 5% weight loss at 12- months.  
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_595647] (reflected in recent  Medicare rulings ) translational studies of 24- month long DPP interventions with older adults  are 
scarce. This study utilize s community -based settings to examine whether we can sustain the impact of an 
elder -focused DPP approach using potentially scalable telehealth treatment components over a 24 -month 
period. We will recruit and enroll 65–80- year-old adults with obesity and pre -diabetes (N = 360) th rough 
networks  of senior community centers that provide aging services  and utilizing other older adult  targeted 
database resources . The intervention program sequencing will be aligned with current Medicare (MDPP) 
policy. First, from 0- [ADDRESS_786297] 25% from ethnic/racial minority groups. Next, participants, will be randomized ( up to N = 180 per arm; stratified by [CONTACT_595660] < or ≥ 
5%) to one of two 18- month follow -up conditions conducted between 6- 24 months. We will compare 
the effects of (1) DPP -Behaviorally Intensive  30-Minute Groups  or DPP -BI and (2)  DPP Minimal 
Support  15-Minute Groups  or DPP -MIN on measures of weight/adiposity (the primary outcome) at 12, 
18, and [ADDRESS_786298] immediate potential for MDPP lifestyle interventions , 
involving telehealth delivery, which are consistent with a chronic care model, and will benefit vulnerable aging individuals and society.  
 
2.0 Objectives  
Obesity in adults ≥ 65 years is prevalent14 and elevates risk for diabetes,15 multimorbidity,16 
functional decline17 and healthcare burden.18-20 The Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) intensive 
lifestyle intervention21-[ADDRESS_786299] been hampered by [CONTACT_595661], incomplete reporting, inadequate focus on behavioral intensification for participants not meeting goals, and lack of scalable, lo nger duration interventions.
31 Because there is good evidence that 
achieving and sustaining clinically meaningful weight loss of ≥ 5% 32-[ADDRESS_786300] immediate 
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page [ADDRESS_786301] interactive group phone support (one 30- minute contact/month ) was associated with significant 
weight loss28 (7.5 ± 5.5% and 63% achieving ≥ 5%) and associated health improvements at [ADDRESS_786302] more scalable intervention strategies, in a two -arm trial, designed to achieve and  sustain weight losses of ≥5% and 
produce cardiometabolic, physical function, and other health benefits over 24 months. 
The proposed translational effectiveness study will commence with a non- randomized, video-
delivered DPP intervention (our Group Lifestyle Balance -DVD)
4,[ADDRESS_786303] model for achieving the primary weight loss induction of ≥ 5%, followed by 
[CONTACT_595662]-BI or DPP -MS (both telephonic coaching interventions, both aligned with a 
Medicare delivery schedule) for the next 18 months.  After  the 6- month induction period, participants 
will be stratified by [CONTACT_595663] (< or ≥ 5%) and those assigned to DPP -BI will receive 
continued MDPP -prescribed behavioral group sessions  (remotely)  plus additional individualized activity 
coaching. Activity is critical at any age, but for elders with obesity and pre -diabetes, especially those 
who have not reached DPP weight targets  by 6- months, it may enhance cardiometabolic and functional 
health outcomes compared to minimal contact [INVESTIGATOR_67866].7,39  Between 12 -24 months the DPP -BI group will 
continue with group phone coaching sessions that are designed to integrate DPP weight management strategies with those aimed at critical self -care/healthcare behaviors for healthy aging (“5 -keys”)
8,10. In 
contrast, those assigned to DPP -MS (control) will rely on brief group phone contacts alone as the 
minimum scalable modality  for lifestyle behavior change accountability over this period.  
We plan to recruit and enroll ambulatory adults , 65 years of age and older  (up to N = 360) with BMI 
≥ 27 kg/m2 and pre -diabetes (FPG > 100 and <125 mg/dl, or HbA1c > 5.7 and <6.4% mg/dl) from senior 
community settings  and using other database resources . Between 0- [ADDRESS_786304] (16 sessions) will 
be provided t o all enrolled. Between 6- 12 months , individuals randomized to DPP -BI, will receive DPP 
sustai ned DPP -BI 30- minute group calls  (6 sessions) and ≤ 2 individual physical activity consults. 
Between 12- 24 months  sessions reduce to one every two months  (6 sessions) . Those assigned to DPP -
MS, will participate in brief unstructured group support phone contacts  according to the same schedule .  
Participants, 25% from ethnic/racial minority groups (primarily African American) , will be assessed at 
baseline, 6, 12, 18, and 24 months to determine the following specific aims:  
Aim 1: Document the impact of DPP -BI compared to DPP -MS on weight at 12, 18, and 24 months.  
Hypothesis 1:  Overall, DPP -BI compared to DPP -MS will result in more favorable weight loss (average 
change and the proportion reaching ≥ 5%) at 12, 18, and 24 months. 
Aim 2: Document the impact of DPP -BI compared to DPP -MS on cardiometabolic, physical 
activity/function, secondary outcomes, and behavioral adherence measures at 12, 18 and 24 months. Hypothesis 2:  Overall, DPP -BI compared to DPP -MS will result in more favorable cardiometabolic, 
physical activity/function, secondary outcomes, and behavioral adherence measures at 12, 18, and 24 
months. 
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 6 of 30   Exploratory Aim:   We will examine differences in intervention response (weight, cardiometabolic, and 
function) by [CONTACT_545] (African American, Caucasian). For a proportion of the sample, we will explore 
Medicare data for group differences in medical utilization (medications, o utpatient, inpatient, emergency 
visits) and participation in activity programs.  
Evaluating incremental refinements to standard DPP approaches through community centers 
providing aging services, in alignment with MDPP1,[ADDRESS_786305] effective, sustainable 
weight -loss maintenance strategies, we conclude that refining and evaluating longer term healthy 
lifestyle maintenance programs for elders in the context of existing senior services  can propel advances 
in preventive healthcare and potentially decrease medical burden for older adults and society.  
  Obesity is prevalent in the aging population and associated with cardiometabolic risk.  By 2030 
over 20% of the residents of the [LOCATION_002] (US) will be over the age of [ADDRESS_786306] century population health. Increases  in obesity (BMI ≥ 30 
kg/m2) among adults in all age groups have neither slowed nor stopped.14 According to the US Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) reports 
41-[ADDRESS_786307] of men and women ≥ [ADDRESS_786308] obesity prevalence rate among older adults at 44.2%. 
Obesity prevalence rates have been shown to fall by [CONTACT_358727] 10% after age 75, although black women and individuals in rural communities
[ADDRESS_786309] shown the adverse health consequences of excess adiposity for metabolic, cardiovascular and general health outcomes (e .g., 
hyperglycemia, metabolic syndrome, insulin resistance, diabetes, inflammation, plasma lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], arterial blood pressure, and other downstream physiologic abnormalities).
45-[ADDRESS_786310] argued that obesity is inversely associated with morbidity and mortality in elders (i.e., 
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 7 of 30   the “obesity paradox”),59,[ADDRESS_786311] life expectancy and quality of life.
45,62 -64 In addition, normative age -related 
physiologic changes are associated with a progressive loss of lean muscle mass and function known as 
“sarcopenia” with prevalence estimates ranging from 25 -50% of adults ≥ 65 years showing problems 
with body strength and endurance.65 The term “sarcopenic obesity” has been coined to describe the 
problematic interplay of excessive fat mass and low muscle function.  Functional decrements may 
operate through biomechanical pathways (e.g., lower extremity stress and pain) or through cardio-
metabolic and pro- inflammatory pathways, all of which contribute to poor health outcomes. Although 
some have argued that weight loss among older adults may result in further loss of lean mass and 
compromise functional health,[ADDRESS_786312] weight 
loss, particularly when combined with regular physical activity, is highly beneficial.3,67,68 Additional 
research that indicates it is the confluence of obesity and diabetes that accelerates the physical function 
impairment and reduced quality of life seen in aging individuals, is especially pertinent to the current 
proposal.45,62,63,69,70 Unless feasible and sustainable prevention efforts are mounted 3,63,64 an increasing 
number of aging adults will be living longer with obesity and the progressive burden of chronic 
conditions and mobility impairment.   
  Obesity, diabetes, and mobility disability accelerates loss of independent living. It has been 
documented that the average age of nursing home residents  with obesity  is 74, compared to age 80 for 
normal -weight residents71. Although serious deficits in activities of daily living and disability (e.g., 
getting in and out of bed, eating, and dressing independently) have decreased during the last decades of 
the 20th century overall, they have increased by 43% for those living with obesity58. A large prospective 
study72 of community dwelling elders, aged 65 -74 at baseline, examined the odds of nursing home 
admission over 2 decades and found that obesity increased the risk of admission by [CONTACT_358727] 30%; obesity plus one additional risk factor (diabetes, hypertension, or smoking) doubled the odds. Maintaining functional independence is certainly paramount to older adults, caregivers, and the healthcare system. Thus, mitigating obesity and diabetes risk during this period seems particularly crucial for delaying the onset of more costly and restrictive levels of care.  
  Older adults respond well to diet and activity interventions but have been underrepresented in 
major clinical trials and community -based studies.  Elders typi[INVESTIGATOR_344777] <20% of the enrolled 
sample in major multicenter weight loss trials, but available data indicates they are very responsive to the behavioral regimens provided.
23,36,73  This was striking in the DPP trial, with individuals ≥ 60 years 
attending more sessions (including supervised group activity), self -monitoring more consistently, 
achieving weight loss of ≥7% 74 and increasing physical activity36 at higher rates than younger 
participants. This observed outcome was associated with a decrease in incident diabetes of 71% over an average 34 months of active follow -up compared to the average decrease of 59% (ages 45 -59) and 48% 
(ages 25 -44) in the youn ger age groups. Figure 1a and 1b suggest that the long period of sustained 
weight loss (left, bottom line) among older adults was critical to diabetes prevention/delay (right, bottom 
line) compared to the metformin (middle line) and placebo (upper line) gr oups. However, older adults 
have not been the focus of most translational studies of DPP interventions and other cardiovascular risk 
intervention trials
[ADDRESS_786313] et al76 delivered in senior centers by [CONTACT_595664] a 
12-session DPP intervention to an attention control program and found significant differences between 
groups, but weight loss did not reach 5% on average. More community studies evaluating longe r 
duration programs are needed to document the full potential for meaningful weight and health outcomes.  
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 8 of 30     Weight management and other evidence- based lifestyle interventions such as “10-  Keys ™ to 
Healthy Aging” have potential to mitigate multiple chronic conditions in aging adults. 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_595648] ≥ 4 healthy lifestyle habits (e.g., faster walking 
pace, more leisure physical activity, modest alcohol intake, BMI <30 kg/m2 and not smoking) have 45% 
lower odds of incident heart failure.77 Several large randomized trials of intensive diet and activity 
interventions demonstrate that weight loss in the 65+ age group with obesity also results in enhanced 
health related quality of life, vitality and physical function.64,68,78,[ADDRESS_786314], obesity has been associated with an approximate 25% 
increase in odds of mood and anxiety disorders, including among adults ≥ age 6080. A community 
intervention study81 of racially diverse older adults found that either a brief evidence -based problem 
solving therapy directed at mood regulation, or an individual nutrition coaching program directed at healthy lifestyle, performed equally well in reducing symptoms of depres sion over 24 months among 
elders with elevated depressive symptoms at baseline. Our GLB intervention (mean age 72) also demonstrated a “two -for-one” (weight loss and mood) benefit in the short term
28.  Therefore, our 
scientific premise is that older adults, at ever increasing risk for multiple chronic conditions,16,18,82 may 
benefit from comprehensive behavioral lifestyle interventions that reinforce common self -management 
behaviors ( i.e., goal -setting, self -monitoring, problem -solving) with capacity to address multiple risk 
factors. Indeed, this is the theoretical rationale for the development of elder -focused approaches such as 
“10- Keys to Healthy Aging”,8 and is wholly consistent with DPP intervention goals regarding the 
importance of maintaining a healthier weight for cardio -metabolic and functional health benefit. With 
the proposed study of longer duration maintenance interventions, we reason that integr ating DPP -based 
weight maintenance and a “multimorbidity prevention” approach is synergistic, with potential to amplify motivation for self -care among elders.  
  Few DPP translational studies have documented longer term maintenance outcomes or 
moderators of success beyond [ADDRESS_786315],83 self-monitoring,74 self-weighing,84 problem solving,85-87 and adherence to physical activity are 
all implicated in the maintenance of long term weight loss and associated cardiometabolic and physical function benefits
88. However, a recent meta- analysis of 44 DPP -based translation/dissemination studies 
demonstrated that a gap exists between that which has been demonstrated by [CONTACT_595665]. Although short -term cardiometabolic benefits are evident, this 
systematic literature review found that the average number of program contacts in the first six months of DPP translational studies was 11 sessions and only 60% included a continued contact [CONTACT_595666]. Moreover, t ranslational programs that have offered follow -up interventions have reported that in-
person attendance wanes significantly during the second six months of programming and may not be cost-efficient.
[ADDRESS_786316] not been examined long term with elders, nor has the study of elder -focused 
physical activity programming and guidance been integrated or evaluated.  
     Enrollment/participation in community -based activity programs is a potentially promising 
approach for enhancing weight loss maintenance and functional health in elders.  King and 
Guralnik92 have argued that the best way to maintain functional health in an aging population is to 
increase their physical activity and social engagement; providing behavioral guidance for community-based activity program participation may offer a means to both ends. To date, most DPP interventions 
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page [ADDRESS_786317] focused on self -monitoring and awareness of activity minutes or steps but not necessarily the 
merits of enrolling in structured or supervised activity programs. Increasing behavioral support for 
appropriate activity programs has potential to improve t he weight and health of elders with 
cardiometabolic risk, such programs are often part of the services provided at senior centers and fitness facilities but are underutilized . Importantly, prospective research has shown that adjusted Medicare costs 
decreas ed in the two years subsequent to joining these types of activity programs (e.g., Healthways 
Silver Sneakers®, Silver&Fit®, EnhanceFitness®)
93. Other data suggests that program participation of ≥ 
[ADDRESS_786318] of these types of elder -
focused activity programs when combined with a structured weight loss/weight maintenance component.      Our own initial internal review of Silver and Fit™ data, the subsidized activity program for elders that is part of the UPMC Health Plan, indicated that in 2015 only about 12.5% of those enrolled in Medicare Advantage chose to participate in this activity benefit. For those who did elect to participate, most attended classes < [ADDRESS_786319] serve a 65–[ADDRESS_786320] decreases in glucose impairment and health care usage could decrease economic burden. When comparing a pre -diabetes group t o a 
reference group (without diabetes diagnosis or never glucose tested) adjusted rate ratios showed that the pre-diabetes group had 34% more ambulatory visits per year. Additional medical visits associated with 
pre-diabetes have been estimated to range fr om 9% more for serious cardiovascular and peripheral 
vascular disease to 92% more for hypertension for age and sex- matched controls.
96,[ADDRESS_786321] for late life 
individuals by [CONTACT_595667]. In addition, our partnerships with established senior community service networks and 
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page [ADDRESS_786322] implications for a range of elder focused health services and add to our understanding of 
safe and effective lifestyle intervention weight management and preventive chronic care strategies  for 
individuals aged 60+.  
 
4.0 Study Endpoints  
The Sustain study primary endpoint is 24- months, and important secondary endpoints are examined at 
18, 12, and 6- months . All study endpoints are indexed from baseline assessment;  however , 
randomization does not occur until the six- month assessment .  
 
5.0 Study Intervention 
 
Session 0 
added 
4/1/20 
(when 
session s 1-
4 in-person 
meetings  
were stopped)   DPP Base Intervention Sequence : All Participants  
Distribute Core Sessions Workbook and Self -Monitoring Materials  
(45-60 minutes, weekly)  
0-Be a Good Phone Group Member  
1-Welcome to the Sustain -DPP Study  
2-Be a Calorie Detective  
3-Healthy Eating  
4-Move Those Muscles  
5-Tip the Calorie Balance  
6-Take Charge of What’s Around You  
7-Problem Solving  
8-Four Keys to Healthy Eating Out  
9-Slippery Slope of Lifestyle Change  
10-Step Up Your Activity Plan  
11-Make Social Cues Work for You  
12-Ways to Stay Motivated  
13-Strengthen Your Physical Activity  
14-Manage Your Stress  
15-Mindful Choices, Mindful Eating, Mindful Movement  
16-Take Charge of Your Lifestyle  
 Randomization to Follow -up Conditions  
6 Months  A. Active Comparator  
DPP Behaviorally Intensive  (DPP -BI):  
30-45 Minute Calls (monthly)  B. Placebo Comparator  
DPP Minimal Support  (DPP -MIN):  
15-Minute Calls (monthly)  
 New workbook and self -monitoring 
materials distributed . 
 17- A New Balancing Act  No workbook or self -monitoring materials. 
Two standard prompts per call:  
  
(1) D iscuss past month lifestyle successes  
and challenges (2) S hare strategies  and 
positive ideas  for healthy lifestyle 
maintenance  
 18- Stay Active for Life   
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 11 of 30   (plus 1 to 2 one -on-one PA telephone 
consults; delivered by [CONTACT_255434] 20)  
 19- Build Your Own Eating Pattern   
 20- Take Care of Your Heart   
 21- Stay Positive   
 22- Look Back and Look Forward   
12 Months  DPP-BI Healthy Aging : 30-Minute Calls  
(every 2 months ) DPP-MIN : 15-Minute Calls  
(every 2 months)  
 New workbook distributed . 
 
22-Stay Vital Longer  No workbook .  
Two standard prompts per call:  
(1) Discuss past month lifestyle successes and challenges (2) Share strategies and 
positive ideas for healthy lifestyle 
maintenance  
 23-Keep Bones, Joints, Muscles Healthy   
 24-Care for Mind Body Health   
18 Months  DPP-BI Healthy Aging: 30 -Minute Calls  
(every 2 months ) DPP MIN : 15-Minute Calls  
(every 2 months)  
 New workbook distributed:  
 25- Know Your Numbers  Two standard prompts per call:  
(1) Discuss past month lifestyle successes and challenges (2) Share strategies and positive ideas for healthy lifestyle 
maintenance  
 26-Stay Socially Connected   
 27-Live Healthier Longer   
24 Months  End of study  End of study  
Table 1: Overview of 24 Month Intervention Sequence by [CONTACT_595668] -up Group  
Videos + Tele conference  Coaching (0 -6 months).  The 24- month intervention (Table  1) commences 
with a 16- session program administered to all enrolled. Participants receive both hard copy DVDs ( DPP 
sessions 1 -12 only) and instructions for how to access session videos on a password -protected website. 
Participants are directed to watch session videos independently ( 15-20 minutes per each) and follow 
along wi th the intervention workbook when participating in groups  either in-person or by [CONTACT_648] . 
Because the first several weeks of weight change have been shown to be highly predictive of long term intervention response
[ADDRESS_786323] 4 sessions to enhance 
commitment, group cohesion, and behavioral accountability for self -weighing and self -monitoring. As 
of 4/1/[ADDRESS_786324] five 
weeks on a dedicated phone line as a proxy for in -person weighing. A  preliminary Session 0 was added 
to orient the group to the phone conferencing procedures and “good virtual group etiquette ” at the 
outset . Participants received materials to complete the base 16 -session intervention (workbook, DVDs, 
Calorie King ® Calorie Counter; Food and Activity Diaries)  by [CONTACT_21173][INVESTIGATOR_9696]- up or mail delivery. An Accusplit 
Eagle activity monitor was dis tributed at the baseline assessment with instructions on how to complete 
the step assessment  and mail -back a step -tracking post -card before Session 2. P articipants also received 
Go4Life (NIA) activity videos  and other web- linked resources  featuring older adults doing aerobic, 
strength, balance,  and flexibility exercises with instruction on safe progression. 
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 12 of 30   Continued Group Tele conference Coaching for the Active Comparator and the Placebo Comparator 
(6-24 months). Following the six -month assessment visit, r andomization to one of the two 18- month 
continued contact [CONTACT_595669] < or ≥ 3.5% , and also 
incorporated age, sex, and race as balancing variables . The two conditions are: ( Active Comparator ) 
DPP Behaviorally Intensive  or DPP -BI:30-Minute Calls (monthly)  and ( Placebo Comparator ) DPP 
Minimal Support  or DPP -MIN:15-Minute Calls (monthly) . Both group conditions have the same follow -
up dose/frequency (total of 18 group contacts)  and each cohort  meet s with the same lifestyle coach as 
they did during their  base sequence.  
 
The DPP -BI condition was  designed to be behaviorally intensive and aligned with principles of 
MDPP implementation.   Structure d workbooks were used to guide all DPP -BI sessions . In addition, 
those assigned to this arm  were offered up to [ADDRESS_786325] for tailored guidance and feedback on their activity goals  
between Session s 18 and Session 20. Subsequent DPP -BI sessions incorporate d concepts from  the “5-
Keys  to Healthy Aging” and integrate d self -care/healthcare for blood pressure, blood gluc ose, LDL 
cholesterol, healthy bones, muscles and joints, and mood (depression).  Such health maintenance and 
weight loss maintenance health  goals we re mutually reinforced during this phase. Lifestyle coaches 
follow ed a standardized leader guide and session scripts. Phone sessions we re designed to last about [ADDRESS_786326] ed individuals with Master ’s level preparation 
and demonstrated experience in DPP implementation an d/or group lifestyle coaching. All 
interventionists receive d standardized [ADDRESS_786327] ed 10% of interventionist  phone sessions for future independent coding.  
Intervention Fidelity Assurance/Session Monitoring. We u sed standardized intervention materials to 
promote rigor and reproducibility. A  study investigator supervised the  intervention delivery  monthly  
and an independent rater  listened to an d rated 10% of session recordings to ensure  that health coach es 
follow ed the int ervention manual  and deliver ed intervention content as intended. Feedback was 
provided. 
 
6.0 Study D esign /Timeline   
Study design.  This single -site study use d an individually randomized, 2- arm, 24- month, translational 
effectiveness design.  We aim ed to enroll N = 360 participants (180 per condition).  To meet total 
enrollment targets for the study  (Table 2) , we estimate d a need of  [ADDRESS_786328] in Year 4.  Because group telephone interaction constitute d a large proportion of the core 
and follow -up intervention, we limited  initial group size to approximately N = 8- 10 participants. As 
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page [ADDRESS_786329], over the course of the 
study. Anticipated recruitment was Year 1 (N = 62), Year 2 (N = 124) , Year 3 (N=124), and Year 4 (N = 
50).  Outcome assessments were conducted at 0, 6, 12, 18, and [ADDRESS_786330] dissemination, eligibility requirements wer e 
designed to be minimal.  Inclusion criteria were as follows: (1) A ge 65+  years at baseline with no upper 
age limit, acknowledging that other exclusionary criteria would be present for the oldest old, (2) BMI ≥ 27 kg/m2 confirmed at a screening/baseline visit, (3) F asting plasma glucose >100- 125 mg/dl or HbA1c 
>5.7- 6.4% mg/dl confirmed at screening/baseline visit , (4) M edical clearance and approval for 
participation in the intervention protocol  was required from all enroll ed. If, for any reason, the provider 
believed that participation in a [ADDRESS_786331] 
community resources.  
 Exclusion criteria we re as follows: (1) Prior diagnosis of diabetes or currently using medications to treat 
diabetes, (2) permanently confined to a wheelchair (other assistive devices were deemed  acceptable), ( 3) 
unable or unwilling to give informed consent ( 4) Unable or unwilling to self -monitor food, activity, and 
weight as indicated in the intervention orientation, (5) S ignificant dementia or hearing loss that would 
preclude group participation ( 6) Significant psychiatric impairment that would preclude g roup 
participation under normal circumstances in the community, (7) C urrently using weight loss 
medications, (8) Weight loss of 4.[ADDRESS_786332] six months , (9) Bariatric surgery within the 
last two years (those who were greater than [ADDRESS_786333] six months) (10)  Plans to leave the community permanently within the next 12 
months, plans for extended travel or other demands that would result in less than 50% attendance to the  Table [ADDRESS_786334] 1 recruit  N=[ADDRESS_786335] 2 recruit    N=[ADDRESS_786336] 3 recruit      N=[ADDRESS_786337] 4 recruit        N=[ADDRESS_786338] 5 recruit          N=[ADDRESS_786339] 6 recruit            N=40          
assess             0  6  12  18 * 
intervene              C C P P P P P 
   
Study Assessments (Blue) ; Core Program 0 to 6 Months (Green ); Phone Follow -Up 6 to 18 Months (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_8745] ) 
Manuscripts, Meetings, Partner Follow -Up and Planning  Activities (Purple)  
Note: * for Wave 6 ( N = 40 )  the 24 month assessment will occur Q1, Year 6  
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 14 of 30   intervention (in some instances patients are encouraged to pursue future baseline cycles of recruitment). 
In addition, those with diabetes and other exclusions w ere referred to other healthcare resources as 
needed.  
 
8.0 Vulnerable Populations  
The following special populations we re not targeted for recruitment : prisoners, institutionalized 
individuals, or others who may be considered vulnerable. Fetuses, neonates, children <[ADDRESS_786340] 1620 subjects would need to provide verbal consent to undergo phone 
screening procedures prior to consent and enrollment to reach a target N = 360 subjects for the Sustain study. 
 
10.0 Recruitment /Enrollment  Methods  
 Recruitment methods included contacts with members of senior centers , senior housing facilities , 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] -based  community foundations , research data registries, and other entities  providing services 
(and research opportunities) to older adults . Outreach to potential participants included in -person talks, 
electronic and postal mailings, posters and brochures, and paid advertising in senior -focused magazines  
and minority- focused newspapers . Participant recruitment activities commence d with the cooperation of 
the administrative directors and support staff of such organizations. The study was presented as an obesity management/diabetes prevention research program tailored to aging adults that could be complimentary to the health care or senior services they  were already receiving. Using this natural 
infrastructure as a platform for lifestyle intervention/healthy aging dissemination efforts was intended to enhance s ustainability and magnify public health impact. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_595649] -up 
questions , and it was made clear that choosing whether or not to partic ipate  would have no bearing on 
their community center activities or their medical care.  We emphasized that the study duration (and 
expected commitment)  was 24 -months , and up to five assessment visits , but that they were free to 
withdraw at any time , even after si gning informed consent . Staff used a uniform script to respond to 
individuals who voluntarily contact[INVESTIGATOR_530] a dedicated study line within 1 -14 days  to begin this process . 
 
The Sustain study employed a multi- step screening and enrollment  process  as follows :  
(1) Verbal C onsent was given to make an initial determination for inclusion/exclusion based upon self -
reported demographic information, medical history, interest in the intervention study, ability and 
willingness to participate, 2) Written informed consent was obtained at the F ield S creening  where 
trained study staff collected  a Cholestech finger -stick blood sample to measure HbA1c levels to provide 
confirmation of pre -diabetes status (i.e., 5.7- 6.4%) and a height/weight measure to ascertain minimum 
BMI of 2 7 kg/m2. (3) Subjects were informed immediately at this screening step whether they were 
eligible to continue to the baseline visit and it was scheduled within one -two weeks, on average.  Prior to 
April 2020, the Field Screening was conducted in the community, proximal to where participants lived, but post -Covid these locations were slower to resume business and all in person research activities were 
conducted at the University- based offices of the Sustain study. 
 
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 15 of 30   Participant Compensation. Participants received payment for research assessments in the amount of $25 
each for visits conducted at study months 0 (baseline) , 6, 12, 18.  
 
11.0 Study Procedures  
Assessments at 0 (baseline), 6, 12, 18 and 24- months   
 
All the following assessments occurred either in the community (pre -Covid) or i n the University clinic 
offices. Standard assessment duration was about 1.5 hours. 
 Weight and Height : was taken twice using a standardized protocol. Weight was measured to the nearest 
0.1 kg at all screening/assessment points using a digital scale (SECA 880) placed on a hard, flat surface. Height w as measured at all screening/assessment points in street clothes, without shoes, using a portable 
stadiometer and rounded to the nearest 0.1 cm.   BMI : was calculated as average weight divided by [CONTACT_595670] (kg/m2). 
 Fasting HbA1c, Glucose, Insulin and Lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805] (total, HDL and LDL cholesterol, and triglycerides) : were 
collected via standard venipuncture procedures for all assessments at 0, 6, 12, [ADDRESS_786341] (last food/drink consumption will be documented prior to collection of sample) or through a finger stick assessment when venipuncture was  not possible. The sample collected was no  
more than one teaspoon for a fingerstick sample and no more than one tablespoon, or 120 ul (microliters) for venipuncture. Procedures were performed by [CONTACT_595671] . Until March [ADDRESS_786342] Lipid 
Research Laboratories  at the University of Washington. When this lab closed in June 2020, specimens 
were processed  at the Advanced Research and Diagnostic Laboratory (ARDL) at the University of 
Minnesota in Minneapolis.   Waist Circumference: w as measured as an index of truncal fat using a standardized protocol. A Gulick 
tape w as placed around the bare abdomen horizontally at the midpoint between the highest point of the 
iliac crest and the lowest part of the costral margin in the mid -axillary line. Measurements were taken 
three times and averaged.  
 Blood Pressure : was measured using an automatic inflatable digital blood pressure monitor (OMRON 
HEM90HXC) with appropriate cuff size according to a standardized protocol.  International Physical Activity Questionnaire (Older Adult Version) : is a 4-item questionnaire that asks 
participants to describe their usual physical activity during a typi[INVESTIGATOR_595650] a typi[INVESTIGATOR_3711], in each of the following categories --time spent sitting, walking, doing moderate physical activities, doing vigorous physica l activities.  
 Objective Physical Activity Measurement : Participants used  a hip -worn pedometer to assess physical 
activity. They self -reported daily step counts, and the primary measure calculated was average daily step 
count over a 7 -day recording period. 
 Objective Short Physical Performance Battery (SPPB) : Evaluation of physical functional ability wa s 
assessed with four short tests (about 3- 5 minutes each) including (1) a 4- meter walk test (gait speed); (2) 
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 16 of 30   standing balance (feet together, semi -tandem, full tandem); (3) a chair stand test (rise from chair five 
times); and (4) grip strength test using a Jamar dynamometer.  
 
Falls History : an interviewer administered survey document ed number of falls, serious falls, and fear of 
falls experienced during the past year  
 Prescribed Medication List : Participants were asked at each visit  to update a list of all their currently 
prescribed medications (and dosages) taken regularly.  Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MOCA) : a widely used interviewer administered screening instrument 
for mild cognitive dysfunction, was used to assess several mental function domains. 
 All of the following were sent to participants to be c omplete d at home and brought back to the clinic at 
the time of each major assessment visit, or mailed back. Clinic staff checked all of these measures for completeness and phone participants if there were missing items.  
 Center for Epi[INVESTIGATOR_7307] -Depression Scale (CES -D): This 20- item scale is a self -administered 
instrument for assessing depressive symptoms.  SF-12v2 Health Survey: Quality Metric's SF -12v2 is a self -administered shorter version of the SF -36v2 
(used to reduce burden). We used this extensively norm -referenced measure of functional health and 
well-being, which captures the same eight health domains and produces a physical component (PCS) 
and mental component (MCS) summary score that may be compared to the longer version.  Patient Activation Measure : PAM is a self -administered 22- item scale measuring knowledge, skill and 
confidence for self -managing health and healthcare . 
 Weight and Activity Lifestyle Questionnaire : is a self -administered 13 -item scale to measure participant 
beliefs and expectations about self -managing eating and activity behaviors in the face of certain 
emotions, social situations and environments.  
 Mediterranean Diet Assessment Tool : This 14- item self -administered index was used because it has 
been shown to be sensitive to shifts in dietary quality related to interventions, both in the presence and absence of significant weight loss.  
 Rate Your Plate: We use d the Rate Your Plate- Heart 2010 version, a 24 -item, self -administered 
questionnaire that assesses the degree to which eating patterns are consistent with heart healthy dietary guidelines.   CHAMPS Physical Activity Questionnaire : is a 41 -item self -administered instrument, which measures 
the weekly frequency and duration of various physical activities commonly done by [CONTACT_21140]. MET -
weighted variables are readily coded, and the measure is sensitive to changes following activity interventions in persons aged 65- 90. 
 
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 17 of 30   Self-Reported Medical Conditions : The Duke Comorbidity Index is a self -administered inventory that 
asks, "Has your doctor ever told you that you have or have had" (any of 19 specific medical conditions 
that can be categorized into 8 health domains).  Family History of Diabetes and CVD : Research participants w ere asked to provide information about 
whether there is a family history of type [ADDRESS_786343] degree 
relative.  
 
Self-Reported Medical Utilization Outcomes : 
Medical Utilization  was measured by [ADDRESS_786344] Chronic Disease Self -Management 
Program evaluation protocol. This protocol measures the number of times, in the previous six months, an individual has visited a physician/health care provider (outpatient), a hospit al emergency room, the 
total number of separate hospi[INVESTIGATOR_614], and the total number of nights spend in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  Sustain DPP Satisfaction and Acceptability Survey: was collected for qualitative assessment of 
participant satisfaction . This  post -intervention survey contai ned Likert scale items and 5 open ended 
questions.  Complementary and Integrative Research Lab (CAIR) Pandemic Impact Survey: As of 9/30/20 we 
added one 19- item survey with the approval of our NIH/NIDDK sponsor  and IRB . The survey asks 
several questions about the psychosocial impact of COVID -19 and how it has affected either the study 
participant or someone close to them. We hypothesize d that the primary study aims (and the pre -
specified outcomes of weight change, physical activity, physical function and other measures) ha d the 
potential to be influenced (ne gatively and positively) by [CONTACT_47098].  
 UPMC Health Plan Medicare Metrics :  
We obtained  de-identified descriptive statistics for medical claims for consenting Sustain DPP study 
participants who we re also UPMC Health Plan Medicare Advantage members. This w as done to 
compare the two randomized intervention groups (using UPMC Health Plan aggregate data only) on the following claims -based information: categories and number of prescription claims, number of 
outpatient, inpatient and emergency room visits, percent age of participants utilizing physical activity 
benefits (i.e. Silver and Fit).  
12.[ADDRESS_786345] Lipid Research Laboratory (University of Washington, Seattle) until they closed in July of 2020, and then by [CONTACT_595672] (ARDL) (University of Minnesota, Minneapolis) .  No stored samples were banked. An investigator with interest in the data files 
for this study would need to contact [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_136] [EMAIL_11378]. 
 
13.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects  
The data collected  in this study are specific to the research and are not designed to assess medical 
conditions. The investigators are not responsible for failure to find existing abnormalities. In the unlikely event that a participant ’s data (e.g., bloodwork biometrics)  show  a possible abnormality, the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_12749] -I 
(Study MD)  contact s the participant  and advise s medical follow -up for the problem, including a referral 
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 18 of 30   to a primary c are p rovider (PCP). For  participant s who  already have a PCP, and provide verbal 
permission , the study doctor may inform the PCP of the finding and determine if  follow -up is advisable . 
The decision as to whether to proceed with further examination and/or treatment lies solely with a 
participant  and their  PCP. The study does  not cover the costs of any follow -up actions.  
 End of study information provided: Participants will be mailed a letter from the PI [INVESTIGATOR_595651], including a copy of the main outcomes paper  when available.  
 
14.0 Withdrawal of Subjects  
Participants may  be withdrawn from the research without their consent under the following 
circumstances : 
• the investigator decides that continuation can  be harmful to the participant , 
• participant  develops a new condition or undergoes  treatment that will make their subsequent 
follow -up data  in the study unusable , 
• the study is cancelled,  or there are other administrative reasons.  
 
In the event  a participant  withdraw s or is  asked to leave the study, they  will still be compensated for the 
study activities they have completed.  
 
15.[ADDRESS_786346] the health and well- being of 
research participants and their privacy and confidentiality. Risks associated with participation in this 
study include the following:   
(1) Potential risks associated with reduced caloric intake and increased physical activity, such as musculoskeletal injuries . 
(2) Patient privacy and confidentiality breach . 
(3) Inconvenience associated with data collection.  
 These risks are mostly associated with the characteristics of the target patient population and the procedures involved in the research. The risks are reasonable in relation to the anticipated benefits and will be minimized by [CONTACT_595673]. Although we cannot guarantee that risks will not occur, we will implement the following measures to minimize potential risks to participants in the study.  Protection against Risks Associated with Weight Loss Strategies. The premise of the study is that prudent yet comprehensive lifestyle interventions , which include evidence -based strategies for dietary 
modification, physical activity and behavior change, are necessary to meet the targets set forth in national guidelines for managing obesity and obesity- related cardiometabolic and other comorbidities. 
By [CONTACT_595674] -based guidelines for intensive behavior therapy, 
intervention par ticipants may be exposed to risks associated with caloric reduction and physical activity 
not experienced in routine  care.  
 The interventions to be tested in this clinical trial promote a balanced, calorie -controlled diet approach 
and recommend against very low -calorie diets (<1200 kcal/day) or losing weight too rapi[INVESTIGATOR_375] (> 2 lbs. 
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 19 of 30   per week). Participants will be advised to avoid crash or fad diets that promise marked, rapid weight 
loss. Instead, they will be advised to adopt a moderate caloric reduction by 500- 1000 kcal/day through 
healthy substitutions and portion control, rather t han omission or elimination of specific foods or food 
groups. Given the average age anticipated in this participant sample, the intervention will encourage 
consumption of  plant -based and  lean -meat  protein s and low -fat or fat -free dairies at most meals. The  
selection of low -calorie, nutrient -dense foods in accordance with USDA -recommended healthy dietary 
patterns will be emphasized. Participants who wish to lose additional weight  after reaching the 
program’s weight loss goal (5- 10% of baseline weight) will be encouraged to do so only insofar as they 
maintain a normal BMI and the rate of  weight loss does not exceed 2 l b/week.  
 
To minimize risks associated with increased physical activity, consistent with the current public health 
physical activity recommendations for Americans,  the study interventions promote achieving 150 
minutes or more per week of moderate -intensity physical activity in a gradual manner. If participants 
reach the 150 -minute goal but are not achieving the weight loss goal, they can gradually increase to 60-
90 minutes/da y of moderate physical activity, as tolerated. We will also recommend resistance training 
activities 2 times per week, consistent with NIA public health guidelines. Moderate -intensity physical 
activity is deemed feasible for adults with chronic c onditions or functional limitations, and the benefits 
are believed to outweigh the risks. We will emphasize brisk walking—a physical activity recommended 
as being safe for most adults —as the preferred mode of exercise. Participants will receive information  
about how to be active safely considering their conditioning, interest, context, and environment.  
 
Protection against Breaches of Participant Privacy and Confidentiality. All information to be obtained during the study will be considered strictly confidential and only used and disclosed as permitted under the HIPAA regulations. All eligible patients must sign the HIPAA authorization as a part of the informed consent to par ticipate. Only aggregate data will be included in scientific 
presentations and publications resulting from this study; the identity of individual participants will not be revealed. In a ddition, the following measures will be taken during the conduct of the study to ensure 
adequate protection of participant privacy and confidentiality:  
• All investigators and staff will be adequately trained to protect participant privacy and sign an 
agreement to do so. 
• Personal identifiable information (PII) and protected health information ( PHI) collected for the 
purpose of the research study will be assigned a unique anonymous study ID number. The study 
IDs will be used on all study forms  and for data storage, tracking and reporting. 
• Both the anonymized health information and the information linking the study ID numbers to participants’  identities will be stored in a password protected database on a secure network fitted 
for protection of such information, which will be accessible only to the research personnel who have a need to know.  
• The information linking the study ID numbers to participants ’ identities will be stored separately 
from the anonymized health information. 
• We will follow the latest industry standards for data encryption, server authentication, and client authentication to ensure secure data transmissions at all times.  
• No participant data, even if de -identified, shall be saved onto any portable  devices, such as 
laptop computers or USB drives. 
Protection against Risks Associated with Data Collection. All study measures are either  objectively 
measured by [CONTACT_7628], or self -measured or self -reported by [CONTACT_4317] . There are no 
greater risks associated with completing the required measurements in this study than those ordinarily 
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page [ADDRESS_786347] known health benefits, including 
but not limited to, lowering the risk of type 2 diabetes for those at high risk as well as prevention and control of hypertension and hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035]. Improvements in these lifestyle factors and health outcomes may in turn lead to better quality of life. All the benefits are likely to be long -term and outweigh any 
possible short -term risks.  
 
17.0 Data Management and Confidentiality 
Data Management .  
 Data security .  
 
18.0 Data Analysis Plan  
All analyses are conducted in consultation with the study biostatisticians, using SAS 9.4 (SAS Institute, 
Inc., Cary NC). Descriptive analyses and graphic displays are used to identify outliers, missing data, and patterns of attrition. Demographic variables and baseline measures are contrasted between the Active 
Comparator: DPP -Behaviorally Intensive 30- Minute Groups ( DPP-BI) and the Placebo Comparator: 
DPP Minimal 15 -minute Calls (DPP -MIN ) conditions. In all outcome analyses we will use an intent -to-
treat (ITT) approach in which participants remain in the study arm to which they are randomized 
regardless of attrition. The primary analytic strategy is a linear or generalized mixed -effect models 
approach in which treatment group, time, and time by [CONTACT_595675], and subject is treated as a random effect to account for individual subject variability. Hypothesis tests are two-sided, and significance will be set at the 0.[ADDRESS_786348] that we can anticipate 90% retention at 6 months and greater than 80% 
retention over the 18 -month extended intervention period (at 24 months) with no differential attrition 
between arms. Those who drop out or are lost to follow -up are com pared to those who have completed 
intervention for research assessments  using standard parametric and non -parametric methods, as 
appropriate. We will examine the patterns of missingness and, if necessary, account for missingness in outcome analysis (e.g., the covariate approach). Regression modeling will be conducted to adjus t for 
covariates such as race, sex, age, socio -demographic factors,  and other designated baseline clinical 
variables.  
Research Questions  
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 21 of 30   Analysis Plan for Hypotheses 1 and 2: We will apply mixed effect models to evaluate differential 
changes in weight measures at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months from baseline, with fixed terms of group (DPP -
BI vs. DPP -Min), time as a factor (6,12,18, and 24 months), and the group by [CONTACT_6491]. We 
employed  the following steps as the pre -randomization balancing logic: (1) group subjects by [CONTACT_595676] (≤ 3.5 vs. > 3.5 percent at 6- months) and age (≤ 70 vs. > 70 years at baseline), (2) group 
subjects by s ex (male vs. female) and race (Black/African American or Black/Mixed/Other vs. 
White/Caucasian), (3) group subjects using all 4 factors (based on 2x2 frequency table) and (4) 
randomly assign the subjects in the same cell into 2 conditions (DPP Plus vs. DPP  Minimal). Subject 
was included as a random term. To test the differential treatment effect, evaluated the coefficients that 
are associated with the group and the group by [CONTACT_595677] F test.  Planned contrasts 
will be set up from the mixe d models to compare the improvement in weight from baseline to Months 
12, 18 and 24 between the two conditions (DPP -BI vs. DPP -Min). In addition, a  generalized mixed -
effect model was fit to the binary outcome of achieving ≥ 5% weight loss at 6, 12, 18, and 24 months, with the logit link, which includes similar fixed and random terms as above. Average percent weight 
loss and the proportions achieving ≥ 5% weight loss are compared between the two groups at 12, 18 and 
24 months. S imilar analyses were performed  for fasting glucose, HbA1c, and insulin (and other 
biometric measures), physical activity/function, and other secondary outcomes at subsequent assessment 
points.   
The planned contrasts were set up to compare differential changes from baseline to Months 12, 18, and 
24. Benjamini -Hochberg’s method was used to control for the overall type I error for multiple secondary 
outcomes. More intensive modeling is performed to account for factors that are known to affect the 
outcomes as well as those that have been found to differ between treatment conditions at baseline and at Month 6 (the timepoint at which participants are stratified by < or ≥ 3.5% weight loss and other factors 
and randomly assigned to the two 18- month conditions). We also perform analyses in which we restrict 
our linear and generalized mixed -effect analyses to those who did not reach ≥ 5% weight loss at 6 
months and set up the contrasts to compare DPP -BI with DPP -MIN , on average, and the proportion 
reaching ≥ 5% at 12 months and 18 months from baseline.  
 
Exploratory Aim . We e xamine available Medicare data for those insured by a large regional payer to 
assess group and time from baseline differences in medical utilization metrics (e.g., type of outpatient, 
inpatient, or emergency visits) and participation in activity programs, for a proportion of the sample.  
We will extract Medicare data on numbers of outpatient, inpatient and emergency visits, and number of 
subjects participating in activity programs, and compare the numbers between the two conditions using 
linear and generali zed regression models.  We will explore the potential moderation effects of sex and 
race. We will include the interaction of sex by [CONTACT_595678] -effect  models, as 
well as the three -way interaction of sex, group and time or race, group and time, if the group by [CONTACT_595679].  
 
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 22 of 30   Power and Sample Size Considerations . We powered this study on the main comparisons between the 
Active Comparator: DPP -BI and the Placebo Comparator: DPP -MIN on average weight loss at 12 
months from baseline  (24-month data is not readily available) . With 180 subjects per arm and projected 
90% attrition at Month 12, we would have 80% power to detect effect sizes of 0.31, using two- sided t 
tests at the 0.05 level. Our prior Pi[INVESTIGATOR_595652] 7.5 % weight reduction at 12 
months among those subjects who received active intervention for 12 months, and 5.5% reduction at [ADDRESS_786349] 
deviation of 5.8% as observed in the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_595653], we expect to se e a standardized group difference 
ranging 0.[ADDRESS_786350] group differences with power greater than 0.8 for our primary 
weight outcome.  
 
19.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
In this minimal risk Sustain study, we utilized a Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) to ensure the 
safety of study participants and the validity and integrity of data in compliance with NIH /NIDDK and 
our local IRB.  The DSMP was reviewed annually by a single data safety monitoring officer  via written 
report  and teleconference . 
 
An AE is defined as any untoward medical or psychological event experienced by a subject during or as 
a result of his/her participation in the study that represents a new symptom or an exacerbation of an existing condition whether or not considered study- related based on appropriate medical judgment.  
SAEs are any adverse experience that results in any of the following outcomes:  
• Death  
• Imminently life -threatening event/illness  
• Inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081] 
• Persistent or significant disability/incapacity  
• Pregnancy resulting in a congenital anomaly/birth defect  
• Any event requiring medical or surgical intervention to prevent permanent impairment or 
damage. In this study, this is defined as physician confirmed diagnosis of any of the following: 
angina pectoris, heart attack, stroke, transient ischemic attack, heart  failure, coronary angioplasty 
or by[CONTACT_4897], peripheral vascular disease, incident diabetes, serious musculoskeletal injuries 
(e.g., fractures, ruptured ligaments), liver failure, kidney failure, and cancer (except for non-
melanoma skin cancer).  
 
Non-SAEs are all adverse events that do not meet the above criteria for “serious.”   
 
Blinded Reporting.  Safety information for this study is reported to the Safety Officer by [CONTACT_153238] (i.e., without revealing the treatment assignment of each group) . With each report , 
summaries of the numbers and rates of all AEs by [CONTACT_595680] .  
 
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page [ADDRESS_786351] be reported to the safety officer within 5 business days 
of discovery, regardless of any judgment of their relatedness to the study treatment . The safety officer 
may require a conference call to review relevant information ( and the site study physician’s 
determination of whether there was any possible relevance to the study)  and discuss and approve the 
investigators’ Corrective and Preventive Action Plan, if warranted.   
 
Data quality monitoring.  T he safety officer  receive s an annual  report on data quality and 
completeness. At a minimum, this report will include the following: (1) participant accrual and follow -
up completion/retention by [CONTACT_595681]; (2) the randomization process and 
group comparability on t he balancing variables; (3) data completeness for primary and secondary 
outcome measures; and ( 4) protocol exemptions, deviations and violations. Follow -up data will be 
reported for all partici pants, irrespective of random assignment, during the course of the study.  
 
Study Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_1869].  Formal stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_58106], efficacy, and futility are not proposed given 
that this is a minimal risk clinical trial as the behavioral intervention to be tested are based on prior 
research in different populations without major harms (e.g., mortality or serious medical complications). 
Second, while we hypothe size that the intervention will lead to significant and clinically meaningful 
improvements in weight loss and other outcomes of interest, we expect the probability of major health benefits (e.g., reduced incidence of disease or reduced mortality) that woul d trigger early stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_595654] a 24- month follow -up period.  
 
20.[ADDRESS_786352] the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
21.0 Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
There are no plans for the study to provide free medical care or to pay for research- related illnesses or 
injuries, or to provide other forms of compensation (such as lost wages or pain and suffering) to participant for research related illnesses or injuri es. As part of the informed consent process participants 
are advised to contact [CONTACT_7880]  [INVESTIGATOR_595655].  
 
22.[ADDRESS_786353] receive standardized training in trial -specific 
protocols  as well as mandatory training s in good clinical research practice.   For Sustain, t here will be an 
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 24 of 30   initial screening consent (verbal authorization for phone  or field  screening) and subsequently written 
informed consent . We allow sufficient time and resources to  meet the ethical obligations to research 
participants and to foster a progressively increasing understanding of the research as well as the 
development of rapport between subjects and research staff.  
 
Informed Consent Process Training . We will conduct effective and efficient informed consent to 
ensure that participants understand the following: (1) that the study is for research purposes and in no 
circumstances does it supplant medical care provided by [CONTACT_78567](s), (2) the risks and 
benefits of the study, (3) the available alternatives, and (4) that their voluntary decision to participate or 
to not participant in this research will be accepted without penalty (i.e. without jeopardizing their 
medical care or relationship with their clinical sites). In reaching a decision about participation, it is 
essential for the potential subject to demonstrate an ability to use this information in a rational manner. 
Thus, in considering the risks, benefits, and available alternatives, subjects must show that they 
understand the aspects of these factors that are unique to them as individuals.   
 
References  
1. Fitzpatrick SL, Wilson DK, Pagoto SL. Society for Health Psychology (APA Division 38) and Society of 
Behavioral Medicine joint position statement on the Medicare Diabetes Prevention Program. Translational behavioral medicine. 2017:1- 3. 
2. Group LAR. Eight -year weight losses with an intensive lifestyle intervention: the look AHEAD study. 
Obesity (Silver Spring, Md). 2014;22(1):5.  
3. Rejeski WJ, Ip EH, Bertoni AG, et al. Lifestyle change and mobility in obese adults with type 2 diabetes. N 
Engl J Med. 2012;366(13):1209 -1217.  
4. Kramer MK, Kriska AM, Venditti EM, et al. A novel approach to diabetes prevention: Evaluation of the 
Group Lifestyle Balance program delivered via DVD. Diabetes research and clinical practice. 
2010;90(3):e60 -e63.  
5. Kramer MK, Molenaar DM, Arena VC, et al. Improving employee health: evaluation of a worksite lifestyle 
change program to decrease risk factors for diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Journal of occupational 
and environmental medicine / American College of Occupational and Environmental Medicine. 2015;57(3):[ADDRESS_786354] HJ, Rosenberg DE, Beatty T, Arterburn DE. Barriers to and facilitators of physical activity program use among older adults. Clin Med Res. 2014;12(1- 2):10- 20. 
7. Dalcin AT, Jerome GJ, Fitzpatrick SL, et al. Perceived helpfulness of the individual components of a behavioural weight loss program: results from the Hopkins POWER Trial. Obesity Science & Practice. 2015;1(1):23- 32. 
8. Hibbard JH, Mahoney ER, Stock R, Tusler M. Do increases in patient activation result in improved self-management behaviors? Health services research. 2007;42(4):[ADDRESS_786355] J, Tusler M. Development and testing of a short form of the patient activation measure. Health services research. 2005;40(6p1):[ADDRESS_786356] J, Mahoney ER, Tusler M. Development of the Patient Activation Measure (PAM): conceptualizing and measuring activation in patients and consumers. Health services research. 2004;39(4p1):1005- 1026.  
11. Greene J, Hibbard JH, Alvarez C, Overton V. Supporting patient behavior change: approaches used by 
[CONTACT_595682]. The Annals of Family 
Medicine. 2016;14(2):148- 154.  
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 25 of 30   12. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Flegal KM. Prevalence of obesity in the [LOCATION_002]. JAMA. 2014;312(2):189-
190.  
13. Biggs ML, Mukamal KJ, Luchsinger JA, et al. Association between adiposity in midlife and older age and 
risk of diabetes in older adults. JAMA. 2010;303(24):2504 -2512.  
14. Salive ME. Multimorbidity in older adults. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_19274]. 2013;35:75 -83. 
15. Brown CJ, Flood KL. Mobility limitation in the older patient: a clinical review. Jama. 2013;310(11):1168 -
1177.  
16. Anderson G. Chronic Care: Making the case for ongoing care.  Robert Wood Johnson Foundation;2010.  
17. Anderson GF. Medicare and chronic conditions. N Engl J Med. 2005;353(3):305- 309.  
18. Vogeli C, Shields AE, Lee TA, et al. Multiple chronic conditions: prevalence, health consequences, and implications for quality, care management, and costs. J Gen Intern Med. 2007;[ADDRESS_786357] 3:391- 395.  
19. Knowler WC, Barrett -Connor E, Fowler SE, et al. Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with 
lifestyle intervention or metformin. N Engl J Med. 2002;346(6):393 -403.  
20. Diabetes Prevention Program Research G. The Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP): description of 
lifestyle intervention. Diabetes Care. 2002;25(12):2165- 2171.  
21. Diabetes Prevention Program Research G, Knowler WC, Fowler SE, et al. 10 -year follow -up of diabetes 
incidence and weight loss in the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study. Lancet. 
2009;374(9702):1677- 1686.  
22. Diabetes Prevention Program Research G. Long -term effects of lifestyle intervention or metformin on 
diabetes development and microvascular complications over 15 -year follow -up: the Diabetes Prevention 
Program Outcomes Study. The Lancet Diabetes & Endocrinology. 2015;3(11):866 -875.  
23. Venditti EM, Kramer MK. Diabetes Prevention Program community outreach: perspectives on lifestyle 
training and translation. Am J Prev Med. 2013;44([ADDRESS_786358] 4):S339- 345.  
24. Kramer MK, Kriska AM, Venditti EM, et al. Translating the Diabetes Prevention Program: a 
comprehensive model for prevention training and program delivery. Am J Prev Med. 2009;37(6):505 -
511.  
25. Kramer MK, McWilliams JR, Chen HY, Siminerio LM. A community -based diabetes prevention program: 
evaluation of the group lifestyle balance program delivered by [CONTACT_336479]. The Diabetes 
educator. 2011;37(5):659- 668.  
26. Venditti E, Marcus, MD, Miller, RG, Arena, VC, Greenspan, SL, Cwenar, B. Weight and well- being 
improves in older obese adults with mild depressive symptoms: two -for-one benefit of group lifestyle 
intervention. Diabetes  2015;64(S1):A219.  
27. Ali MK, Echouffo -Tcheugui JB, Williamson DF. How effective were lifestyle interventions in real- world 
settings that were modeled on the Diabetes Prevention Program? Health affairs. 2012;31(1):67- 75. 
28. Dunkley AJ, Bodicoat DH, Greaves CJ, et al. Diabetes prevention in the real world: effectiveness of 
pragmatic lifestyle interventions for the prevention of type [ADDRESS_786359] of adherence to 
guideline recommendations: a systematic review and  meta -analysis. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(4):922 -933.  
29. Mudaliar U, Zabetian A, Goodman M, et al. Cardiometabolic Risk Factor Changes Observed in Diabetes Prevention Programs in US Settings: A Systematic Review and Meta- analysis. PLOS Med. 
2016;13(7):e1002095.  
30. Williamson DA, Bray GA, Ryan DH. Is 5% weight loss a satisfactory criterion to define clinically significant 
weight loss? Obesity. 2015;23(12):2319- 2320.  
31. Albright AL, Gregg EW. Preventing type 2 diabetes in communities across the U.S.: the National Diabetes 
Prevention Program. Am J Prev Med. 2013;44([ADDRESS_786360] 4):S346- 351.  
32. Bray GA, Wadden TA. Improving long- term weight loss maintenance: can we do it? Obesity (Silver 
Spring). 2015;23(1):[ADDRESS_786361] of weight loss with lifestyle intervention on risk of diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2006;29(9):2102 -2107.  
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 26 of 30   34. The Diabetes Prevention Program Research G, Crandall J, Schade D, et al. The Influence of Age on the 
Effects of Lifestyle Modification and Metformin in Prevention of Diabetes. The journals of gerontology Series A, Biological sciences and medical sciences. 2006;61(10):1075- 1081.  
35. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_595656] P. Certification of Medicare Diabetes Prevention Program. 2016; 
https://www.cms.gov/Research -Statistics -Data -and-
Systems/Research/ActuarialStudies/Downloads/Diabetes -Prevention -Certification -2016 -03-14.pdf . 
36. Venditti EM. Behavior Change to Prevent or Delay Type 2 Diabetes: Psychology in Action. American 
Psychologist. 2016.  
37. Nelson ME, Rejeski WJ, Blair SN, et al. Physical activity and public health in older adults: recommendation from the American College of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Association. 
Circulation. 2007;116(9):1094.  
38. Ortman JM, Velkoff VA, Hogan H. An aging nation: the older population in the [LOCATION_002].  
39. Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of childhood and adult obesity in the [LOCATION_002], 
2011- 2012. JAMA. 2014;311(8):806 -814.  
40. Flegal KM, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Ogden CL. Prevalence of obesity and trends in the distribution of body 
mass index among US adults, 1999 -2010. Jama. 2012;307(5):491 -497.  
41. Fakhouri TH, Ogden CL, Carroll MD, Kit BK, Flegal KM. Prevalence of obesity among older adults in the [LOCATION_002], 2007 -2010. NCHS data brief. 2012(106):1- 8. 
42. Befort CA, Nazir N, Perri MG. Prevalence of obesity among adults from rural and urban areas of the [LOCATION_002]: findings from NHANES (2005 -2008). The Journal of rural health : official journal of the 
American Rural Health Association and the National Rural Health Care Association. 2012;28(4):392 -397.  
43. Villareal DT, Apovian CM, Kushner RF, Klein S. Obesity in older adults: technical review and position 
statement of the American Society for Nutrition and NAASO, The Obesity Society. Obesity research. 
2005;13(11):1849- 1863.  
44. McTigue KM, Hess R, Ziouras J. Obesity in older adults: a systematic review of the evidence for diagnosis 
and treatment. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2006;14(9):1485 -1497.  
45. Allison DB, Downey M, Atkinson RL, et al. Obesity as a disease: a white paper on evidence and arguments commissioned by [CONTACT_595683]. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2008;16(6):1161-
1177.  
46. Bastien M, Poirier P, Lemieux I, Despres JP. Overview of epi[INVESTIGATOR_595657]. Progress in cardiovascular diseases. 2014;56(4):369 -381.  
47. Gregg EW, Cheng YJ, Cadwell BL, et al. Secular trends in cardiovascular disease risk factors according to 
body mass index in US adults. Jama. 2005;293(15):1868- 1874.  
48. Saydah S, Bullard KM, Cheng Y, et al. Trends in cardiovascular disease risk factors by [CONTACT_595684], NHANES 1999 -2010. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2014;22(8):1888- 1895.  
49. Burke GL, Arnold AM, Bild DE, et al. Factors Associated with Healthy Aging: The Cardiovascular Health 
Study. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. 2001;49(3):254 -262.  
50. Mozaffarian D, Kamineni A, Carnethon M, Djousse L, Mukamal KJ, Siscovick D. Lifestyle risk factors and 
new -onset diabetes mellitus in older adults: the cardiovascular health study. Arch Intern Med. 
2009;169(8):798- 807.  
51. Cheng YJ, Imperatore G, Geiss LS, et al. Secular Changes in the Age -Specific Prevalence of Diabetes 
Among U.S. Adults: 1988 –2010. Diabetes Care. 2013;36(9):2690- 2696.  
52. Boyle JP, Thompson TJ, Gregg EW, Barker LE, Williamson DF. Projection of the year 2050 burden of 
diabetes in the US adult population: dynamic modeling of incidence, mortality, and prediabetes 
prevalence. Population Health Metrics. 2010;8:29 -29. 
53. Messier SP, Legault C, Mihalko S, et al. The Intensive Diet and Exercise for Arthritis (IDEA) trial: design 
and rationale. BMC musculoskeletal disorders. 2009;10:93.  
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 27 of 30   54. Martin LG, Schoeni RF. Trends in disability and related chronic conditions among the forty -and-over 
population: 1997 -2010. Disability and health journal. 2014;7([ADDRESS_786362]):S4 -14. 
55. Silverwood V, Blagojevic -Bucknall M, Jinks C, Jordan JL, Protheroe J, Jordan KP. Current evidence on risk 
factors for knee osteoarthritis in older adults: a systematic review and meta- analysis. Osteoarthritis and 
cartilage / OARS, Osteoarthritis Research Society. 2015;23(4):507- 515.  
56. Alley DE, Chang VW. The changing relationship of obesity and disability, 1988 -2004. Jama. 
2007;298(17):2020- 2027.  
57. Lavie CJ, De Schutter A, Milani RV. Healthy obese versus unhealthy lean: the obesity paradox. Nature 
reviews Endocrinology. 2015;11(1):55 -62. 
58. Flegal KM, Kalantar- Zadeh K. Overweight, mortality and survival. Obesity (Silver Spring). 
2013;21(9):1744 -1745.  
59. Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, et al. 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline for the management of overweight and obesity in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and The Obesity Societ y. Journal of the American College 
of Cardiology. 2014;63(25 Pt B):2985- 3023.  
60. Nocera J, Buford TW, Manini TM, et al. The impact of behavioral intervention on obesity mediated 
declines in mobility function: implications for longevity. J Aging Res. 2011;2011:392510.  
61. Anton SD, Karabetian C, Naugle K, Buford TW. Obesity and diabetes as accelerators of functional decline: can lifestyle interventions maintain functional status in high risk older adults? Exp Gerontol. 
2013;48(9):888 -897.  
62. Houston DK, Leng X, Bray GA, et al. A long -term intensive lifestyle intervention and physical function: the 
look AHEAD Movement and Memory Study. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2015;23(1):77 -84. 
63. Janssen I, Heymsfield SB, Ross R. Low relative skeletal muscle mass (sarcopenia) in older persons is 
associated with functional impairment and physical disability. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2002;50(5):889 -896.  
64. Newman AB, Lee JS, Visser M, et al. Weight change and the conservation of lean mass in old age: the Health, Aging and Body Composition Study. Am J Clin Nutr. 2005;82(4):872- 878; quiz 915- 876.  
65. Villareal DT, Chode S, Parimi N, et al. Weight loss, exercise, or both and physical function in obese older 
adults. N Engl J Med. 2011;364(13):1218 -1229.  
66. Messier SP, Mihalko SL, Legault C, et al. Effects of intensive diet and exercise on knee joint loads, 
inflammation, and clinical outcomes among overweight and obese adults with knee osteoarthritis: the IDEA randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2013;310(12):1263- 1273.  
67. Buford TW, Anton SD, Judge AR, et al. Models of accelerated sarcopenia: critical pi[INVESTIGATOR_595658] -related muscle atrophy. Ageing Res Rev. 2010;9(4):369- 383.  
68. Figaro MK, Kritchevsky SB, Resnick HE, et al. Diabetes, inflammation, and functional decline in older 
adults: findings from the Health, Aging and Body Composition (ABC) study. Diabetes Care. 
2006;29(9):2039 -2045.  
69. Lapane KL, Resnik L. Weighing the relevant issues: obesity in nursing homes. J Aging Soc Policy. 
2006;18(2):[ADDRESS_786363] MM. Lifestyle -related risk factors and risk of future nursing 
home admission. Archives of internal medicine. 2006;166(9):985 -990.  
71. Pi-Sunyer X. The Look AHEAD Trial: A Review and Discussion Of Its Outcomes. Current nutrition reports. 
2014;3(4):387- 391.  
72. Wing RR, Hamman RF, Bray GA, et al. Achieving weight and activity goals among diabetes prevention program lifestyle participants. Obesity research. 2004;12(9):1426- 1434.  
73. Dhruva SS, Redberg RF. Variations between clinical trial participants and Medicare beneficiaries in evidence used for Medicare national coverage decisions. Archives of internal medicine. 2008;168(2):136-140.  
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page [ADDRESS_786364] DS, Bursac Z, Cornell CE, et al. Lay Health Educators Translate a Weight -Loss Intervention in Senior 
Centers: A Randomized Controlled Trial. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2011;41(4):385- 391.  
75. Del Gobbo LC, Kalantarian S, Imamura F, et al. Contribution of Major Lifestyle Risk Factors for Incident 
Heart Failure in Older Adults: The  Cardiovascular Health Study. JACC: Heart Failure. 2015;3(7):520 -528.  
76. Anton SD, Manini TM, Milsom VA, et al. Effects of a weight loss plus exercise program on physical function in overweight, older women: a randomized controlled trial. Clin Interv Aging. 2011;6:141- 149.  
77. Jakicic JM, Gregg E, Knowler W, et al. Activity patterns of obese adults with type 2 diabetes in the look 
AHEAD study. Medicine and science in sports and exercise. 2010;42(11):1995- 2005.  
78. Simon GE, Von Korff M, Saunders K, et al. Association between obesity and psychiatric disorders in the 
US adult population. Archives of general psychiatry. 2006;63(7):[ADDRESS_786365], Thomas SB, Morse JQ, et al. Early intervention to preempt major depression among older black and white adults. Psychiatr Serv. 2014;65(6):765- 773.  
80. Fabbri E, Zoli M, Gonzalez -Freire M, Salive ME, Studenski SA, Ferrucci L. Aging and Multimorbidity: New 
Tasks, Priorities, and Frontiers for Integrated Gerontological and Clinical Research. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 
2015;16(8):640 -647.  
81. Newman AB, Bayles CM, Milas CN, et al. The 10 keys to healthy aging: findings from an innovative 
prevention program in the community. Journal of aging and health. 2010.  
82. Svetkey LP, Stevens VJ, Brantley PJ, et al. Comparison of strategies for sustaining weight loss: The weight loss maintenance randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2008;299(10):1139 -1148.  
83. Wing RR, Tate DF, Gorin AA, Raynor HA, Fava JL. A self- regulation program for maintenance of weight 
loss. N Engl J Med. 2006;355(15):[ADDRESS_786366]. 2014;11:16.  
85. Murawski ME, Milsom VA, Ross KM, et al. Problem solving, treatment adherence, and weight -loss 
outcome among women participating in lifestyle treatment for obesity. Eating behaviors. 
2009;10(3):146 -151.  
86. Perri MG, Nezu AM, McKelvey WF, Shermer RL, Renjilian DA, Viegener BJ. Relapse prevention training and problem -solving therapy in the long- term management of obesity. Journal of consulting and clinical 
psychology. 2001;69(4):722.  
87. Goodpaster BH, DeLany JP, Otto AD, et al. Effects of diet and physical activity interventions on weight loss and cardiometabolic risk factors in severely obese adults: A randomized trial. JAMA. 2010;304(16):1795- 1802.  
88. Vanderwood KK, Hall TO, Harwell TS, et al. Implementing a state -based cardiovascular disease and 
diabetes prevention program. Diabetes Care. 2010;33(12):2543- 2545.  
89. Ma J, Yank V, Xiao L, et al. Translating the Diabetes Prevention Program lifestyle intervention for weight loss into primary care: a randomized trial. JAMA Intern Med. 2013;173(2):113- 121.  
90. Weinstock RS, Trief PM, Cibula D, Morin PC, Delahanty LM. Weight loss success in metabolic syndrome by [CONTACT_595685]: results from the SHINE Study. J Gen Intern Med. 2013;28(12):1620- 1628.  
91. King AC, Guralnik JM. Maximizing the potential of an aging population. JAMA. 2010;304(17):1944 -1945.  
92. Nguyen H, Ackermann R, Maciejewski M, et al. Managed -Medicare Health Club Benefit and Reduced 
Health Care Costs Among Older Adults. Preventing Chronic Disease, Public Health Research, Practice, and 
Policy. 2008;5(1).  
93. Ackermann RT, Cheadle A, Sandhu N, Madsen L, Wagner EH, LoGerfo JP. Community exercise program 
use and changes in healthcare costs for older adults. American journal of preventive medicine. 
2003;25(3):232 -237.  
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page [ADDRESS_786367] 
Differences with Participation in a Community -Based Group Physical Activity Benefit for Medicare 
Managed Care Health Plan Members. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. 2008;56(8):1459 -1465.  
95. Nichols GA, Arondekar B, Herman WH. Medical care costs one year after identification of hyperglycemia 
below the threshold for diabetes. Med Care. 2008;46(3):287- 292.  
96. Nichols GA, Glauber HS, Brown JB. Type 2 diabetes: incremental medical care costs during the 8 years 
preceding diagnosis. Diabetes Care. 2000;23(11):[ADDRESS_786368] associated with prediabetes. Popul Health Manag. 
2009;12(3):157 -163.  
98. Robare JF, Bayles CM, Newman AB, et al. The “10 Keys” to healthy aging: 24 -month follow -up results 
from an innovative community -based prevention program. Health Education & Behavior. 
2011:1090198110379575.  
99. Zgibor JC, Schlenk EA, Vater L, et al. Partnership Building and Implementation of an Integrated Healthy -
Aging Program. Progress in community health partnerships: research, education, and action. 
2016;10(1):123 -132.  
100.  Venditti E, Delahanty D, Edelstein S, Hoskin M, Mele L, Wylie- Rosett J. Diabetes Prevention Program 
(DPP) Lifestyle Coaches Use Standard Session Content and Problem Solving as a Common Response to 
Participant Barriers. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2010;18(Suppl: 84):166P.  
101.  Bandura A. Health promotion by [CONTACT_48164]. Health education & behavior : the official 
publication of the Society for Public Health Education. 2004;31(2):[ADDRESS_786369] of lifestyle intervention on sedentary 
time in individuals at high risk of diabetes. Diabetologia. 2015;58(6):1198 -1202.  
103.  Venditti EM, Kramer MK. Necessary components for lifestyle modification interventions to reduce 
diabetes risk. Curr Diab Rep. 2012;12(2):138 -146.  
104.  Kramer MK, Miller RG, Siminerio LM. Evaluation of a community Diabetes Prevention Program delivered by [CONTACT_584611]: one -year follow up. Diabetes research and clinical practice. 
2014;106(3):e49- 52. 
105.  Unick JL, Neiberg RH, Hogan PE, et al. Weight change in the first two months of a lifestyle intervention predicts weight changes 8 years later. Obesity (Silver Spring, Md). 2015;23(7):1353 -1356.  
106.  Rigler SK, Studenski S, Wallace D, Reker DM, Duncan PW. Co -morbidity adjustment for functional 
outcomes in community -dwelling older adults. Clinical rehabilitation. 2002;16(4):[ADDRESS_786370] 
Activity Monitors in Older Adults With Varied Ambulatory Abilities. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2016.  
108.  Ware JE, Jr., Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36 -item short -form health survey (SF -36). I. Conceptual 
framework and item selection. Medical care. 1992;30(6):473 -483.  
109.  Studenski S, Perera S, Patel K, et al. Gait speed and survival in older adults. Jama. 2011;305(1):50- 58. 
110.  Guralnik JM, Ferrucci L, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_29825], et al. Lower extremity function and subsequent disability: consistency across studies, predictive models, and value of gait speed alone compared with the short physical performance battery. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2000;55(4):M221 -231.  
111.  Greenspan SL, Perera S, Ferchak MA, Nace DA, Resnick NM. Efficacy and safety of single -dose zoledronic 
acid for osteoporosis in frail elderly women: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med. 
2015;175(6):913- 921.  
112.  Nasreddine ZS, Phillips NA, Bedirian V, et al. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment, MoCA: a brief 
screening tool for mild cognitive impairment. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2005;53(4):695 -699.  
113.  Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JB. The PHQ -9: validity of a brief depression severity measure. J Gen 
Intern Med. 2001;16(9):606 -613.  
114.  Morrow S. Instrumental activities of daily living scale. AJN The American Journal of Nursing. 
1999;99(1):24CC.  
Reducing cardiometabolic risk and promoting functional health in community- based elders with obesity 
and pre -diabetes: evaluating sustainable follow -up strategies  
 Page 30 of 30   115.  Baumgartner RN, Wayne SJ, Waters DL, Janssen I, Gallagher D, Morley JE. Sarcopenic obesity predicts 
instrumental activities of daily living disability in the elderly. Obesity research. 2004;12(12):1995 -2004.  
116.  Martinez -Gonzalez MA, Garcia- Arellano A, Toledo E, et al. A 14 -item Mediterranean diet assessment tool 
and obesity indexes among high -risk subjects: the PREDIMED trial. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43134.  
117.  Shen J, Wilmot KA, Ghasemzadeh N, et al. Mediterranean Dietary Patterns and Cardiovascular Health. Annual review of nutrition. 2015;35:425 -449.  
118.  Ruiz- Canela M, Zazpe I, Shivappa N, et al. Dietary inflammatory index and anthropometric measures of 
obesity in a population sample at high cardiovascular risk from the PREDIMED (PREvencion con DIeta MEDiterranea) trial. The British journal of nutrition. 2015;113(6):984- 995.  
119.  Kiernan M, Schoffman DE, Lee K, et al. The Stanford Leisure -Time Activity Categorical Item (L -Cat): a 
single categorical item sensitive to physical activity changes in overweight/obese women. Int J Obes (Lond). 2013;37(12):1597 -1602.  
120.  Taylor -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_285765], Norton LC, Haskell WL, et al. Validation of a new brief physical activity survey among 
men and women aged 60 -69 years. Am J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2006;164(6):598- 606.  
121.  Haskell WL, Lee IM, Pate RR, et al. Physical activity and public health: updated recommendation for adults from the American College of Sports Medicine and the American Heart Association. Medicine and science in sports and exercise. 2007;39(8):[ADDRESS_786371]. CHAMPS physical activity questionnaire for older adults: outcomes for interventions. Medicine and science in sports and exercise. 2001;33(7):1126-
1141.  
123.  Stewart AL, Verboncoeur CJ, McLellan BY, et al. Physical activity outcomes of CHAMPS II a physical 
activity promotion program for older adults. The Journals of Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences 
and Medical Sciences. 2001;56(8):M465 -M470.  
124.  Clark MM, Abrams DB, Niaura RS, Eaton CA, Rossi JS. Self- efficacy in weight management. Journal of 
consulting and clinical psychology. 1991;59(5):739.  
125.  Ahn S, Basu R, Smith ML, et al. The impact of chronic disease self- management programs: healthcare 
savings through a community -based intervention. BMC public health. 2013;13:1141.  
126.  Friese S. Qualitative data analysis with ATLAS. ti.  Sage; 2014.  
127.  West DS, Elaine Prewitt T, Bursac Z, Felix HC. Weight loss of black, white, and Hispanic men and women in the Diabetes Prevention Program. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2008;16(6):1413- 1420.  
 
 