MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014 	 	Page 1 of 21		
Date:	 5/16/201 7				
Version	Number:	6 	
Principal	Investigator:	[INVESTIGATOR_10086]	Q .	Beversdorf,	MD 	
Application	Number:	2005213 	
Application	Title:	Trial	of	Propranolol	in	Children	and	Youth	with	ASD	and	Predictors	of	Response 	
	
	
Protocol 	
		
1. Abstract 	
	Autism	spectrum	disorder	(ASD)	is	a	neurodevelopmental	disorder	characterized	by	
[CONTACT_766391],	repetitive	behaviors,	which	affects	
approximately	[ADDRESS_1051368] ioning	adults	and	adolescents	with	autism	in	a	double -blinded,	placebo -controlled	trial.	
We	will	also	examine	whether	response	to	treatment	can	be	predicted	based	upon	markers	of	autonomic	functioning,	such	as	skin	conductance ,	heart	rate	variability 	(HRV), 	and	the	
pupi[INVESTIGATOR_766360] 	(PLR), 	and	whether	anxiety	can	 predict	treatment	response.	Our	
hypothesis	is	that	social	functioning	and	language	abilities	will	benefit	from	serial	doses	of	propranolol,	as	we	have	demonstrated	in	previous	single -dose	stud ies.	We	also	predict	that	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/[ADDRESS_1051369]	benefit	from	the	drug. 	
	
3. Background	 	
	
Previous	studies	support	the	existence	of	altered	noradrenergic	a ctivity	in	ASD,	including	
early	studies	suggesting	increased	plasma	(1)	and	urine	(2)	adrenergic	metabolites	in	autism.	Additionally,	multiple	studies	indicate	that	ASD	may	be	characterized	by	[CONTACT_376787] -restrictive	
associative	networks	(3,	4) 	which	may	be	rela ted	to	increased	noradrenergic	signaling	(5).	
These	findings	suggest	the	potential	benefit	of	a	pharmacological	agent	aimed	at	the	noradrenergic	system	for	this	population.	Propranolol,	a	centrally	and	peripherally	active	
nonselective	beta -adrenergic	antag onist,	reduces	noradrenergic	system	activity.		This	
anxiolytic	has	been	used	off -label	for	test	anxiety	(6)	and	performance	anxiety	(7)	for	several	
decades.		Propranolol	was	first	explored	within	the	context	of	ASD	in	an	uncontrolled	case	series,	which	rep orted	improvements	in	language	and	sociability	(8).		Our	laboratory	has	
since	investigated	this	agent’s	effects	on	a	wide	range	of	behaviors	known	to	be	affected	in	
ASD,	including	verbal	abilities	(9,	10) ,	working	memory	(11),	and	facial	scanning	(12)	in	
single -dose	psychopharmacological	challenge	studies	in	adults	and	adolescents	with	ASD.	
Most	recently,	we	demonstrated	a	benefit	of	a	single	dose	of	propranolol	on	social	functioning,	
assessed	via	conversational	reciprocity,	in	a	sample	of	20	high -functioni ng	adults	and	
adolescents	with	ASD	(13)	and	 a	potential	association	between	resting	autonomic	activity,	
assessed	via	heart	rate	variability,	and	response	to	propranolol	on	the	social	task 	(14).	These	
findings	suggest	a	potential	benefit	of	propranolol	on	c ore	features	of	ASD	and	that	treatment	
response	may	be	predicted	by	[CONTACT_766392].	Accordingly,	further	study	is	necessary	to	examine	if	these	potential	benefits	are	maintained	in	serial	doses	in	the	form	of	a	trial	in	
children	and	youth 	with	autism. 	
	
4. Study	Procedures 	
a. Study	design,	including	the	sequence	and	timing	of	study	procedures		 	
	
The	proposed	study	is	a	between -subject,	placebo -controlled	trial.	For	the	purposes	of	
this	study,	we	will	recruit	two	groups	of	participants —the	first	being	children	age	7 -14	
with	ASD,	the	second	being	youth	age	15 -24	with	high	functioning	ASD .	High -
functioning	autism	is	defined	in	this	study	by	[CONTACT_766393] -Revised	
(ADI -R)	criteria	and	 Autism	Diagnosti c	Observational	Scale	(ADOS)	criteria	for	autism,	
and	a	WASI -II	IQ	full	scale	of	at	least	85. 	Participants	will	be	screened	for	this	
information	as	well	as	inclusion/exclusion	criteria	to	determine	their	eligibility	to	participate	in	this	study	through	the ir	medical	record	and	over	the	phone	prior	to	
obtaining	written	consent.	A	waiver	of	documentation	 consent	is	requested 	only	for	
these	screening	purposes	and	to	distribute	the	 Rome	IV	Diagnostic	Questionnaire	for	
Pediatric	Functional	Gastrointestinal	Disor ders	 -	Child	(R4PDQ -Child) ,	(for	adults,	the	
Rome	IV	Diagnostic	Questionnaire	for	Adults	(R4DQA)	will	be	used),	and	the	
Gastrointestinal	Symptoms	Inventory	(GSI) .	Written	consent	will	be	obtained	prior	to	
any	other	study -related	procedures. 	
If	a	prospectiv e	participant	does	not	have	IQ	scores	available	through	the	Thompson	
Center	database	or	EMR,	such	as	Powerchart,	or	if	the	participant’s	scores	are	not	reflective	of	his/her	current	level	of	functioning,	the	WASI -II	may	be	given	at	the	
beginning	of	the	ini tial	study	visit	or	at	a	separate	visit.	The	ADI -R	may	be	
administered	to	the	parent/caregiver	of	a	prospective	participant	at	the	beginning	of	the	initial	study	visit	or	at	a	separate	visit,	if	the	prospective	participant	does	not	have	ADI-R	scores	from	a 	previous	assessment.	Prior	to	participation	in	the	study,	informed	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/[ADDRESS_1051370].	In	addition,	the	subjects	will	be	informed	
that	they	can	terminate	the	procedure	and	exit	the	study	at	any	time. 	
	
Procedure	outline	for	 ages	15 -24:	
	
General	study	visit	outline: 	
Upon	study	enrollment,	participants	will	be	randomized	to	receive	either	placebo	or	propranolol	via	oral	capsule ,	crushed	tablet,	or	liquid 	daily .	The	drug	dosage	will	be	
titrated	slowly	to	ensure	the	drug	is	tolerated	well	(detailed	titration	schedule	below).	
The	following	are	brief	descriptions	of	the	drugs	to	be	administered: 	
	Propranolol	[pro -pran’ -o-lol]	blocks	the	brain’s	and	body’s	use	of	
nore pi[INVESTIGATOR_766361].				Placebo	[pla -see’-bo],	also	commonly	referred	to	as	a	“sugar	pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382],”	is	an	inactive	
substance	that	looks	like	other	drugs. 	
	Subjects	 in	the	youth	age	gr oup	will	undergo 	magnetic	resonance 	imaging	 (MRI)	before	
initiating	drug .	(See	details	below.) 	
	
During	the	study,	participants	will	undergo	psychophysiological	and	behavioral	assessments	(discussed	below)	at	three	separate	study	visits	at	the	following	tim e	
points:	(1)	prior	to	drug	administration,	for	establishment	of	a	baseline;	(2)	halfway	through	drug	period	(approximately	week	6);	(3)	the	end	of	drug	period	
(approximately	week	12).		
	Prescription	for	the	drug	will	be	given	after	the	completion	of	the	imaging	and	baseline	
sessions. 	
	
At	each	study	visit,	psychophysiological	measurements	will	be	perform ed	to	assess	
autonomic	activity	(details	below). 	A	small	sample	of	cheek	cells	will	be	taken	using	a	
buccal	swab 	for	genetic	processing .	Behavioral	tasks	a nd	questionnaires	will	also	be	
performed	at	each	study	session ,	except	for	the	Vineland,	which	will	only	be	performed	
at	baseline	and	week	12.	Different	forms	of	each	behavioral	task	will	be	used	at	each	of	the	six	visits.	Questionnaires	will	r emain	the	sa me	for	each	visit.	(See	detailed	
description	below.) 	
	
Imaging	visit	specifics:	
The	imaging	personnel	will	go	over	the	MRI	screening	form	in	detail	with	the	subject	
and	give	specific	instructions	on	how	to	safely	complete	the	session.	Subjects	will	also	
be	given	the	option	to	practice	in	a	mock	scanner	before	the	actual	scanning	session	to	
acclimatize	them	better.	The	 MRI	session	will	consist	of	a	T1	weighted	anatomical	scan,	
functional	MRI	(task -based	activation),	resting	state	functional	connectivity	MRI	and	
diffusion	tensor	imaging 	(DTI).	Prior	to	each	scanning	session,	the	subjects	will	be	
given	practice	fluency	tasks	to	familiarize	with	the	task.	For	the	semantic	word	fluency	task	imaging,	a	block	design	with	two	sets	of	three	task	blocks	(30	seconds)	and	[ADDRESS_1051371]	
blocks	(30	seconds)	for	a	total	of	[ADDRESS_1051372]	from	the	ones	used	on	subsequent	cognitive	testing.	Verbal	responses	will	be	recorded	offline	with	an	MRI	compatible	mi crophone.	The	stimuli,	presented	visually,	will	be	the	category	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014 	 	Page 4 of 21	(semantic	fluency)	from	which	the	subject	will	generate	words,	which	will	remain	on	
screen	for	the	full	[ADDRESS_1051373]	
instruction	will	be	displayed	using	an	LCD	projector	(Avotec,	Inc.).	A	laptop	computer	using	E -Prime	(Version	2.0,	Psychological	Software	Tools,	Inc.)	will	generate	the	
stimuli.	The	second	task	based	activation	will	have	[ADDRESS_1051374]	30	seconds	for	a	total	of	3	minutes	per	set. 	Images	will	be	
collected	with	the	3T	Siem ens	Trio	MRI	scanner	at	The	University	of	Missouri	 Brain	
Imaging	Center.	High -resolution	structural	three -dimensional	T1 -weighted	images	will	
be	acquired	for	anatomic	localization	and	co -registration	of	the	functional	data,	using	a	
high-resolution	sagittal 	MP-RAGE	seque nce	(TR	=	1920	ms;	TE	=	3.75	ms;	8	degree	flip	
angle;	in -plane	resolution	=	1x1	mm;	slice	thickness	=	1mm;	number	of	slices		=	160).	
The	BOLD	contrast	functional	data	will	be	collected	using	a	T2* -weighted	EPI	[INVESTIGATOR_766362]	(TR	=	2000	ms;	TE 	=	30	ms;	90	degree	flip	angle;	3.[ADDRESS_1051375]	
resolution,	slice	thickness	=	3.8	mm,	number	of	slices	=	28),	which	will	be	acquired	parallel	to	the	anterior -posterior	commissure	plane.	The	acquisition	parameters	for	
the	resting	state	functional	conn ectivity	MRI	( fcMRI )	and	the	ROIs	will	be	identical	to	
those	with	the	above	described	task -based	imaging,	and	the	z -transformed	correlations	
will	be	compared	similarly	for	its	relationship	to	response	to	propranolol.		Diffusion	tensor	imaging	( DTI)	will	be 	acquired	using	standard	sequences ,	and	fractional	
anisotropy,	and	mean	diffusivity	will	be	calculated	to	establish	white	matter	integrity	
and	how	this	relates	to	response	to	propranolol.	A	custom	VacFix	cushion	(S&S	Par	Scientific,	Inc.)	can	be	used	to	pr ovide	head	and	upper	body	restraint.	The	imaging	
session	will	last	no	longer	than	1	hour.			Study	visit	task	specifics:	
Measurements	will	include	skin	conductance ,	measured	by	[CONTACT_766394], 	and	
heart	rate	variability,	measured	by	 [CONTACT_53402].	 Two	adjustable	transducers	will	
be	placed	on	the	fingers	to	collect	skin	conductance	data ,	and	three	electrodes	will	be	
placed	on	the	chest	in	the	typi[INVESTIGATOR_766363],	and	signal	from	the	transducers	and	electrodes	will	be	amplified	by	[CONTACT_766395]	100C	and	ECG	100C	ampl ifiers	 connected	to	a	
BIOPAC	 MP150	Data	Acquisition	System .		Alternatively,	for	skin	conductance,	two	
transducers	may	be	placed	on	the	palmar	surface	of	the	hand 	if	sufficient	data	are	not	
obtained	from	the	finger	transducers. 	Measurements	will	be	recorded 	for	a	period	of	[ADDRESS_1051376]	cuff	at	each	study	visit. 	
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_766364]	a	BIOPAC	TSD201	respi[INVESTIGATOR_766365]. 		The	transducer	is	affixed	to	an	adjustable	strap	and	in	non -invasive. 		The	TSD201	is	
connected	to	a	RSP100C	amplifier	that	is	attached	to	the	MP150	system. 	
	
Pupi[INVESTIGATOR_766360]	(PLR)	will	be	collected	at	baseline	and	again	at 	week	12.		PLR	is	a	
simple	functional	neurological	test	that	measures	the	pupil	size	changes	in	response	to	
a	short	light	flash .		A	novel	remote	PLR	system	will	be	used	to	measure	PLR	in	
participants.		During	the	test,	the	participant	will	sit	comfortably	in	a	chair	about	[ADDRESS_1051377]	the	attention	of	the	participant	so	that	the	PLR	responses	can	be	
measured. 	The	movie	is	red -filtered	to	avoid	affecting	pupil	size.	The 	operator	will	
observe	the	participant’s	head	and	pupil	images	on	the	control	PC	and	initialize	the	
PLR	test	at	appropriate	times.	The	projector	screen	will	be	illuminated	using	LEDs	
(530nm)	to	provide	stimuli.	PLR	measurements	will	be	first	made	with	a	st imulation	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014 	 	Page 5 of 21	intensity	of	9.5	cd/m2	in	the	light -adaptation	condition;	then	the	room	light	will	be	
turned	off	while	the	participant	continues	to	watch	the	video	for	15	mins;	and	PLR	will	
be	then	tested	again	with	0.75	cd/m2	stimulation	in	dark -adaptation.	A	t otal	of	[ADDRESS_1051378]	will	be	completed	in	about	30 	min	(including	
15	min	dark -adaptation).	Breaks	will	be	allowed	at	the	participant’s	request.	 	
The	pupil	size	will	be	automatically	computed	using	custom	software	from	saved	image	stacks	to	construct	the	pupi[INVESTIGATOR_766366].	Initial	pupil	diameter,	the	measure	mos t	
closely	related	to	sympathetic	and	parasympathetic	balance,	and	PLR	latency,	the	measure	most	specific	to	autism,	will	be	the	primary	measures	of	interest. 	
	Buccal	Swab:	To	collect	a	sample,	researchers	will	ask	the	participant	how	long	since	their	last	food	or	drink	to	ensure	nothing	had	been	consumed	for	[ADDRESS_1051379]	two	hours	after	collection.	The	swab	will	be	stored	
in	a	- 80	degree	freezer	until	processing. 	These	samples	will	be	analyzed	to	examine	
whether	or	not	different	genes	are	related	to	symptoms	of	autism	and/or	affect	how	people	with	autism	respond	to	the	drug	propranolol. 	
	The	following	assessments	will	be	complet ed	by	[CONTACT_766396]: 	
1.	General	Social	Outcomes	Measure	( GSOM ):	To	address	our	primary	outcome	
measure:	determining	whether	our	previously	reported	social	effects	with	single	doses	of	propranolol	are	also	observed	with	serial	doses,	the	General	Social	Outcomes	
Measure	will	be	administered,	as	with	our	previous	work	with	single	doses.	This	is	
designed	to	allow	repeated	assessments,	consisting	of	a	semi -structured	assessment	of	
social	functioning	assessing	ability	staying	on	topic,	sharing	informat ion,	reciprocity,	
transitions/interruptions,	nonverbal	communication,	and	eye	contact,	during	a	semi -
structured	conversation	with	the	researcher	for	Conversational	Reciprocity	score,	as	developed	by	[INVESTIGATOR_124].	Stichter.	In	our	initial	study,	we	assessed	only	the	Conversational	
Reciprocity	portion	of	the	GSOM.	We	will	also	secondarily	assess	the	other	portions,	
and	thus	will	also	obtain	scores	on	Facial	Expressions,	Social	Problem	Solving,	Affect	
Demonstration,	and	Emotional	Perspective	Taking	as	well,	that	have	be en	developed	in	
the	newest	version	of	the	GSOM.	As	our	previous	study	demonstrated	effects	of	single	
doses	on	the	Conversational	Reciprocity	portion	of	the	GSOM,	as	well	as	prediction	of	
response	based	on	HRV,	this	sub -test	will	be	the	primary	outcome	meas ure	for	the	
effect	of	serial	doses	of	propranolol	in	this	study.	The	utilization	of	a	novel	assessment	is	necessary	due	to	the	lack	of	existing	measures	allowing	repeated	measure	of	social	
interaction	in	the	testing	environment	in	response	to	a	treatment.	[CONTACT_766407]	designed	this	for	serial	assessment	of	response	to	interventions	for	this	purpose. 	
	 2.	Social	Responsiveness	Scale,	second	edition	(SRS -2):	This	65 -item,	parent -
report	measure	asks	questions	about	a	participants’	social	awareness,	social	infor mation	processing,	capacity	for	reciprocal	social	responses,	social	anxiety	or	
avoidance,	and	characteristic	autistic	preoccupations	or	traits.	Depending	on	the	child’s	age,	the	preschool	or	school -age	version	of	the	SRS -2	will	be	administered. 	
3.	Anagrams 	(Youth	age	group 	only):	Subjects	will	be	given	a	set	of	20	anagram	
tasks	(word	unscrambling	tasks,	where	letters	are	rearranged	to	form	a	word:	IRCKB	→	BRICK)	similar	to	those	used	in	our	previous	research.8	As	with	our	previous	work,	
a	maximum	of	120	sec onds	will	be	allowed	for	each	anagram.	Number	solved	and	
solution	latency	(with	failed	anagrams	recorded	as	120	seconds)	will	be	recorded.	Six	
distinct	test	versions	of	equivalent	difficulty	are	available	for	this	task,	and	additionally	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/[ADDRESS_1051380]	versions,	as	with	our	previous	work.	This	task	has	been	extensively	utilized	with	
normative	data	in	o ur	previous	work. 	
4.	Semantic	fluency	( Youth	age	group 	only):	Subjects	will	also	be	given	the	word	
fluency	task,	a	widely	utilized,	validated	language	task	in	a	variety	of	populations. 	
Subjects	will	be	asked	to	generate	as	many	words	as	possible	within	one	minute	each	
from	3	different	categories	(e.g.	set1:	animals,	things	to	wear,	vegetables;	set2:	drinks,	things	in	the	kitchen,	hobbies).	These	categories	will	be	distinct	from	those	use d	in	the	
initial	fcMRI.	Six	distinct	test	versions	of	equivalent	difficulty	are	also	available	for	this	task,	in	addition	to	the	version	used	during	imaging,	and	they	also	will	be	presented	
counterbalanced	across	the	conditions	and	visits	in	order	to	furth er	minimize	any	
potential	effect	of	variation	in	difficulty	between	test	versions,	as	with	our	previous	
work.	Total	number	of	distinct	words	(not	including	proper	nouns)	will	be	recorded	
for	each	session. 	
5.	Clinical	Globa l	Impression	of	Severity	(CGIS),	C linical	Global	Impression	of	
Change	(CGIC) ,	Clinical	Global	Impression	of	Severity	&	Change	–	Anxiety	(CGIA),	and	
Clinical	Global	Impression	of	Severity	&	Change	–	Gastrointestinal	(CGIG) 	(purpose -	
overall	clinical	change ,	and	change	in	anxiety	and	gastroi ntestinal	symptoms ):	These	
tools	are	semi -structured	interviews	that	are	now	leading	reliable	and	validated	
primary	outcome	measures	in	clinical	trials	for	other	cognitive	disorders	and	are	
currently	in	use	in	autism	clinical	trials.	The	CGIC	consists	of	a 	7-point	subjective	scale	
assessing	change	from	baseline.	On	this	scale,	scores	of	1,	2,	and	3	represent	marked,	moderate,	and	mild	improvement,	respectively.	A	score	of	4	represents	no	change.	
Scores	of	5,	6,	and	7	represent	mild,	moderate,	and	marked	wor sening,	respectively. 	
CGIC	scores	from	both	the	parent/caregiver	and	the	blinded	clinician	([CONTACT_620255])	
will	be	utilized.	Since	this	reflects	change,	this	will	only	be	done	at	week	[ADDRESS_1051381]	Measure	(AIM)	(purpose:	au tism	severity	impact):	This	is	a	
tool	developed	by	[CONTACT_6283].	Kanne	and	Mazurek	that	has	been	developed	to	assess	the	impact	of	the	autism -associated	behaviors.	Subjects	are	asked	a	series	of	[ADDRESS_1051382]	of	autism	than	other	measures	focusing	on	specific	aspects,	such	as	behavior. 	
7.	Clinical	Evaluation	of	Language	Fundamentals -5th	Edition	(CELF -5):	The	
CELF -5	is	a	comprehensive	la nguage	assessment	that	is	validated	across	the	full	range	
of	our	subjects’	ages	and	yields	a	Core	Language	score	in	addition	to	Index	scores	for	
Receptive	Language,	Expressive	Language,	Language	Content,	and	Language	Memory,	and	also	includes	a	Pragmatics	 subtest. 	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014 	 	Page 7 of 21	8.	Vineland	Adaptive	Behavior	Scales -Second	Edition	(VABS -2)	(purpose -	
communication,	living	skills,	socialization):	The	VABS -2	is	a	well	validated	assessment	
used	for	the	full	range	of 	our	subjects’	ages	and	yields	standard	scores	in	
Communicatio n,	Daily	Living	Skills, 	Socialization,	and	Motor	Skills.	VABS -[ADDRESS_1051383]	(ABC)	(purpose -	overall	behavioral	
disturbances):	The	ABC 	is	a	well	validated,	reliable,	and	widely	used	assessment	tool	
for	interventions	for	a	range	of 	cognitive	disorders.	It	is	a	58 -item	questionnaire	of	the	
parent/caregiver,	rated	on	a	four -point 	scale	(0=not	at	all	a	problem,	3=the	problem	is	
severe).	Items	are	 scored	on	five	subscales:	I -Irritability, 	Agitation,	Crying,	II -Lethargy,	
Social	Withdrawal,	III -Stereotypic	Behavior,	IV -Hyperactivity, 	Noncompliance,	V -
Inappropriate	Speech.	Each	subscale	will	be	utilized	in	our 	assessment.	It	has	been	
validated	and	util ized	in	a	wide	range	of	ages	and	cognitive	conditions 	including	
autism.	It	is	sensitive	to	early	effects	of	drugs	(within	a	few	weeks)	in	autism, 	including	
non- antipsychotic	agents. 	
10.	Gastrointestinal	Symptomatology: 	The	Rome	IV	Diagnostic	Questionnaire	on	
Pediatric	Functional	Gastrointestinal	Disorders	(R4PDQ -child) 	assesses	the	frequency,	
severity,	and	duration	of	functional	GI	symptoms	in	children	and	adolescents,	and	
contains	 parent /caregiver 	and	 self-	report 	versions. 	For	participants	age	18	and	olde r,	
the	adult	version	of	the	Rome	IV	Diagnostic	Questionnaire	(R4DQA)	 may	be	used. 		The	
R4PDQ	and/or	the	R4DQA 	will	be	administered	at	baseline,	6 -week,	and	12 -week	
sessions. 		Paper	and/or	on -line	versions	of	the	questionnaire	may	be	utilized. 		
Furthermore, 	the	GI	Severity	Index	(GSI)	will	be	administered	to	the	participant	or	
their	parent/caregiver	in -person	or	over	the	phone	during	the	baseline,	week	1,	week	
2,	week	6,	and	week	12	periods. 	
11.	Pet	Demographics	Questionnaire	(PDQ):	The	PDQ	assesses	demograp hics	
regarding	the	presence	of	a	pet	or	pets	in	the	home,	and	the	level	of	attachment	to	the	
animals	by	[CONTACT_766397]. 		The	PDQ	will 	be	administered	at	baseline. 	
12.	The	Companion	Animal	Bonding	Scale	(CABS):	The	CABS	is 	an	8 -item	scale	
assessing	an	individuals’	interaction s	with	their	companion	animal	in	the	home .		The	
CABS	will	be	administered	at 	baseline,	6 -week s,	and	12 -week s.	
13.	Sympathetic	Tone	and	Anxiety:	As	above,	to	determine	effects	on	
sympathetic	tone	or 	anxi ety,	the	HRV,	heart	rate 	(via	standard	electrocardiogram	
procedure	 using	adhesive	pads	on	the	chest) ,	skin	conductance ,	blood	pressure ,	PLR	
and	SCAS	will	be	repeated	at	[ADDRESS_1051384]	of	treatment	on	
these	markers	relate	to 	response	t o	treatment	for	the	outcomes	above. 	
14.	Salivary	Cortisol:	To	determine	the	effects	on	the	stress	response,	salivary	
cortis ol	samples	will	be	collected	immediately	when	the	participant	enters	the	testing	
room	and	again	after	administration	of	the	GSOM 	duri ng	the	baseline,	[ADDRESS_1051385]	of	treatment	on	cortisol	relates	to	response	to	treatment	for	the	outcomes	above. 		Samples	will	be	collected	using	the	Salimetrics	
SalivaBio	Children’s	Swab	(SCS)	method 	and	analyzed 	using	enzyme -linked	
immunosorbent	assay	(ELISA). 	
15.	Sensory	Over -Responsivity:	To	examine	the	effects	of	propranolol	on	
sensory	over -responsivity,	the	SenSOR	will	be	administer ed	at	baseline,	6 -weeks,	and	
12-weeks. 		The	SenSOR	is	a	76 -item	yes/no	questio nnaire	examining	sensory	over -
responsivity	in	multiple	domains. 	
	Our	team	has	experience	with	all	of	these	assessments	from	our	previous	research	in	
our	single -dose	studies	with	propranolol,	as	well	as	with	other	research. 	
		 	 	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014 	 	Page 8 of 21		 	 Drug	Titration	schedule: 	
	
This	study	involves	a	titration	schedule	in	which	participants	will	begin	with	small	
doses	(single	capsules)	of	the	drug	and	increase	to	a	larger	dosage	(divided	over	3	
capsules)	over	the	course	of	three	weeks.	To	maintain	blinding,	participants	will	be	given	bottles	labeled	“A”	and	“B,”	containing	different	doses	of	propranolol.	
Participants	will	be	given	a	drug	diary	to	keep	track	of	their	doses	throughout	the	study.	 Participants 	will	be	asked	turn	in	their	drug	diary	and	empty	capsule	bottles	
after	each	drug	period	ends.	In	addition,	participants	will	be	given	a	personalized	
calendar,	marked	with	labels	denoting	which	pi[INVESTIGATOR_766367]. 	
	The	drug	titration	schedule	will	be	as	follows	for	the	drug	period	and	its	subsequent	tapering -off	period:	 	
	 Week	1 :	40	mg	propranolol	(1	capsule,	nightly) 	
Week	2 :	80	mg	propranolol	(2	40mg	capsules,	morning	&	night) 	
Weeks	3	- 	12:	100	mg	propranolol	(3	capsules,	40	mg/morning,	
20mg/afternoon,	&	40mg/night) 	
Week	13 :	60	mg	propranolol	(2	capsules,	40	mg/morning	&	20mg/night) 	
Week	14 :	20	mg	propranolol	(1	capsule,	nightly) 	
Week	15 :	no	capsules 	
[Participants	may	choose	to	continue	on	with	open	label	extension	described	
below] 	
	
During	the	titration	schedule,	heart	rate	and	blood	pressure	meas urements	will	be	
taken	via	automated	wrist	cuff	by	[CONTACT_766398]/caregiver	within	48	hours	after	each	change	in	drug	dosage.	At	the	initial	study	visit,	participants	and/or	their	
parent/caregiver	will	be	trained	on	the	use	of	the	wrist	cuff	or	pediatric	arm	cuff,	
depending	on	needs	of	participant,	given	a	sheet	of	instructions	for	its	use,	and	given	a	wrist/arm	cuff	to	take	home	for	the	duration	of	the	study.	A	member	of	the	study	staff	
will	call	the	family	to	obtain	the	heart	rate	and	blood	pre ssure	results.	If	on	any	
measurement	the	heart	rate	is	below	55	for	youth	or	60	for	children	or	systolic	blood	pressure	is	below	90	for	youth	or	80	for	children,	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_766368],	
and	he	will	call	and/or	examine	the	participant	to	assess 	his	or	her	condition.	At	this	
point,	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_766369].	A	
member	of	the	study	staff	will	also	call	the	participant	t o	confirm	no	further	problems	
before	each	increase	in	dosage.	During	this	call,	parts	A	and	B	of	the	Safety	Monitoring	Uniform	Research	Form	(SMURF)	will	be	performed.	The	SMURF	is	a	rating	scale	for	measuring	the	presence	and	intensity	of	medication	side	effects.	Abnormal	ratings	on	
the	SMURF	will	result	in	notification	of	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_766370]/her	condition. 	
	
	
Study	procedure	for	ages	7 -14:	
	General	study	procedures: 	
	
Procedures	for	the 	child	age	group	w ill	be	the	same	as	for	the	youth	age	group	except: 	
	
1) Child	age	group	will	not	participate	in	the	imaging	portion	of	the	study. 	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014 	 	Page 9 of 21	2) Child	age	group	will	not	complete	the	anagrams	or	semantic	fluency	tasks. 	
3) Titration	schedule	for	the	child	age	group	is	based	on	w eight. 	
4) Minimum	heart	rate	allowed	for	children	will	be	60	and	the	minimum	systolic	
blood	pressure	allowed	will	be	80. 	
	
Drug	titration	schedule	for	the	child	age	group	will	be	based	on	weight	as	follows: 	
For	patients	>50kg:	 	
Same	titration	as	youth	age	group 	
For	patients	40 -50kg :	75%	youth	dosage 	
Week	1 :	30	mg	propranolol	(nightly) 	
Week	2 :	60	mg	propranolol	(30mg	morning	&	night) 	
Weeks	3	- 	12:	75	mg	propranolol	(30	mg/morning,	15mg/afternoon,	&	
30mg/night) 	
Week	13 :	45	mg	propranolol	(30	mg/morning	&	15mg /night) 	
Week	14 :	15	mg	propranolol	(nightly) 	
Week	15 :	no	medication 	
For	patients	30 -40kg:	 50% 	
Week	1 :	20	mg	propranolol	(nightly) 	
Week	2 :	40	mg	propranolol	(20mg	morning	&	night) 	
Weeks	3	- 	12:	50	mg	propranolol	(20	mg/morning,	10mg/afternoon,	&	
20mg/night) 	
Week	13 :	30	mg	propranolol	(20	mg/morning	&	10mg/night) 	
Week	14 :	10	mg	propranolol	(nightly) 	
Week	15 :	no	medication 	
For	patients	20 -30kg:	 25% 	
Week	1 :	10	mg	propranolol	(nightly) 	
Week	2 :	20	mg	propranolol	(10mg	morning	&	night) 	
Weeks	3	- 	12:	25	mg	proprano lol	(10	mg/morning,	5mg/afternoon,	&	
10mg/night) 	
Week	13 :	15	mg	propranolol	(10	mg/morning	&	5mg/night) 	
Week	14 :	5	mg	propranolol	(nightly) 	
Week	15 :	no	medication 	
[Participants	may	choose	to	continue	with	open	label	extension	described	
below] 	
	
	
Optional	 Open	Label	Extension 	
Participants	will	also	have	the	option	to	participate	in	an	open	label	extension	period	after	week	[ADDRESS_1051386]	two	 week s	taking	no	initial	study	medication,	
participants	will	be	prescribed	propranolol	by	[CONTACT_766399],	a	
researcher	will	retake	baseline	GSOM,	SRS,	ABC ,	R4PDQ/ R4DQA,	and	GSI 	measures,	
and	participants	will	be	titrated	on	the	schedule	dictated	by	[CONTACT_766400]/or	weight.	
After	12	weeks	on	propranolol,	a	researcher	will	take	final	GSOM,	SRS,	ABC ,	
R4PDQ/R4DQA,	and	GSI 	measures. 	
	
b. Study	duration	and	number	of	study	visits	required	of	research	participants. 	
	
Participation	in	this	study	will	last 	[ADDRESS_1051387]	1	visit	to	the	Brain	Imaging	Center	(lasting	approximately	1.5hr),	3	visits	to	the	Thompson	Center,	and	an	optional	2	visits	to	the	Thompson	Center	(lasting	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014 	 	Page 10 of 21	approximately	 2hrs) .	The	child	group	will	not	have	the	visit	t o	the	Brain	Imaging	
Center. 	
	
c. Blinding,	including	justification	for	blinding	or	not	blinding	the	trial,	if	applicable. 	
	
This	study	will	be	double -blinded	for	the	purposes	of	removing	any	bias	that	could	be	
introduced	if	either	the	researchers	or	the	study	p articipants	are	aware	of	which	drug	
they	are	taking	at	a	given	time.	Blinding	of	the	drugs	will	be	conducted	by	[CONTACT_766401][INVESTIGATOR_307]’s	Investigational	Pharmacy.	In	the	case	of	emergency,	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_766371]	a	sealed	envelope. 	
	
d. Justification	of	why	participants	will	not	receive	routine	care	or	will	have	current	therapy	stopped. 	
	
Routine	care	for	this	population	will	not	be	affected	by	[CONTACT_766402].	Participants	will	be	able	to	continue	routine	care,	including	behavioral	therapy	or	other	medications.	
Potential	participants	taking	medications	that	are	exclusionary	for	this	study	will	not	be	enrolled. 	
	
e. Justification	for	inclusion	of	a	placebo	or	non -treatment	group. 	
	
A	placebo	arm	of	this	study	will	allow	for	statistical	comparisons	between	behavioral	
performance	while	participants	are	taking	placebo	and	propranolol 	
	
f. Definition	of	treatment	failure	or	participant	removal	criteria. 	
	
As	this	is	a n	initial 	trial	exploring	t he	effects	of	propranolol	on	social	and	language	
abilities,	there	are	no	behavioral	endpoints	that	we	would	consider	treatment	failure.	However,	for	the	safety	of	the	participants,	if	at	any	measurement	taken,	a	participant’s	
heart	rate	or	blood	pressure	a re	very	low	or	if	the	participant	is	experiencing	an	
adverse	reaction	to	the	drug	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_766372].	At	that	point,	if	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_766373],	the	participant	will	be	
instructed	to	discontinue 	taking	the	drug	and	will	be	removed	from	the	study. 	
	
g. Description	of	what	happens	to	participants	receiving	therapy	when	study	ends	or	if	a	participant’s	participation	in	the	study	ends	prematurely. 	
	
When	the	study	ends	or	if	a	participant’s	participation	ends	prematurely,	the	participants	will	no	longer	take	propranolol	or	placebo	capsules.	Participants	will	
continue	with	their	routine	care	as	they	would	have	done	throughout	the	study. 	
	
5. Inclusion/Exclusion	Criteria 	
	
Participants 	
Youth :	 Inclusion: 	
	 	 Autism 	
	 	 IQ	>=	85 	
	 	 Age	15 -24yrs 	
	 	 Native	English	speaker 	
	 	 General	Exclusion: 	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014 	 	Page 11 of 21	Alpha	2	agonists 	
	 	 Non-autism	LD	(ADHD,	dyslexia,	etc) 	
	 	 Other	major	psych	diagnosis 	
	 	 Other	neuro	diagnosis 	
	 	 Major	head	trauma 	
	 	 Reaction	to	adhesives 	
	 	 Drug	Exclusions: 	
	 	 	 Diabetes 	
	 	 	 Reactive	airway	disease 	
	 	 	 Thyroid	disease 	
	 	 	 Bradyarrhythmias 	
	 	 	 Unexplained	syncope 	
	 	 	 Pregnancy 	
	 	 	 Possible	interacting	drugs 	
	 	 	 Underweight 	
	 	 	 Imaging	Exclusions: 	
	 	 	 Metallic	implants 	
	 	 	 Metal	foreign	body	exposure 	
	 	 	 Pacemakers 	
	 	 	 Claustrophobia 	
	 	 	 Any	other	MRI	exposure	risk 	
	 	 	 Pregnancy 	
	
Children :	Inclusion: 	
	 	 Autism 	
	 	 Age	7 -14yrs 	
	 	 Native	English	speaker 	
	 	 General	Exclusion: 	
Alpha	2	agonists 	
	 	 Other	major	psych	diagnosis 	
	 	 Other	neuro	diagnosis 	
	 	 Major	head	trauma 	
	 	 Reaction	to	adhesives 	
	 	 Drug	 Exclusions: 	
	 	 	 Diabetes 	
	 	 	 Reactive	airway	disease 	
	 	 	 Thyroid	disease 	
	 	 	 Bradyarrhythmias 	
	 	 	 Unexplained	syncope 	
	 	 	 Possible	interacting	drugs 	
	 	 	 Underweight 	(<20kg) 	
	
	 Parent/caregiver 	
	 	 Inclusion:	>=18yo,	native	English	speaker 	
	 	 Exclusion:	 None 	
	
6. Drugs/	S ubstances/	Devices 	
a. The	rationale	for	choosing	the	drug	and	dose	or	for	choosing	the	device	to	be	used. 	
	Propranolol	is	a	beta -adrenergic	antagonist	that	dampens	the	stress	response	system.	
We	predict	that	propranolol’s	effects	on	stress	and	anxiety	will	positively	impact	social	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014 	 	Page 12 of 21	and	language	abilities	in	individuals	with	ASD.	The	dose	(starting	with	40	mg	and 	
titrating	up	to	100	mg)	has	been	previously	used	in	neuropsychiatric	populations 	(15)	
and	is	within	the	dosage	recommended	by	[CONTACT_766403]. 	
	
b. Justification	and	safety	information	if	FDA	approved	drugs	will	be	administered	for	
non- FDA	approved	i ndications	or	if	doses	or	routes	of	administration	or	participant	
populations	are	changed. 	
	
Previous	studies	from	our	laboratory	indicate	a	potential	effect	of	propranolol	on	social	
and	language	abilities	in	adults	and	adolescents	with	ASD.	Thus,	this	trial	investigation	
will	explore	the	effects	of	serial	doses	of	propranolol	in	the	same	populati on.	
Participants	taking	propranolol	in	this	study	may	be	at	risk	for	the	side	effects	described	below.	Measures	to	maintain	the	safety	of	study	participants	will	be	further	discussed	below.		Subjects	will	be	encouraged	to	discuss	these	with	the	PI	(David	Q .	
Beversdorf,	MD)	and/or	their	own	doctor.	Subjects	will	also	be	told	that	there	may	be	other	side	effects	that	we	cannot	predict.	 	
	
c. Justification	and	safety	information	if	non -FDA	approved	drugs	without	an	IND	will	be	
administered.	 	
	
NA	
	
7. Study	Statistics 	
a. Primary	outcome	variable. 	
	
We	are	primarily	exploring	the	effects	of	propranolol	on	social	abilities,	as	assessed	via	the	GOSM .	
	b. Secondary	outcome	variables. 	
	
Our	secondary	outcome	variables	include,	effects	on	anxiety	(assessed	via	the	SCAS,	and	salivary	cortisol ),	language	abilities	(assessed	via	anagrams	and	semantic	fluency	
tasks),	adaptive/global	functioning	(assessed	via	the	Vineland),	and	change	in	clinical	impression/impact	of	ASD	symptoms	(assessed	via	CGIC,	CGIS,	SRS,	 ABC,	 and	AIM). 			
Effects	of	p ropranolol	on	gastrointestinal	functioning,	as	measured	by	[CONTACT_941]	R4PDQ -
child /R4DQA	and	the	GSI 	will	be	assessed 	to	obtain	pi[INVESTIGATOR_766374]. 		Furthermore,	effects	of	
propranolol	on	bonding	with	a	pet	in	the	home	will	be	assessed. 	
	
c. Statistical	plan	including	sample	size	justification	and	interim	data	analysis. 	
	
The	analysis	for	the	primary	outcome	(GSOM)	will	be	a	two -factor	ANOVA	with	
repeated	measures	on	one	factor	(Time)	and	so	this	is	the	model	we	base	our	sample	size	estimates	on.	Sample	size	estimation	for	a	re peated	measures	model	is	complex	
and	requires	considerable	prior	information	to	be	well	informed.	Not	only	is	the	expected	configuration	of	means	needed	but	also	information	on	an	appropriate	
covariance	structure	for	the	ANOVA	residuals.	For	purposes	of	sa mple	size	
calculations ,	we	assumed	a	first -order	autoregressive	(AR)	model	for	the	residuals	
with	ρ	=	0.20.	Perhaps	because	the	time	between	pre -	and	post -propranolol	
measurements	was	very	short	in	the	pi[INVESTIGATOR_766375]	0.74,	and	so	the	
assumption	of	an	AR	process	with	ρ	=	0.20	se ems	to	be	a	reasonably	pessimistic	
assumption	for	sample	size	purposes.	We	further	assume	that	in	the	control	group	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/[ADDRESS_1051388]	deviation	improvement	on	the	GSOM	with	only	a	single	dose	so	we	feel	these	are	both	
meaningful	and	plau sible	expectations	for	change.	Thus	when	testing	at	the	0.05	level	
of	significance,	a	sample	size	of	40	subjects	per	group	(pooled	across	Aim	1a	and	b	to	
maximize	the	power	for	the	main	effect	of	propranolol	on	GSOM	in	this	parallel	design	
study)	will	prov ide	better	than	80%	power	to	detect	a	statistically	significant	Time	by	
[CONTACT_766404] -up	within -	and	between -group	
pairwise	comparisons.	Prior	experience	with	ASD	subjects	leads	us	to	expect	a	high	level	of	motivation	a nd	compliance,	but	to	protect	against	potential	drop	out	will	
recruit	48	subjects	per	group,	i.e.	approximately	20%	loss	to	follow -up.	The	sampling	
plan	will	be	stratified	to	provide	balanced	sample	to	within	each	age	group,	with	half	of	the	sample	represe nting	adults	and	adolescents	and	half	younger	ASD	subjects. 	
	The	imaging	data	acquired	will	be	analyzed	using	Statistical	Parametric	Mappi[INVESTIGATOR_007]	(SPM)	and	FMRIB	Software	Libraries	(FSL)	(FMRIB,	[LOCATION_006]),	adjusted	for	acquisition	delay,	
corrected	for	motion	artifacts,	co -registered	to	the	mean	image	and	registered	to	the	
Montreal	Neurological	Institute	(MNI)	template	and	smoothed	with	a	Gaussian	spatial	smoothing	function	(with	a	FWHM	of	5	mm).	Specially	designed	processing	pi[INVESTIGATOR_766376]	f or	subject	motion -related	error	during	the	assessment	of	
resting	state	 functional	connectivity.	Group	analyses	will	be	performed	for	both	the	
task	based	activation	studies	and	functional	connectivity	data	and	the	activation	maps	will	be	superimposed	on	the 	standard	template.		
	Functional	connectivity	will	be	determined	using	average	time -courses	of	all	activated	
voxels	in	the	regions -of-interest	(ROI)	and	the	linear	associations	of	the	temporal	
activation	patterns	in	each	ROI	pair.	The	four	a	priori	regions 	of	interest	for	the	word	
fluency	task	are	the	right	and	left	inferior	frontal,	left	parietal	and	left	middle	temporal	areas.	Subsequently,	Fisher’s	z	transformations	will	be	applied	to	assess	statistical	
significance	in	the	comparison	of	the	observed	corr elations.	Mean	connectivity	across	
all	ROI	pairs	activated	with	the	language	tasks	will	be	the	measure	utilized	to	determine	relationship	to	response	with	propranolol. 	Fractional	anisotropy,	and	radial	
and	axial	mean	diffusivity	will	be	calculated	from	the 	DTI	session	to	establish	white	
matter	integrity	and	how	it	relates	to	response	to	propranolol.	 	
	
For	PLR,	the	pupil	size	will	be	automatically	computed	using	custom	software	from	
saved	image	stacks	to	construct	the	pupi[INVESTIGATOR_766366].	The	following	basic	PLR	par ameters	
will	be	recorded	for	each	measurement:	initial	pupil	diameter	(D
0),	maximal	
constriction	diameter	(D m),	relative	constriction	(A),	PLR	latency	(t L),	constriction	time	
(tC),	recovery	time	(t R),	constriction	velocity	and	recovery	velocity.	The	mean	v alue	of	
each	PLR	parameter	will	be	calculated	at	all	stimulus	conditions,	and	entered	into	the	
regression	analysis.		Participants	with	uncorrectable	visual	acuity	issues	will	be	
excluded	from	this	aspect	of	the	study.	Initial	pupil	diameter,	the	measure	mo st	closely	
related	to	sympathetic	and	parasympathetic	balance,	and	PLR	latency,	the	measure	most	specific	to	autism,	will	be	the	primary	measures	of	interest. 	
	
For	skin	conductance,	heart -rate	variability, 	heart	rate,	and	blood	pressure, 	regression	
will	be 	used	to	determine	the	relationship	between	performance	on	the	GSOM 	and	
autonomic	nervous	system	functioning. 	
	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014 	 	Page 14 of 21	d. Early	stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_766377]. 	
	
As	this	is	a n	initial	 trial	exploring	the	effects	of	propranolol	on	social	and	language	
abilities,	there	are	no	behavioral 	endpoints	that	we	could	consider	treatment	success	
or	failure	prior	to	the	completion	of	the	study,	thus	we	would	not	stop	the	study	based	
on	early	evidence	of	treatment	efficacy	or	futility.	If	safety	becomes	a	concern	due	to	
side	effects	associated	with 	propranolol,	the	PI	(in	consultation	with	the	HS	IRB)	may	
decide	to	stop	the	study	early.	However,	this	is	not	expected	to	occur	given	the 	well -
established 	minimal	side	effects	known	to	be	associated	with	this	drug. 	
	
8. Risks 	
a. Medical	risks,	listing	all	proce dures,	their	major	and	minor	risks	and	expected	
frequency. 	
	
The	medical	risks	participants	may	encounter	are	those	associated	with	taking	the	
drugs	used	in	this	study	and	an	MRI	scan.			
Below	are	the	descriptions	and	side	effects	associated	with	each	drug: 	
	Propranolol 	[pro -pran’ -o-lol]	is	commonly	used	to	decrease	high	blood	pressure.	This	
drug	can	cause	problems	for	persons	with	depression,	diabetes,	thyroid	disease,	very	
slow	heart	rates,	very	low	blood	pressure,	fluid	in	the	lungs	from	heart	failure,	an d	
asthma.	The	side	effects	related	to	this	drug	are	given	below.	These	symptoms	are	most	present	within	[ADDRESS_1051389] 	 Frequency 	 Severity 	
Brad ycardia 	(abnormally	slow	heart	action) 	 Common 	 Mild	
Fatigue 	(extreme	tiredness) 	 Common 	 Mild	
Dizziness 	 Common 	 Mild	
Hypotension 	(abnormally	low	blood	pressure) 	 Common 	 Moderate 	
Light	headedness 	 Occasional 	 Mild	
Constipation 	 Uncommon 	 Mild	
Paresthesia	(abnormal	sensation,	typi[INVESTIGATOR_766378]) 	of	hands 		Rare 	 Mild	
Vivid	dreams 	 Rare 	 Mild	
Dry	eyes 	 Rare 	 Mild	
Urticaria 	(hives) 	 Rare 	 Mild	
Diarrhea 	 Rare 	 Mild	
Abdominal	crampi[INVESTIGATOR_766379] 	(Upper	abdominal	pain) 	 Rare 	 Mild	
Impotence 	(inability	to	achieve	or	maintain	an	erection) 	 Rare 	 Mild	
Nightmares 	 Rare 	 Mild	
Depression 	 Rare 	 Moderate 	
Lassitude 	(lack	of	energy) 	 Rare 	 Moderate 	
Weakness 	 Rare 	 Moderate 	
Visual	disturbances 	 Rare 	 Moderate 	
Hallucinations 	(experience	of	something	that	is	not	actually	
present) 	Rare 	 Moderate 	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014 	 	Page 15 of 21	Disorientation 	(mental	confusion	about	time,	place	or	
identity) 	Rare 	 Moderate 	
Emotional	lability 	(excessive	emotional	reactivity	and	
frequent	mood	changes) 	Rare 	 Moderate 	
Slightly	clouded	sensorium 	(inability	to	think	clearly	or	
concentrate) 	Rare 	 Moderate 	
Decreased	performance	on	neuropsychometrics 	(tests	to	
assess	psychological	functioning) 	Rare 	 Moderate 	
Peyronie’s	disease 	(scar	tissue	inside	the	penis	causing	
curved,	painful	erections) 	Rare 	 Moderate 	
Allergy 	 Rare 	 Serious 	
Catatonia 	(inability	to	move	normally) 	 Rare 	 Serious 	
Intensification	of	AV	block 	(Worsening	of	a	type	of	heart	
block) 	Rare 	 Serious 	
Arterial	 insufficiency 	(slowing	or	stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_766380]	(blood	vessels)) 	Rare 	 Serious 	
Alopecia 	(sudden	hair	loss	with	one	or	more	circular	patches) 	Very	rare 	 Mild	
Exfoliative	dermatitis 	(reddening	and	scaling	of	skin) 	 Very	rare 	 Moderate 	
Psoriasisform	rashes 	(plaque -like	rashes) 	 Very	rare 	 Moderate 	
Vomiting 	 Very	rare 	 Moderate 	
Amnesia 	(partial	or	total	loss	of	memory) 	 Very	rare 	 Serious 	
Erythema	multiforme 	(bulls -eye-shaped	lesions	on	skin) 	 Very	rare 	 Serious 	
SLE-like	reaction 	(a	disorder	where	the	body	mistakenly	
attacks	healthy	tissues	in	the	body) 	Very	rare 	 Serious 	
Congestive	heart	failure 	(inefficient	pumpi[INVESTIGATOR_766381]) 	 Very	Rare 	 Severe 	
Stevens	Johnson	Syndrome 	(disorder	of	skin	and	mucous	
membranes) 	Extremely	Rare 	Serious 	
Agranulocytosis 	(deficiency	of	granulocytes	in	blood;	
increased	vulnerability	to	infection) 	Extremely	rare 	Serious 	
Nonthrombocytopenic	purpura 	(spontaneous	bruising	
without	decrease	in	levels	of	blood	cells	that	prevent	
bleeding) 	Extremely	rare 	Serious 	
Thrombocytopenic	purpura 	(low	levels	of	blood	cells	that	
prevent	bleeding) 	Extremely	rare 	Serious 	
Toxic	Epi[INVESTIGATOR_766382] 	(skin	condition) 	 Extremely	Rare 	Life	threatening 	
Mesenteric	arterial	thrombosis 		(injury	of	the	small	intestine	
due	to	lack	of	blood	supply) 	Extremely	rare 	Life	threatening 	
Ischemic	colitis 	(injury	of	the	large	intestine	due	to	lack	of	
blood	supply) 	Extremely	rare 	Life	threatening 	
	
	
Placebo 	[pla-see’-bo]	:	Also	known	as	a	“sugar	pi[INVESTIGATOR_4382].”	The	placebo	capsules	contain	
lactose,	necessitating	the	exclusion	of	any	potential	participants	who	have	extreme	
lactose	allergies.		
	Below	are	the	risks	associated	with	MRI	scan: 	
	Unlike	x -rays	or	CT -scans,	MRI	does	not	invo lve	any	ionizing	radiation.		However,	the	
tasks	may	cause	some	fatigue	similar	to	reading	a	book	or	doing	homework.		Participants	may	also	experience	discomfort	from	lying	still.			
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/[ADDRESS_1051390]	been	observed.		However,	the	long -term	effects	of	MRI	on	the	body	are	not	fully	
known.		Some	individuals	with	claustrophobia	(fear	of	closed	or	confining	spaces)	may	
find	the	MRI	equipment	too	confining 	
	
The	MRI	scanner	makes	sounds	variou sly	described	as	“thumpi[INVESTIGATOR_007]”,	“pounding”,	
“banging”,	“chirpi[INVESTIGATOR_007]”	and	“buzzing”;	these	sounds	can	be	loud.		Participants	will	be	
required	to	wear	protective	earplugs	and	headphones	during	scanning	to	reduce	the	
noise.		 	
	The	MR	imaging	in	this	study	is	being	performed	at	a	research	dedicated	scanner	and	
the	personnel	performing	the	imaging	are	not	Licensed	or	Trained	Diagnosticians	or	Clinicians.	The	testing	performed	in	this	project	is	not	intended	to	find	abnormalities,	
and	the	images	or	data	collected	do	no t	comprise	a	diagnostic	or	clinical	study.	The	
Investigators	and	the	University	of	Missouri	are	not	responsible	for	failing	to	find	
abnormalities.	However,	on	occasion	the	Investigators	may	perceive	possible	
abnormalities.	When	this	occurs,	the	Brain	Imagi ng	Center	will	consult	with	a	
Specialist.	If	the	Specialist	determines	that	additional	inquiry	is	warranted,	a	staff	person	from	the	Brain	Imaging	Center	will	contact	[CONTACT_766397] .	In	such	case,	
participants 	are	advised	to	consult	with	a	Licensed	Physic ian	to	determine	whether	
further	examination	or	treatment	would	be	prudent.	The	Investigators,	Specialist,	Brain	Imaging	Center	and	the	University	of	Missouri	are	not	responsible	for	any	
decision	made	with	regard	to	examination	or	treatment.	Because	the	im ages	collected	
for	this	research	project	do	not	comprise	a	diagnostic	or	clinical	study,	the	images	will	not	be	made	available	for	diagnostic	or	clinical	purposes. 	
	
No	short -term	effects	to	a	fetus	from	this	procedure	have	been	observed.		However,	the	
long-term	effects	of	MRI	on	the	fetus	are	not	fully	known.		Therefore,	participants	will	
be	screened	for	pregnancy	before	imaging.			
Participants	cannot	have	an	MRI	if	they	have	any	metal	in	or	near	the	brain	such	as	an	
aneurysm	clip	or	a	cochlear	implant,	or	other	contra -indicated	implants	such	as	a	
pacemaker	for	the	heart	or	metal -containing	prostheses	(like	a	‘stent’	or	a	heart	valve,	
hearing	aids,	etc.).		For	example,	welders	and	metal	workers	may	be	at	risk	for	a	MRI	because	they	may	have	gotten	small	meta l	fragments	in	their	eyes.		This	would	be	
dangerous	inside	the	magnet.	There	are	also	possible	risks	for	participants	if	metal	objects	are	drawn	to	the	magnet	while	a	participant	is	within	or	near	the	bore.		
Accordingly,	participants	will	be	asked	to	leave 	all	jewelry	and	metal	objects	outside	of	
the	testing	area.		No	loose	metal	objects	will	be	allowed	near	the	magnet.		Many	items	
of	clothing	contain	metal	hooks,	wires,	etc.	and	some	of	these	cannot	be	worn	in	the	
MRI	device.	Clean	garments	will	be	provide d	in	this	case. 	
	
There	may	be	some	unanticipated	risks	or	side	effects	involved	with	participation	in	
this	research	study.		Since	1981,	there	is	no	evidence	that	high	magnetic	fields	
endanger	health	on	a	short	or	long	term	basis.	Therefore ,	the	potential	h ealth	risk	is	
thought	to	be	minimal,	if	any. 	
	Other	potential	risks:		
	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/[ADDRESS_1051391].	If	this	occurs,	the	rash	normally	
subsides	shortly	after	the	study	visit.	Participants	will	be	asked	to	notify	a	member	of	the	study	staff	or	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_766383]. 	
	
There	are	also	psychological	risks	of	boredom	and	probing	for	personal	and/or	
sensitive	information	in	the	tasks	and	questionnaires	the	participants	will	complete	as	part	of	this	study. 	
	There	is	the	potential	risk	of	a	loss	of	privacy,	in	which	information	related	to	
participants’	autism	diagnosis	and	th eir	answers	to	the	tasks	and	questionnaires	being	
administered	will	be	obtained.		
	b. Steps	taken	to	minimize	the	risks. 	
	
Strict	adherence	to	the	exclusionary	criteria	of	this	study	will	minimize	the	chance	of	enrolling	participants	who	might	be	put	at	risk	b y	taking	propranolol.	Before	
enrollment	in	the	study,	the	PI	(a	licensed	physician)	will	meet	in	person	with	prospective	participants	to	evaluate	their	ability	to	safely	take	part	in	this	study.	Upon	
enrollment	in	the	study,	participants	will	be	given	a	bu siness	card	containing	contact	
[CONTACT_766405]	[INVESTIGATOR_766384]/or	emergency. 	
	 	
Given	the	chance	of	unforeseen	side	effects	associated	with	the	drug	in	participants	
who	met	criteria	for	participating	in	the	study,	regula r	monitoring	of	heart	rate	and	
blood	pressure	will	occur	throughout	the	study.	During	titration	of	the	drug	from	the	
initial 	to	the	full	dose ,	heart	rate	and	blood	pressure	measurements	will	be	taken	via	
wrist	cuff	or	pediatric	arm	cuff	by	[CONTACT_766398]/caregiver	within	48	hours	after	each	change	in	drug	dosage.	A	member	of	the	study	staff	will	call	the	family	to	obtain	these	results.	If	on	any	measurement	the	heart	rate	is	below	55	(60	for	children)	
or	systolic	blood	pressure	is	below	90 	(80	fo r	children) ,	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_766385],	and	he	will	call	and/or	examine	the	participant	to	assess	his	or	her	condition.	At	this	point,	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_766386].	A	member	of	the	study	staff	will	also	call	the	participant	to	confirm	no	further	
problems	before	each	increase	in	dosage.	During	this	call,	the	SMURF	 will	be	
performed ,	and	blood	pressure	and	heartrate	will	be 	taken.	Abnormal	ratings	on	the	
SMURF	 or	too	low	blood	pressure	or	heartrate	will	result	in	notification	of	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_766387]/her	condition.	 	
	 	
At	each	study	visit	taking	place	at	the	Thompson	Center	for	Autism	&	
Neurodevelopmental	Disorders,	a	member	of	the	study	staff	will	first	confirm	that	there	are	no	changes	in	the	participant’s	physical	condition	since	he/she	met	with	the	
PI	[INVESTIGATOR_766388].	A	medical	and	pharmaceutical	history	will	also	be	obtained	to	ensure	the	
participant’s	condition	has	not	changed	in	a	way	that	would	increase	the	risk	of	taking	
prop ranolol.	Any	new	symptoms	or	diagnoses	will	be	reported	to	the	PI,	who	will	
follow -up	with	the	participant	if	necessary.	Blood	pressure	and	heart	rate	will	also	be	
measured	at	each	of	these	study	visits.			
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/[ADDRESS_1051392]. 	
	 	
To	minimize	the	risk	of	probing	for	personal	and/or	sensitive	information,	testing	will	
take	place	in	a	private	room	at	the	Thompson	Center.	If	participants	have	difficulty	with	disclosure	of	information	on	some	surveys,	t hey	will	be	reminded	that	their	
answers	will	be	kept	secure	and	are	confidential. 	
	 	
To	minimize	the	risk	of	loss	of	privacy,	the	data	will	be	coded,	password -protected,	and	stored	
separately	from	the	consent	and	screening	forms	in	a	locked	filing	cabinet.	However,	in	the	unfortunate	event	that	a	loss	of	privacy	occurs,	it	is	possible	that	information	related	to	a	
participant's	autism	diagnosis	and	performance	on	the	tests	being	administered	will	be	obtained. 	
c. Risks	specific	to	genetic	testing	
When	disease,	including	autism,	is	tied	to	genetic	abnormalities,	this	can	create	
problems	for	families	with	regards	to	obtaining	insurance	coverage.	To	keep	this	from	
happening,	the	results	of	the	genetic	analysis	through	buccal	swab	will	not	be	given	to	
anyone	outside 	of	the	research	team.	Also,	a	Federal	law,	called	the	Genetic	
Information	Nondiscrimination	Act	(GINA),	generally	makes	it	illegal	for	health	
insurance	companies,	group	health	plans,	and	most	employers	to	discriminate	based	
on	genetic	information. 	
	
Howeve r,	this	Federal	law	does	not	protect	participants	or	their	families	against	
genetic	discrimination	by	[CONTACT_766406],	disability	insurance,	or	long-term	care	insurance.	Also,	GINA	does	not	prohibit	discrimination	of	individuals	
with	a	g enetic	disorder	that	has	been	diagnosed.	However,	in	order	to	do	everything	
possible	to	prevent	genetic	discrimination,	the	results	of	the	DNA	test	will	NOT	be	given	to	anyone	outside	the	study	staff.	This	means	that	it	will	not	be	made	available	to	
partic ipants	or	their	family	members,	their	private	physician,	employer,	insurance	
company	or	any	other	party	as	allowed	by	[CONTACT_2371].			
	
d. Plan	for	reporting	unanticipated	problems	or	study	deviations. 	
	
Any	unanticipated	problems	or	study	deviations	will	be	immediately 	reported	to	the	PI	
[INVESTIGATOR_766389].	 	
	The	Research	Monitor,	John	Hall ,	MD,	is	responsible	to	oversee	the	safety	of	the	
research	and	report	observations/findings	to	the	IRB	or	a	designated	institutional	official.	Th e	Research	Monitor	will	review	all	unanticipated	problems	involving	risks	to	
subjects	or	others	associated	with	the	protocol	and	provide	an	independent	report	of	
the	event	to	the	IRB.	The	Research	Monitor	may	discuss	the	research	protocol	with	the	
investig ators;	shall	have	authority	to	stop	a	research	protocol	in	progress,	remove	
individual	human	subjects	from	a	research	protocol,	and	take	whatever	steps	are	
necessary	to	protect	the	safety	and	well -being	of	human	subjects	until	the	IRB	can	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014 	 	Page 19 of 21	assess	the	monito r's	report;	and	shall	have	the	responsibility	to	promptly	report	their	
observations	and	findings	to	the	IRB	or	other	designated	official	and	the	HRPO. 	
	
e. Legal	risks	such	as	the	risks	that	would	be	associated	with	breach	of	confidentiality. 	
	
The	risk	of	loss 	of	privacy	is	minimized	as	the	data	will	be	coded,	password -protected,	
and	stored	separately	from	the	consent	and	screening	forms	in	a	locked	filing	cabinet.	
However,	in	the	unfortunate	event	that	a	loss	of	privacy	occurs,	it	is	possible	that	information	 related	to	a	participant's	autism	diagnosis	and	performance	on	the	tests	
being	administered	will	be	obtained. 	
	
f. Financial	risks	to	the	participants. 	
	
There	are	no	expected	financial	risks	associated	with	this	study.	However,	in	the	event	
of	an	injury	associ ated	with	the	study,	participants	may	be	responsible	for	paying	for	
medical	expenses	associated	with	that	injury.	This	determination	would	be	made	in	
consultation	with	the	University	of	Missouri	Risk	Management	Officer. 	
	
9. Benefits 	
a. Description	of	the	probabl e	benefits	for	the	participant	and	for	society. 	
	
All	participants	will	be	receiving	medical	surveillance	beyond	the	standard	of	care	with	
frequent	call	checks	for	symptoms	and	blood	pressure	checks	throughout	
participation. 	Participants	will	also	be	receiv ing	behavioral	and	psychological	
assessments	beyond	general	standard	of	care. 	
	Also,	t here	 is	evidence	that	serial	doses	of	propranolol	will	be	beneficial	for	people	
with	autism	in	the	realm	of	social	interaction	and	anxiety	(13,	14,	16) .	Therefore,	
participants	 taking	propranolol	(including	those	one	the	placebo	arm	who	choose	to	
take	part	in	the	open	label	extension) 	have	the	potential	for	direct	benefit.	Beyond	that,	
if	propranolol	is	shown	to	improve	ASD -related	symptoms,	with	the	greatest	benefit s	
being	for	those	with	the	greatest	dysregulation	in	autonomic	activity,	propranolol	may	
be	used	to	treat	others	with	similar	conditions. 	
	
10. Payment	and	Remuneration 	
a. Detail	compensation	for	participants	including	possible	total	compensation,	proposed	
bonus,	 and	any	proposed	reductions	or	penalties	for	not	completing	the	protocol. 	
	
Participants	will	be	compensated	$25.00	for	each	completed	study	visit	they	complete,	for	a	maximum	total	of	$125.00	if	they	complete	all	five 	study	visits.		The	final	payment	
of	$2 5.00	will	be	authorized	once	the	participant	returns	the	heart	rate	and	blood	
pressure	cuff	to	a	member	of	the	study	staff .	Participants	in	youth	age	group	can	also	
receive	$50.00	for	completing	the	fMRI	session. 	If	a	participant	lives	more	than	50	
miles	from	the	Thompson	Center	in	for	Autism	&	Neurodevelopmental	Disorders	in	Columbia,	MO,	the	family	will	be	eligible	for	a	flat	rate	of	$75	per	visit	to	offset	of	costs	
of	travel	to	the	Thompson	Center.	Payments	wil l	be	made	in	cash	at	the	end	of	each	
study	visit. 	
	
11. Costs 	
a. Detail	costs	of	study	procedure(s)	or	drug	(s)	or	substance(s)	to	participants	and	
identify	who	will	pay	for	them. 	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/[ADDRESS_1051393]	to	the	participants	will	be	transportation	to	and	from	the	
Thompson	Center	for	Autism	&	Neurodevelopmental	Disorders.	Participants	may	also	
be	responsible	for	costs	incurred	in	the	research	for	ancillary	resources,	such	as	medical	tre atment,	psychological	counseling,	emergency	services	or	concomitant	
medications. 	
	
12. References 	
	
a. List	of	references	supporting	research	question. 		
	
(1)	Lake	C,	Ziegler	MG,	Murphy	DL.	Increased	norepi[INVESTIGATOR_766390] -β-hydroxylase	activit y	in	primary	autism.	Archives	of	General	Psychiatry.	
1977;34(5):553- 6.	
	(2)	Martineau	J,	Barthélémy	C,	Jouve	J,	Muh	J -P,	LeLord	G.	Monoamines	(serotonin	and	
catecholamines)	and	their	derivatives	in	infantile	autism:	Age -related	changes	and	
drug	effects.	De velopmental	Medicine	&	Child	Neurology.	1992;34(7):593 -603.	
	(3)	Beversdorf	D,	Narayanan	A,	Hillier	A,	Hughes	J.	Network	model	of	decreased	context	utilization	in	autism	spectrum	disorder.	Journal	of	Autism	and	Developmental	
Disorders .	2007;37(6):1040 -8.	
	(4)	Beversdorf	DQ,	Smith	BW,	Crucian	GP,	et	al.	Increased	discrimination	of	“false	
memories”	in	autism	spectrum	disorder.	Proceedings	of	the	National	Academy	of	Sciences .	2000;97(15):8734 -7.	
	(5)	Hasselmo	ME.	Noradrenergic	suppression	of	synaptic	transmission	may	influence	cortical	signal -to-noise	ratio.	Journal	of	the	American	Physiological	Society.	
1997;77(6):3326- 3339.	 	
	
(6)	Faigel	HC.	The	effect	of	beta	blockade	on	stress -induced	cognitive	dysfunction	in	
adolescents.	 Clinical	pediatrics .	1991;30(7):441 -5.	
	(7)	Laverdure	B,	Boulenger	JP.	Beta -blocking	drugs	and	anxiety:	A	proven	therapeutic	
value.	 L'Encephale .	1991;17(5):481 -92.	
	
(8)	Ratey	J,	Bemporad	J,	Sorgi	P,	et	al.	Brief	report:	Open	tri al	effects	of	beta -blockers	
on	speech	and	social	behaviors	in	8	autistic	adults.	Journal	of	Autism	and	Developmental	
Disorders .	1987;17(3):439 -46.	
	
(9)	Beversdorf	DQ,	Carpenter	AL,	Miller	RF,	Cios	JS,	Hillier	A.	Effect	of	propranolol	on	
verbal	problem	solv ing	in	autism	spectrum	disorder .	Neurocase .	2008;14(4):378 -83.	
	(10)	Beversdorf	DQ,	Saklayen	S,	Higgins	KF,	Bodner	KE,	Kanne	SM,	Christ	SE.	Effect	of	
propranolol	on	word	fluency	in	autism.	Cognitive	and	Behavioral	Neurology.	2011;24(1):11 -7.	
	
MU	IRB	version:		3/26/2014 	 	Page 21 of 21	(11)	Bodner	K E,	Beversdorf	DQ,	Saklayen	SS,	Christ	SE.	Noradrenergic	moderation	of	
working	memory	impairments	in	adults	with	autism	spectrum	disorder.	Journal	of	the	
International	Neuropsychological	Society.	2012;18(3):556 -64.	
	(12)	Zamzow	RM,	Christ	SE,	Saklayen	SS,	e t	al.	Effect	of	propranolol	on	facial	scanning	
in	autism	spectrum	disorder:	A	preliminary	investigation.	Journal	of	Clinical	and	
Experimental	Neuropsychology.	2014:1 -15.	
	
(13)	Zamzow	RM,	Ferguson	BJ,	Stichter,	JP,	Porges,	EC,	Ragsdale,	AS,	Lewis,	ML,	&	
Beversdorf,	DQ.		Effects	of	propranolol	on	conversational	reciprocity	in	autism	
spectrum	disorder:	a	pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268],	double -blind,	single -dose,	psychopharmacological	challenge	
study.		Psychopharmacology	(Berl).	2 016;	233(7),	1171 -8.	
	(14)	Zamzow	RM,	Ferguson	BJ,	Hegarty	II	JP,	Lewis,	ML,	Ragsdale,	AS,	Christ,	SE,	
Stichter	JP,	Beversdorf	DQ.	Effects	of	a	beta -adrenergic	antagonist	on	social	and	
cognitive	functioning	in	autism	spectrum	disorder.	Poster	Presentation	at	the	
International	Meeting	For	Autism	Research	Annual	Meeting,	Atlanta,	Georgia 	(2014). 	
	(15)	Kampman	KM,	Dackis	C,	Lynch	KG,	Pettinati	H,	Tirado	C,	Gariti	P,	Sparkman	T, 	
Atzram	M,	O’Brien	CP.	A	double -blind,	placebo -controlled	trial	of	amantadine, 	
propr anolol,	and	their	contribution	for	the	treatment	of	cocaine	dependence	in	
patientswith	severe	cocaine	withdrawal	symptoms.	Drug	Alcohol	Depend 	84:129- 137	
(2006). 	
	
(16)	 Ratey,	J.	J.,	Bemporad,	J.,	Sorgi,	P.,	Bick,	P.,	Polakoff,	S.,	O'Driscoll,	G.,	&	Mikkelsen,	E.	
(1987).	Brief	report:	open	trial	effects	of	beta -blockers	on	speech	and	social	behaviors	
in	8	autistic	adults.	Journal	of	autism	and	developmental	disorders,	17(3),	439 -446.	