Project Title
Oxygen consumption-based assessments of hemodynamics in neonates following 
congenital heart surgery (Oxy-CAHN Study)
Study Investigators
John Kheir, MD (Principal Investigator)
Mackenzie Ford, MD
Ravi Thiagarajan, MD
James DiNardo, MD
Pedro del Nido, MD
Craig Smallwood, RRT
Nilesh Mehta, MD
Mel Almodovar, MD
Evan Butler, PhD
Dimitar Baranov, PhD
Kimberlee Gauvreau, ScD
Last update, February 1, [ADDRESS_122137] Summary
The purpose of the Oxy-CAHN study is to improve the monitoring capabilities of 
newborn infants recovering from congenital heart surgery.  Currently, we utilize 
important but unsophisticated measures, such as vital signs and lactate measurements, 
to monitor these patients.  Although they are useful in categorizing patients as well or unwell, these signs currently lack the power quantify a patient’s risk for cardiac arrest.  
More to the point, they are mostly indirect measures of what we really are assessing, 
which is tissue oxygen delivery.
Our group has signiﬁcant expertise with devices which quantify the amount of oxygen 
that a baby [CONTACT_110037].  These values are more commonly in combination with other measures to assess nutritional and metabolism status.  In critically ill patients, 
however, the volume of oxygen consumed  by a patient may be limited by [CONTACT_110038] .  This may represent a critical relationship, which has 
been previously described, but not exploited for the purpose of identifying patients with critically low oxygen delivery.  
The aims of this study are therefore (1) to demonstrate that oxygen consumption can be 
safely and precisely measured continuously in newborns undergoing one of two 
common congenital heart surgeries, (2) to determine whether postoperative circulatory failure is associated with a precedent change in oxygen consumption, and (3) to 
determine whether the addition of the oxygen-based measurements (including oxygen 
consumption and venous oxygen saturations) to standardly measured parameters will add power in predicting which patients will experience postoperative circulatory failure.
If successful, this study may improve our capacity to non-invasively and continuously 
monitor patients following the highest risk congenital heart surgeries, and in the future, 
to create an algorithm which quantiﬁes a patients risk for having a cardiac arrest.  This 
may permit providers to intervene on these patients deﬁnitively, improving the morbidity and mortality associated with congenital heart disease.
Abbreviations
Abbreviation Meaning
ASO Arterial switch operation
BCH [LOCATION_011] Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_110007]-Taussig shunt
CHD Congenital heart disease
CICU Cardiac intensive care unit
CPR Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
CVP Cardiovascular Program
DSMB Data safety and monitoring board
d-TGA/IVS d-Transposition of the great arteries with an intact 
ventricular septum
ECMO Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
EtCO 2 End tidal carbon dioxide 
GEE Generalized estimating equations
HLHS Hypoplastic left heart sydrome
HP Hybrid palliation
PAB Pulmonary artery band
PLOC Postoperative loss of circulation
Qp/Qs Ratio of pulmonary blood ﬂow to systemic blood ﬂow
SVC Superior vena cava
SvO 2 Mixed venous oxyhemoglobin saturation
S1P Stage I palliation
T3 Tracking, Trajectory and Trigger Program (Arcardia 
Solutions)
VCO 2 Elimination of carbon dioxide (per minute)
VO 2 Oxygen consumption (per minute)
Table of Contents
Introduction
! The importance of oxygen delivery.................................................................
! HLHS and the risk of postoperative loss of circulation...................................
! Currently used markers of oxygen delivery....................................................
! Preliminary studies.........................................................................................
Study Objectives.......................................................................................................
Study Design.............................................................................................................
Study Population
! Inclusion criteria..............................................................................................
! Exclusion criteria.............................................................................................
! Recruitment methods......................................................................................
Study Treatments
! Oxygen consumption measurement...............................................................
! Continuous SVC saturation measurement............................................ .........
Endpoints/Outcomes! Primary Outcome Measure.............................................................................
! Secondary Outcome Measures..........................................
.................. .........
Data Collection Methods, Assessments and Schedule.............................................!Adverse Event Criteria and Reporting Procedures....................................................
Data Management and Statistical Analysis................................................................Risks and Discomforts...............................................................................................
Potential Beneﬁts
! Potential Direct Beneﬁts..................................................................................
! Potential Indirect Beneﬁts...............................................................................
Privacy and Conﬁdentiality Provisions.......................................................................
References................................................................................................................
List of Appendices......................................................................................................5
6
7
9
10
11
11
11
11
12
13
14
14
15
1616
18
19
20
20
2123
Background
The Importance of Oxygen Delivery
Cellular function and survival requires a 
continuous supply of oxygen to perform 
aerobic respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516].  Inspi[INVESTIGATOR_110008], which carries large amounts of 
the molecule to the systemic tissues.  Systemic oxygen delivery (DO
2) is amount of 
oxygen carried by a given volume of blood 
multiplied by [CONTACT_110039] ﬂow rate (cardiac output).  
This represents the amount of oxygen available for tissues to consume.  In healthy 
individuals, this supply exceeds demand by a 
substantial margin - some 60-70% of oxygen delivered to the tissues returns to the 
systemic veins unused.  The volume of 
oxygen actually consumed by [CONTACT_110040] (VO
2) of course can never exceed DO 2, and is 
generally governed by a patient’s metabolic 
rate.  In critically ill patients, factors which are 
known to increase VO 2 include fevers, 
seizures, activity and inotrope administration 
to name a few.  In patients who are very 
critically ill, DO 2 may actually decrease below 
a critical threshold known as ‘critical 
DO 2‘ (Figure 1 ).1  Below critical DO 2, the 
body’s normal compensatory mechanisms (e.g. to increase cardiac output or increase 
the oxygen extraction ratio) are overcome, and an insufﬁcient volume of oxygen is 
delivered to tissues, which in turn decreases 
VO
2 (since tissues cannot consume oxygen if 
it is not delivered).  
In critically ill patients, e.g. in newborns following open heart surgery, it is common for 
DO 2 to be marginal.  This is evidenced by [CONTACT_110041] (namely serum lactate measurements), by [CONTACT_110042] a high oxygen 
extraction ratio (low superior vena cava oxyhemoglobin saturations relative to arterial 
saturations), and by [CONTACT_110043] (e.g. physical signs of increased systemic vascular 
resistance and a fast heart rate).  When the myocardium receives and insufﬁcient 
amount of oxygen, tissue hypoxia ensues and causes myocardial dysfunction.  Intensive care efforts often focus upon improving tissue perfusion by [CONTACT_110044], and this requisitely increases myocardial oxygen demands.
[ADDRESS_122138] 
Figure 1.   Oxygen delivery is the amount of 
oxygen carried to the tissues, and typi[INVESTIGATOR_110009]/consumed by [CONTACT_110040].  As oxygen delivery decreases progressively (moving right to left across the X axis), a critical threshold is reached below which oxygen consumption decreases as tissues become dysoxic (A).  As tissues become progressively hypoxic, an increasing amount of oxygen is extracted from hemoglobin, increasing the oxygen extraction ratio.  Figure from Schumacker, Int Care Med, 1987.
critically ill patients, the myocardium reaches a 
profound state of tissue hypoxia which may 
cause a postoperative loss of circulation (PLOC).
HLHS and the risk of PLOC
Patients with hypoplastic left heart syndrome 
(HLHS) necessarily have so-called ‘single ventricle physiology’.  In these patients, the right 
ventricle pumps blood to both the systemic 
circulation (to deliver oxygen) and to the lungs (to pi[INVESTIGATOR_110010], Figure 2 ).  Normally, these two 
functions occur in series, i.e. the right ventricle pumps blood to the lungs and the left ventricleto the body.  In two ventricle physiology, each 
ventricle pumps one cardiac output.  In single 
ventricle physiology, however, the right ventricle pumps to both circulations in parallel, requiring at 
least 1.6-1.8 cardiac outputs (at times 2-3 cardiac 
outputs),
3 which among other things causes a 
disproportionate increase in myocardial VO 2.  In 
the postoperative period, the oxygen extraction 
capacity of myocardium may be compromised by 
[CONTACT_110045], systemic inﬂammation, and mitochondrial dysfunction following the effects of 
cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_6476].  Myocardial oxygen 
delivery can be compromised by [CONTACT_108659] (as a consequence of postoperative bleeding), and by 
[CONTACT_110046] ﬂow (especially 
pronounced in settings of tachycardia - which decreases coronary ﬁlling time - and of diastolic 
hypotension due to the presence of a systemic to 
pulmonary shunt).  
In the BCH CICU, approximately 10-15% of 
neonates undergoing a stage I palliation (S1P) experience PLOC and receive some resuscitation, 
often times in the form of extracorporeal 
membrane oxygen (EMCO) device support.  These patients often experience increased ICU and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_110011], higher hospi[INVESTIGATOR_110012], and worse neurologic outcomes.
4-[ADDRESS_122139] prior to an 
injurious or potentially lethal event.
Figure 2.   In patients born with an 
inadequate left ventricle, the right 
ventricle is used to pump blood to both the body and the lungs simultaneously and in parallel by [CONTACT_110047], and creating a shunt from this circulation to the lungs.  This circulation leads to increased oxygen demand for the heart.  When this demand is not met, myocardial dysfunction and PLOC result.  Figure from Ohye, NEJM, 2010.{Ohye:2010kn}
Currently Used Markers of Oxygen Delivery
Assessing the physiologic state of patients is a complex but vitally important task.  At 
the bedside, the clinician combines many pi[INVESTIGATOR_110013], each of which has strengths and weakness as a clinical sign.  Basic hemodynamic parameters (aka vital signs) include a patient’s heart rate, arterial 
and venous blood pressures, oxygen saturations and temperature are central to the 
assessment of a patient’s physiologic state, and are often the most important clues to inadequate oxygen delivery.  Further to this includes markers of end organ function, 
such as urine output, coagulation parameter, as well as laboratory indices of hepatic 
and renal function add some degree of conﬁdence that our general assessments are correct.  
In patients at higher risk of insufﬁcient DO
2, advanced monitoring techniques are 
commonly used.  The three most commonly used techniques in routine use in neonates 
undergoing congenital heart surgery include (1) cerebral near infrared spectroscopy 
(cNIRS), (2) SVC saturation sampling, and (3) serum lactate measurements.  
Cerebral NIRS
cNIRS is a technology which intends to non-invasively quantify (at least as a trend) the quantity of oxyhemoglobin versus deoxyhemoglobin within the tissue beds underlying 
the probe.  The probe emits red light to the surface of the forehead, penetrating to the 
cerebral cortex of the brain.  Because oxyhemoglobin absorbs green and blue wavelengths, but deoxyhemoglobin does not (hence desaturated patients appear 
cyanotic), the optical properties of the light returning to the sensor depend upon the 
oxyhemoglobin/deoxyhemoglobin ratio within the tissues that the light path crosses.  The monitor we use most often (Somanetics INVOS Cerebral/Somatic Oximeter) 
senses light at two wavelengths (730 and 810 nm) and converts this number to a 
regional oxyhemoglobin saturation index.  The measurement of NIRS has been correlated with jugular venous saturation in humans.
7,8  The technology was approved 
for pediatric use in 2005, and has been utilized in several studies of pediatric cardiac 
patients since that time.9,10 
However, there are important limitations in using NIRS to assess mixed venous 
saturation, including the obscuring and competing signal from myoglobin in skeletal muscle, interfering with the superimposed spectral signal from red cell hemoglobin.
11  
There has been a resultant lack of subsequent evidence validating NIRS with low 
cardiac output in children after cardiac surgery with possible risk of potential harm from 
uncertainty in interpretation of the recorded NIRS values.12  Because of these 
limitations, the ‘gold standard’ for assessing cerebral oxygen delivery is therefore 
quantiﬁcation of SVC oxyhemoglobin saturations.  
SVC oxyhemoglobin saturations
Inadequate DO 2  leads to tissue hypoxia, which in turn leads to an increased oxygen 
extraction ratio and central venous desaturation.  Therefore, quantiﬁcation of oxyhemoglobin saturation from a pulmonary artery (distal to complete mixing) is 
considered a benchmark measurement when assessing oxygen delivery.  However, 
because this requires placement of a pulmonary artery catheter (which is not commonly 
done in children), blood is more commonly sampled from the SVC for the same 
purpose.  In fact, SVC saturations are at times the most accurate place to sample 
venous blood, as many patients with congenital heart disease (CHD) have left to right shunts or even single ventricle physiology, making pulmonary artery saturations difﬁcult 
to interpret.  
Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897], SVC saturations are measured by [CONTACT_110048] a 
catheter placed into the SVC via the internal jugular vein, or retrograde through the right 
atrium.  The SVC saturation is used to calculate the oxygen extraction ratio, and 
generally values below 40-50% represent a compromised DO
2.  The limitations to this 
technique include the following.  (1) Blood must be removed from the body (including 
‘waste’ blood which ﬁlls the catheter) which can lead to anemia.  (2) Even frequent 
sampling of SVC blood is intermittent, and assessing responses of DO 2 to interventions 
can be difﬁcult in real time.  (3) Frequent entry into the central line can increase the risk 
of catheter related bloodstream infection.  (4) In patients with profoundly low SVC 
saturations, small amounts of air which enter the blood gas syringe can lead to artiﬁcially higher oximetric readings.  
To address these limitations, we will test a recently developed central venous catheter 
which utilizes in vivo reﬂection spectrophotometry on 4 wavelengths (PediaSat catheter; Edwards Lifesciences) to accurately quantify oxyhemoglobin saturations in blood 
passing the catheter tip.  This catheter is placed in standard fashion, and is coated with 
both Heparin and antimicrobials in order to diminish the risks of thrombus formation and infection, respectively.  Its insertion is similar to standard catheters which are routinely 
placed in the patient populations being studied here.  We have chosen to utilize this 
catheter in this study because it addresses the pi[INVESTIGATOR_110014], and because it will allow a continuous, real-time assessment of cardiac output 
and an estimation of the ratio of pulmonary to systemic blood ﬂow (Qp/Qs).  Of note, the 
catheter was recently used to safely and accurately quantify SvO
[ADDRESS_122140] of anaerobic respi[INVESTIGATOR_110015], and 
is therefore an obvious choice as a marker of inadequate DO 2.  It is commonly 
measured in the clinical management of neonates following congenital heart surgery.  
Unfortunately, serum lactate can be falsely low in extreme tissue malperfusion (it is 
thought that lactate does not equilibrate with the plasma in situations of extremely low DO
2), and can be falsely elevated by [CONTACT_110049] (prototypi[INVESTIGATOR_897], epi[INVESTIGATOR_238]) 
and in hepatic dysfunction.  Together, these factors make isolated measurements of 
lactate difﬁcult to interpret.  
It has been previously shown that in adults experiencing a cardiac arrest, a high serum 
lactate (>10 mg/dL) is more common in patients experiencing a recurrent cardiac arrest.
[ADDRESS_122141] been shown to exhibit both precision and 
accuracy in quantifying VO
2 in newborns, even those following congenital heart surgery.  
For example, Li has described the VO 2 of newborns following S1P to be ~80-100 mL/
min/m2 19, using a VO [ADDRESS_122142] 
three years, for example, members of our group completed a study in which VO 2 and 
VCO 2 were quantiﬁed in postoperative Fontan patients using this device in the CICU.24  
The nursing and respi[INVESTIGATOR_110016].  
The device utilizes an in-line adapter which afﬁxes to the end of the endotracheal tube, 
and samples gas concentrations on a breath-to-breath basis (GE Healthcare, E-
CAIOVX module, Waukesha, WI).  The process for gas exchange measurement has been described previously.
[ADDRESS_122143] differential paramagnetic O 2 analyzer and infrared 
CO 2 analyzer by [CONTACT_10167]-stream sampling. A ﬁxed oriﬁce, pressure differential 
pneumotachometer (D-lite (+) or Pedi-lite (+), GE Healthcare, Madison, WI) is used to 
measure gas volumes and ﬂows and to calculate VO 2.  This device has been well 
validated against mass spectrometry and has been found to be both accurate and precise at even low VO
[ADDRESS_122144], many animals 
exhibited a pronounced decrease in 
their measured VO 2, a pattern which 
was not present in treated animals 
which did not experience subsequent 
hemodynamic instability (Figure 3 ).  
Having seen this pattern consistently in 
approximately n=40 animal experiments 
(weight range 2.5-4 kg), we hypothesize that in critically ill patients, VO
[ADDRESS_122145].  If this hypothesis is true, quantiﬁcation of VO
2 
may represent a new ‘vital sign’ which 
represents end organ oxygen delivery in 
critically ill patients.  Identiﬁcation of patients with pathologically supply 
dependent VO
[ADDRESS_122146], e.g. initiation of extracorporeal life support, prior to a 
life-threatening PLOC.
Study Objectives
Speciﬁc Aim 1. To demonstrate that 
oxygen consumption (VO 2) and superior 
vena cava (SVC) saturations can be 
safely and precisely measured continuously in newborns undergoing surgery for 
hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) or d-transposition of the great arteries with an intact ventricular septum (d-TGA/IVS).
Hypothesis:  Measurement of these oxygen-based parameters will not be associated 
with an increased incidence of equipment-related adverse events (e.g. line displacements, inadvertent extubations) and will lead to precise and reproducible 
measurements of these important parameters.
Speciﬁc Aim 2. To determine whether postoperative loss of circulation (PLOC, deﬁned 
as cardiac arrest requiring CPR, ECMO cannulation, or causing death) in these patients 
are associated with a change in oxygen consumption or SVC saturation prior to the event.
Hypothesis:  PLOC will be associated with signiﬁcant decreases in both oxygen 
consumption and SVC saturations for at least [ADDRESS_122147].
Speciﬁc Aim 3.  To determine whether the addition of the oxygen-based measurements 
to standardly measured parameters (i.e. vital signs, near-infrared spectroscopy 
Fig 1.  Proof of concept: Oxygen consumption (VO 2) 
monitoring in n=2 representative rabbits (weight ~3 kg) 
undergoing a 30 minute period of observation, then a 15 minute period of asphyxia.  The animal treated with an intravenous form of oxygen (blue) was subsequently hemodynamically stable, and had a stable VO
2.  The 
untreated animal (red) became markedly ill following asphyxia, exhibiting a decreasing, then absent VO
[ADDRESS_122148]. Figure 3.   In a proof of concept study, VO 2 monitoring of 
rabbits (weight ~3 kg) undergoing a [ADDRESS_122149]-asphyxial recovery.  Exemplary VO
2 tracings 
shown of animals treated (blue line) and untreated (red line) with an intravenous formulation of oxygen which prevented severe hypoxemic-ischemic injury.  Animals which suffered severe injury exhibited a signiﬁcant decrement in VO
[ADDRESS_122150]-asphyxial loss of circulation.  Animals who experienced treated asphyxial injury had an unchanged VO
2 curve.  A central 
hypothesis of this study is therefore whether VO 2 may 
represent a sensitive, real-time, prospective, and non-invasive marker of circulatory failure and inadequate DO
2 in newborns at risk for this life-threatening 
problem.
measurements, intermittent measurements of lactate and superior vena cava 
saturations) add power in predicting which patients will experience PLOC.
Hypothesis:  Continuous measurements of VO [ADDRESS_122151] which patients will undergo PLOC.
Study Design
We will prospectively and continuously measure VO 2 and SVC saturations in newborns 
undergoing stage I palliation (S1P) or hybrid palliation (HP) for HLHS (n=20) or arterial 
switch operation (ASO) for d-TGA/IVS (n=20), beginning at the time of ﬁrst preoperative 
intubation and ending at the time of the ﬁrst postoperative extubation.  Newborns will be followed for the occurrence of PLOC as the primary endpoint.  A study schematic is 
attached as Appendix [ADDRESS_122152]-TGA/IVS AND planned ASO
3.Written parental informed consent
Exclusion criteria.
1.Weight < 2 kg
2.Disease speciﬁcA.HLHS patients: Infants whose surgical plan includes a neonatal biventricular 
repair will be excluded. 
B.d-TGA/IVS patients:  Newborns with any additional cardiac defect other than 
an atrial septal defect will be excluded.
3.Patients on ECMO preoperatively
4.Clinically signiﬁcant tracheo-esophageal ﬁstula or known preoperative air leak
Recruitment Methods.   The ﬂow of patients and the infrastructure within the CVP at 
BCH is ideally suited for this study.  A list of planned newborn admissions, including presumptive anatomical diagnoses) is kept by [CONTACT_110050] 
(AFCP) within the CVP, and is emailed to providers within the Cardiac Intensive Care 
Unit (CICU), which will be screened weekly by [CONTACT_3476].  Additionally, the CICU census will be screened each morning by a member of the study team for patients 
meeting inclusion criteria.  As a backup, CICU staff will be formally educated about the 
study and asked to page the PI [INVESTIGATOR_110017].  
The early newborn period is one which is full of anxiety, stress and an overwhelming 
amount of information.  In the spi[INVESTIGATOR_110018] a more informed consent, we will attempt to raise awareness of the study in the following manner.  A one-page brochure 
describing the study will be placed in the employee areas of the AFCP.  Staff members 
who follow expectant mothers whose children have either HLHS or d-TGA/IVS will be 
asked to give the ﬂyer to their patients in order to allow time for parents to consider 
participation prior to the birth of their child.  Study staff will be made available for 
questions by [CONTACT_6968], phone or in-person for these parents at any time.  The ﬂyer is 
attached as Appendix 2 .
When patients are identiﬁed who meeting study criteria, study participation will be discussed with the treating team, speciﬁcally including the patient’s cardiac intensivist and cardiac surgeon.  Following the verbal assent of the team, parents will be 
approached for written consent.  
Study Treatments
The treatment which newborns with congenital heart disease receive is complex, and is 
directed by a multidisciplinary team which includes a cardiac surgeon, a team of cardiac 
intensivist, a primary cardiologist and an array of cardiac subspecialists (e.g. cardiac 
catheterization staff).  Patients in this protocol will be treated according to the current standard of care in the CVP by [CONTACT_110051].  As this is a prospective 
observational study, there will be no treatments associated with the study except for the 
application and insertion of the relevant equipment, which is described below.
VO
2 monitoring.  Currently, all patients undergoing mechanical ventilation for any reason 
are monitored using a capnograph, a device which features an adapter ﬁtted onto the 
end of the endotracheal tube for the continuous 
monitoring of end-tidal carbon dioxide (EtCO 2), and 
other basic spi[INVESTIGATOR_66729] (e.g. tidal volume, 
VCO 2, lung compliance).  There are several different 
capnograph devices in current use within BCH.  However, none of these devices measure VO
2, which is 
a critical endpoint in our study.  Therefore, patients included in the study will be monitored using a device 
with this capability (Datex Ohmeda Critical Care Monitor, GE Healthcare, E-CAIOVX module, shown in 
Figure 4 ).  As discussed above, the study team has 
accumulated signiﬁcant experience with this FDA-
approved device in children, and it has been used in 
other clinical studies in children at BCH.  All cardiac 
intensive care, cardiac anesthesia and cardiac ICU nursing staff will be inserviced on the equipment by a 
member of the study team prior to initiation of the study. 
In the opi[INVESTIGATOR_57455], VO
[ADDRESS_122153] parameters of ventilation (i.e. 
end tidal CO 2, capnograph waveform, tidal volume and lung compliance measurements) 
will be displayed on the monitor for clinician use for the duration of the study; VO 2 will 
be recorded but not displayed on the monitor.
Figure 4.   The E-CAIOVX module of 
the GE monitor to be used in this 
study.  The plastic pi[INVESTIGATOR_110019] ﬁts onto the end of the tracheal tube and measures features of inhaled and exhaled breath by [CONTACT_10167]-stream analysis.  
SVC saturation monitoring.   Currently, all patients undergoing an S1P, HP or ASO 
routinely undergo placement of a temporary central venous catheter placed within the 
internal jugular vein, and terminating within the SVC.  These catheters are standardly 
used for infusion of inotropic medications, constant monitoring of central venous pressures and the intermittent withdrawal of blood for SVC saturation measurements.  
These catheters are standardly 4 French in size, are 5 cm in length and contain two 
lumens (Cook Medical).  Following admission to the CICU, these catheters are routinely treated with a Heparin infusion at 10 Units/kg/hour through one of the lumens until the 
time of removal.  
In lieu of the standard Cook Medical catheter, the treating team will place a similar FDA-
approved catheter, but which is ﬁtted with a ﬁberoptic sensor which continuously 
records the oxyhemoglobin saturation of the blood to which it is exposed.  The catheter is 4.5 French, 5 cm in length, has two lumens, 
and is Heparin bonded (PediaSat catheter, 
Edwards LifeSciences, Model# XT245HK, see Figure 5 ).  The catheter comes will a sterile 
percutaneous insertion kit.  As above, all cardiac intensivists, cardiac anesthesiologists and CICU nursing staff will receive a formal 
training on the insertion and care of this 
catheter by [CONTACT_110052] ([CONTACT_110063]).  Prior to insertion, the 
catheter will be calibrated using an in vitro 
solution which comes with the catheter.  For those familiar with the device, this process will 
add 2-3 minutes to the insertion time.  
Following insertion of the catheter, the device will be attached to the study monitor (Datex 
Ohmeda Critical Care Monitor, GE Healthcare) 
via a specialized cable.  The catheters will be paid for by [CONTACT_978].
In the opi[INVESTIGATOR_57455], the SVC saturation is a clinically useful pi[INVESTIGATOR_110020].  Because the device 
readings have been shown to correlate well with oximetric readings from venous blood, 
the SVC saturation will be continuously displayed on the study monitor for clinicans to use at their discretion for the duration of the study.
The study will end following the ﬁrst postoperative extubation or removal of the central 
venous catheter, whichever occurs last.
Figure 5.   The PediaSat catheter to be used 
in this study is functionally the same as 
catheters routinely used in the perioperative care of newborns with CHD except that it is ﬁtted with a ﬁberoptic probe at its tip which continuously reads SVC saturation.  
Endpoints/Outcomes
Primary Outcome.  The primary outcome being measured will be a composite endpoint 
of PLOC, including the need for CPR, the need for ECMO in the setting of CPR, or 
death.
Secondary Outcomes.  Because Aim 3 of this study is to determine whether the 
aforementioned oxygen-based measurements add to the predictive power of the data 
standardly used to assess patients, there will be a substantial amount of data gathered, which is outlined below.
•Oxygen-based parameters unique to this study•Oxygen consumption (Q1 second).  The VO
2 will be recorded Q1 second as 
part of the ventilatory parameters described below.
•SVC saturations (Q1 second).  SVC saturations as determined by [CONTACT_110053] Q1 second.
•Standard of care monitoring
•Vital signs.  These data will include heart rate, arterial blood pressures, 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], pulse oximetry, atrial pressures, and central venous pressure.    As discussed in detail below, these data will be extracted from an existing 
program which records the primary data Q5 second in time stamped fashion 
(T3 Program, Arcardia Solutions).
•NIRS .  The near-infrared spectroscopy value represents the oxyhemoglobin 
saturation of the deep tissues.  This will be recorded Q1 second in time-stamped fashion.
•Ventilatory parameters.  All ventilation parameters will be recorded from the 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_110021].  These data include end-tidal 
CO
2, fraction of inspi[INVESTIGATOR_33559] 2, respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], fraction of inspi[INVESTIGATOR_5697] O 2, fraction 
of expi[INVESTIGATOR_5697] O 2, peak end expi[INVESTIGATOR_27111], peak inspi[INVESTIGATOR_27111], 
plateau pressure, mean airway pressure, airway resistance, inpi[INVESTIGATOR_696]-
expi[INVESTIGATOR_110022], inspi[INVESTIGATOR_110023], inspi[INVESTIGATOR_110024], compliance of the respi[INVESTIGATOR_2133], minute ventilation, VCO
2, energy expenditure, and respi[INVESTIGATOR_38952].  These data 
will be recorded Q1 second in time-stamped fashion.
•Standard labs will be drawn at the treating team’s discretion and gathered from the medical record each day.•Arterial blood gase and time drawn
•Serum lactate and time drawn
•SVC (or other venous) saturations and time drawn
•Chemistry proﬁle, complete blood count (white blood cell count, hemoglobin, 
hematocrit and platelet count), coagulation proﬁle and times drawn
•Treatments
•Inotrope infusions are routinely administered, often in high doses, to these 
patients in the perioperative setting.  It is thought that these infusions affect 
both oxygen delivery to all tissues, as well as increasing myocardial oxygen consumption.  
•Additionally, we will record intermittently administered medications , such as 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_238], calcium gluconate, sodium bicarbonate, hydrocortisone, and 
thyroid replacement therapy, all of which may affect oxygen consumption and 
oxygen delivery as well. 
•Chest explorations and operative interventions performed at the bedside (e.g. clippi[INVESTIGATOR_110025]) will be recorded each day from a review of the medical record, discussion with the primary team (including the bedside 
nurse) and the notes within the medical record.
•Blood loss from chest tubes (in mL/kg each hour) and blood product 
administrations (including the blood products given and the times at which 
they are given) will be recorded from the medical record each day.
•Sedatives and paralytics are routinely used and also affect oxygen 
consumption.  
•Diuretic medications are also routinely used, can affect preload.
•Arrhythmias and 
•Other clinical parameters
•Urine output is a crude marker of intravascular volume and end organ oxygen 
delivery.
•The presence of enteral feedings, the rate of feedings and the caloric 
densities will also be recorded, as these may affect a patient’s systemic 
vascular resistance.  
•Operative characteristics
•Full preoperative and postoperative anatomic diagnoses
•Residual anatomic defects
•Total pump time, cross-clamp time, circulatory arrest time, regional perfusion time, minutes of continuous and modiﬁed ultraﬁltration, blood products 
administered on by[CONTACT_110054], Assessments and Schedule
Outcome measurementsThe majority of the endpoints presented above are routinely collected within the medical 
record as a part of patient care.  Therefore, the majority of the data will be abstracted 
directly from the medical record and into a spreadsheet for data analysis by a member of the study team during each day for the duration of the study.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_110026]-
time technicians within his lab who will assist with this labor intensive process.  
•The oxygen-based measurements which are central to this study, including VO
2, 
SVC saturation, as well as all ventilatory parameters listed above will be saved to a computer program (S5 Collect, GE Healthcare) attached to the patient’s 
monitor.  This program saves data in time stamped fashion Q1 second.
•Time-stamped vital sign data listed above will be exported daily from the 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s in situ T3 program (Arcadia Solutions).
•The labs, treatments and other clinical parameters (see previous section) will be 
extracted in time-stamped fashion from the medical record each day by a 
member of the study team.
Patient variables
Upon study enrollment, we will record relevant variables for the purposes of 
comparisons between patients, including gestational age, date and time of birth, gender, 
weight and length, date of admission, known medical problems, current medication list.  
Markers of severity of illness will include the number of organ failures, number and dosing of inotropic medications, and any positive cultures.  
Adverse events
Although this is a prospective, observational study which do not anticipate will alter our 
standard practices, we will monitor vigilantly for complications associated with the 
standard therapi[INVESTIGATOR_110027].  Namely, we will monitor for endotracheal tube complications (e.g. ventilator associated pneumonia, 
accidental extubation) and for central venous line complications (e.g. catheter 
associated bloodstream infections).
Safety end points
Because this is a prospective observational study and is not expected to directly impact patient care, we will not have stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_110028], except if 
informed consent is withdrawn by a parent or team member. 
Parameters for discontinuation of the research
All components of this study have been tested and validated in the critically ill newborn 
population.  As such, we do not anticipate any technical problems with the observations proposed in this study.  However, the research will be discontinued if an interim analysis 
shows a signiﬁcant increase in the adverse events presented above compared with a 
retrospective control.
Adverse Event Criteria and Reporting Procedures
A data safety and monitoring board (DSMB) will be composed of two clinicians 
knowledgeable in the postoperative care of children with congenital heart disease.  The 
DSMB for this study will include John Arnold, MD, Director of Respi[INVESTIGATOR_1511], and staff 
Anesthesiologist and Intensivist at [LOCATION_011] Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], and Kirsten Odegard, MD, a staff Cardiac Anesthesiologist at [LOCATION_011] Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  Meetings will be 
held at the discretion of the DSMB members and study investigators, at least once 
following enrollment of the ﬁrst 5 patients.   The following complications will be speciﬁcally monitored for and reported to the DSMB immediately upon occurrence: 
accidental extubation or central venous catheter removal thought to be related to the 
monitoring devices (these are both extremely unlikely given that they are FDA-approved, widely used devices in children).  
Data Management and Statistical Analysis
Data management methods
Upon entry into the study, each patient will be assigned a unique patient identiﬁer which 
is unique from their medical record number for the purpose of patient tracking.  A 
spreadsheet which links each patient’s UPI [INVESTIGATOR_110029] a separate binder, locked in the PI’s ofﬁce.  The UPI [INVESTIGATOR_110030]-related materials, including the laptop used to collect data from the 
GE monitor (which includes all ventilation parameters and SVC measurements), and on 
the data collection forms.  Data from the T3 system will be extracted from SQL T3 database, and stored in a deidentiﬁed manner using the same UPI.  
Logistic considerations
At the time of study enrollment, baseline characteristics 
will be collected and recorded on a deidentiﬁed form.  At 
the time of ﬁrst intubation or CVL placement, the pole-mounted GE monitor will be brought to the room by 
[CONTACT_3462], and data recording will begin in realtime 
to the S5 Collect program using an attached laptop (Figure 6 ).  The program ﬁle will be saved as the 
patients UPI [INVESTIGATOR_110031]ﬁdential information.  Care will be taken to synchronize the time stamps within each of the devices in order to ensure proper alignment 
of the various data sources.  
Each day, a member of the study team will visit the 
patient’s bedside to abstract the relevant information from 
the medical record, with corroboration from the patient’s bedside nurse and treating team.  When needed, the 
patient’s cardiac anesthesiologist or perfusionist will be 
contact[CONTACT_110055].  
Using a study laptop, all requisite information will be 
entered into a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet with the desired values listed on the left and each hour listed across the right.  Data will be hand-entered into the spreadsheet by a 
member of the research team, and annotated as necessary to clarify discussions with 
relevant parties.  These data will be double checked by a second member of the study team within [ADDRESS_122154] at startup according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Further, 
anesthesiologist and respi[INVESTIGATOR_110032].  If the airleak exceeds this value, air may be 
added to the tracheal tube cuff.  We have shown that when this difference is <15%, VO
[ADDRESS_122155] to the spreadsheet will be 
ensured by [CONTACT_110056] a second member of the study team.  Furthermore, when possible, the ﬁelds for data entry will contain ‘Data 
Validation’ functions (i.e. value will turn red if outside expected limits, and hard stops will 
be inserted for physiologically impossible values).  Additionally, drop down lists will be utilized when possible to minimize data entry errors.  
Data Analysis Plan
Patients will be divided into patients who do and do not experience PLOC.  All variables 
will be normalized to hours prior to by[CONTACT_6476], by[CONTACT_110057]-by[CONTACT_95187], 
such that  all data for a speciﬁc post-by[CONTACT_110058].  All weight-dependent variables will be normalized to preoperative body weight.  Using 
GraphPad Prism, each variable will be entered into a different column for analysis.  
Simple analyses (e.g. mean, standard deviation, tests for normality) will be completed 
within GraphPad.   With regards to the primary endpoint, VO
2 measurements will be 
analyzed for 120 minutes prior to a PLOC event in cases, and a randomly selected 120 minute period in controls. Values will be compared between cases and controls
using generalized estimating equations (GEEs) to account for the correlation of multiple measurements within the same patient and to compare means between cases and 
controls. A post-hoc broken stick analysis will be used to determine the time prior to the 
event at which the VO
2 changed in each patient experiencing an event. Data for HLHS 
and dTGA patients will be pooled together.
More complex analyses will be completed by a collaborating company called Etiometry 
(including Dimitar Baranov, PhD and Evan Butler, PhD, co-investigators on this study), 
with whom the PI [INVESTIGATOR_110033].  
Deidentiﬁed information will be sent to the company, who will complete further analyses.
Power Calculations and Sample Size
The measured oxygen consumption in neonates following S1P has been described as 86±16 mL/min/m
222. A sample size that includes [ADDRESS_122156] a true decrease of 53 mL/min/m2 in oxygen consumption with 90% power and 
a signiﬁcance level of 0.05 (two tailed). Based on the signiﬁcant change in VO [ADDRESS_122157] catheters, which include bleeding, infection and thrombosis.  To address these, the staff within the CVP at BCH utilize an insertion bundle and antibiotic 
coated catheters, which will be a practice which is unchanged in this study.  As per 
routine in the CICU, the catheters will be infused with a Heparin infusion at 10 Units/kg/hour through one of the two ports of the line, which will decrease any risk of thrombus 
formation.  The catheters are additionally coated with AMC Thromboshield (a coating 
containing both Heparin and antimicrobials), which will further decrease the risks of both infection and thrombus formation.  
Potential Beneﬁts
Potential Direct Beneﬁts
Because this is a prospective observational study, the measurements are not intended 
to change the standard of care by [CONTACT_110059].  However, there are 
several possible direct beneﬁts to patients:
•Decrease in venous blood sampling .  It is possible that due to the indwelling 
oximeter that the care team will require fewer blood samples to be tested for SVC saturations.  This could potentially decrease the blood loss associated with blood sampling and diminish the risk of infection (which is associated with the number 
of times a line is entered).  
•Improved assessments of Qp/Qs.  As discussed in the background section, the 
ratio of blood ﬂow to the lungs to that of the body is a vitally important number in 
the care of patients with HLHS.  In the CICU, it is common practice to make 
changes in patient management based on this value, although the value itself is quite often inaccurately assessed.
3  The primary unmeasured variable in the 
calculation of this ratio is the SVC saturation.  The ability to constantly and 
accurately monitor this value, in combination with arterial saturations based on 
pulse oximetry, may vastly improve the quantiﬁcation of the Qp/Qs ratio and better inform management decisions at the bedside for critically ill neonates. 
•Earlier recognition of circulatory failure .  Regardless of a patient’s underlying 
anatomy, the difference in oxyhemoglobin saturation between a patients systemic arterial and venous circulations represents the adequacy of end organ oxygen 
delivery (reference Figure 1 above).  It is possible that by [CONTACT_110060] (the former by [CONTACT_406]), that the treating team will be able to more rapi[INVESTIGATOR_110034].  There are many interventions which could be utilized 
by [CONTACT_110061] a result 
of and in response to this single factor.
Potential Indirect BeneﬁtsThis study has the potential to signiﬁcantly improve the way that newborn patients (and 
others) are monitored in the postoperative period.  Currently, the circulation of these 
patients are assessed indirectly, using surrogate measures (using cNIRS, and intermittent lactate and SVC saturations measurements) and vital signs.  Because our 
deﬁnitive treatment for refractory circulatory failure is ECMO, and because ECMO itself 
can cause life-threatening complications, it is extremely challenging to determine which patients are at a higher risk of death or organ injury from inadequate DO
[ADDRESS_122158] risk period.  For the 
short term, this could permit treating teams to measure the effects of their interventions 
on oxygen delivery (e.g. addition of inotropes, blood transfusions, clips on shunts) and inform these decisions.  For the long-term, it is possible that VO
[ADDRESS_122159] in the Cardiac Intensive Care 
Unit at [LOCATION_011] Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. Therefore, patients will not be approached for consent unless they meet full inclusion criteria and their treating team assents. Only 
parents, who will be aware of their child’s diagnosis of congenital heart disease, will be 
approached about the study.  None of the patient’s comorbidities will be discussed with the patient or family as part of this study.
Conﬁdentiality Provisions
All data will be tracked using unique patient identiﬁers (UPI). Links between UPI [INVESTIGATOR_110035] a password-protected ﬁle on the PI’s 
computer, and as a printed backup in the PI’s locked ofﬁce. Both of these will be destroyed following data analysis. All primary data will be saved on a hard drive 
maintained in the locked ofﬁce of the PI.  All data will be deidentiﬁed using the UPI [INVESTIGATOR_110036]ﬁer. All data ﬁles will be password protected, and only study investigators will have access to this password. All ﬁles sent via email will be sent with encryption.
References
1.  Schumacker, P. T. & Cain, S. M. The concept of a critical oxygen delivery. Intensive 
Care Medicine 13, 223–229 (1987).
2.  Ronco, J. J. et al.  Identiﬁcation of the critical oxygen delivery for anaerobic 
metabolism in critically ill septic and nonseptic humans. JAMA 270, 1724–
1730 (1993).
3.  Yuki, K., Emani, S. & DiNardo, J. A. A mathematical model of transitional circulation 
toward biventricular repair in hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Anesth Analg 
115, 618–626 (2012).
4.Ravishankar, C. et al.  Association of impaired linear growth and worse 
neurodevelopmental outcome in infants with single ventricle physiology: a 
report from the pediatric heart network infant single ventricle trial. J. Pediatr. 
162, 250–256.e2 (2013).
5.Sherwin, E. D. et al.  Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation after stage 1 palliation 
for hypoplastic left heart syndrome. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 144, 1337–
1343 (2012).
6.Kane, D. A. et al.  Rapid-response extracorporeal membrane oxygenation to support 
cardiopulmonary resuscitation in children with cardiac disease. Circulation 
122, S241–8 (2010).
7.Kim, M. B. et al.  Estimation of jugular venous O2 saturation from cerebral oximetry 
or arterial O2 saturation during isocapnic hypoxia. J Clin Monit Comput  16, 
191–199 (2000).
8.Colquhoun, D. A., Tucker-Schwartz, J. M., Durieux, M. E. & Thiele, R. H. Non-
invasive estimation of jugular venous oxygen saturation: a comparison 
between near infrared spectroscopy and transcutaneous venous oximetry. J 
Clin Monit Comput  26, 91–98 (2012).
9.Haydin, S. et al.  Cerebral perfusion during cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_8041]: 
correlations between near-infrared spectroscopy, temperature, lactate, pump 
ﬂow, and blood pressure. Artif Organs 37, 87–91 (2013).
10. Marimón, G. A., Dockery, W. K., Sheridan, M. J. & Agarwal, S. Near-infrared 
spectroscopy cerebral and somatic (renal) oxygen saturation correlation to continuous venous oxygen saturation via intravenous oximetry catheter. J Crit 
Care 27, 314.e13–8 (2012).
11.Nighswander-Rempel, S. P., Kupriyanov, V. V. & Shaw, R. A. Relative contributions 
of hemoglobin and myoglobin to near-infrared spectroscopic images of cardiac tissue. Appl Spectrosc 59, 190–193 (2005).
12. Durandy, Y., Rubatti, M. & Couturier, R. Near Infrared Spectroscopy during pediatric 
cardiac surgery: errors and pi[INVESTIGATOR_30207]. Perfusion 26, 441–446 (2011).
13. Kessler, K. M., Kozlovskis, P., Trohman, R. G. & Myerburg, R. J. Serum lactate: 
prognostic marker for recurrent cardiac arrest? Am. Heart J. 113 , 1540–1544 
(1987).
14. Cheifetz, I. M. et al.  Serum lactates correlate with mortality after operations for 
complex congenital heart disease. Ann Thorac Surg 64, 735–738 (1997).
15.  Kliegel, A. et al.  Serial lactate determinations for prediction of outcome after cardiac 
arrest. Medicine (Baltimore) 83, 274–279 (2004).
16. Hannan, R. L. et al.  Patterns of lactate values after congenital heart surgery and 
timing of cardiopulmonary support. Ann Thorac Surg 80, 1468–73– 
discussion 1473–4 (2005).
17. Soliman, H. M. & Vincent, J.-L. Prognostic value of admission serum lactate 
concentrations in intensive care unit patients. Acta Clin Belg 65, 176–181 
(2010).
18. Rutledge, J. et al.  Validity of the LaFarge equation for estimation of oxygen 
consumption in ventilated children with congenital heart disease younger than 
3 years--a revisit. Am. Heart J. 160, 109–114 (2010).
19.  Li, J. Systemic oxygen transport derived by [CONTACT_110062]-an interim review. Interact 
Cardiovasc Thorac Surg 15, 93–101 (2012).
20.  Li, J. Accurate measurement of oxygen consumption in children undergoing cardiac 
catheterization. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv 81, 125–132 (2013).
21.  Li, J. et al.  Adverse effects of dopamine on systemic hemodynamic status and 
oxygen transport in neonates after the Norwood procedure. J Am Coll Cardiol 
48, 1859–1864 (2006).
22.  Li, J. et al.  Comparison of the proﬁles of postoperative systemic hemodynamics and 
oxygen transport in neonates after the hybrid or the Norwood procedure: a 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Circulation 116 , I179–87 (2007).
23.  Zhang, G., Holtby, H., Cai, S., Radi, Al, O. & Li, J. Aortic atresia is associated with 
an inferior systemic, cerebral, and splanchnic oxygen-transport status in neonates after the Norwood procedure. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 39, e13–21 
(2011).
24. Mehta, N. M. et al.  Resting Energy Expenditure After Fontan Surgery in Children 
With Single-Ventricle Heart Defects. Journal of Parenteral and Enteral 
Nutrition 36, 685–692 (2012).
25.  Kheir, J. N. et al.  Comparison of Two Lung Recruitment Strategies in Children with 
Acute Lung. Respir Care (2012).doi:10.4187/respcare.[ZIP_CODE]
26.  Stuart-Andrews, C. R. et al.  Laboratory validation of the M-COVX metabolic module 
in measurement of oxygen uptake. Anaesth Intensive Care 37, 399–406 
(2009).
27. Kheir, J. N. et al.  Oxygen gas-ﬁlled microparticles provide intravenous oxygen 
delivery. Sci Transl Med 4, 140ra88 (2012).
28.  Smallwood, C. D. & Mehta, N. M. Accuracy of abbreviated indirect calorimetry 
protocols for energy expenditure measurement in critically ill children. JPEN J 
Parenter Enteral Nutr 36, 693–699 (2012).
List of Appendices
Appendix 1.  Study schematic
Appendix 2.  Parent informational ﬂyer
Enrollment Criteria
Preoperative HLHS (n = 20)
OR
d-TGA/IVS (n=20)
Assent of cardiac surgeon and cardiac intensivist
Parental consent
* Enrollment begins at either first intubation or central venous line insertion (whichever occurs first) and ends at first 
   postoperative extubation or central venous line removal (whichever occurs last).At first intubation*
-> Calibrate VO2
-> Check ETT leak
-> Begin data collection-> In vitro calibration-> Catheter insertion -> Confirm position in SVCAt CVL insertion*Cardiac OR
 Cardiac ICU
Daily collect:
-> Primary outcome (CPR, ECMO, death)
-> VO2 and SVC saturations
-> Cardiac output and Qp/Qs
-> NIRS, lactate, UOP-> Inotropes-> Blood loss and transfusion-> Sedatives, paralytics-> Feedings
-> Vital signsFrom medical record
and discussion with primary team
From T3 databaseFrom S5 Collect™
Oxy-CAHN Study 
Oxygen consumption-based assessments of hemodynamics in neonates following congenital heart surgery
