ASSISTS  2019 -32 IRB Protocol,  version  4/11/2024  Page  1 of 11   
Protocol ID: [ZIP_CODE] 
ClinicalTrials.gov  ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
Title: App for Strengthening Services  In Specialized  Therapeutic Support (ASSISTS)  849995  
ASSISTS  2019 -32 IRB Protocol,  version  4/11/2024  Page  2 of 11   
 
1. Description  of theory,  methodology, intent  of study  
Philadelphia’s Department of Behavioral  Health  and Intellectual  disAbility  Services  (DBHIDS) is 
about to make substantial investments in establishing and enforcing standards for autism 
intervention. Data collection  will be an important part of these new standards.  The objective of the 
proposed study is to learn about the barriers and facilitators of support staff’s data collection in their work with children with autism. The main objective of the clinical trial is to test the refined 
app with [ADDRESS_175708] resulted  in 
an increased use of one- to-one aides at  home, school and  in the community. These aides, referred 
to as ‘behavioral health technicians (BHTs)’ in Philadelphia, usually have a bachelor’s or associate’s degree and receive limited training and supervision. (Please note that the terminology used to refer to these aides has changed from ‘therapeutic support staff” [TSS]; all subsequent references  to these aides in  the document will  be as BHTs.)  Some BHTs have  received additional 
training and are referred to as ‘registered behavior technicians (RBT)’. Ideally, aides would use evidence -based in terventions in the family of applied behavior analysis (ABA) to help children 
reduce problem behaviors and increase adaptive behaviors.  
 
Philadelphia’s Medicaid system spends ~$[ADDRESS_175709] of the children’s mental  health  services  budget. While  children with autism comprise 7% of all children 
served  through this system,  they account for 40% of BHT  services.  Administrators,  advocates  and 
parents  have decried  the poor or unknown quality  of care and outcomes associated  with  it; yet  the 
very nature of the work  they do makes  it difficult to monitor. Our structured  observations of BHTs 
in the community, combined with our interviews with administrators and clinicians suggest that BHTs are not supported in providing high- quality, evidence -based care, in large part because of 
the isolating nature of their work and limited opportunity f or feedback and acknowledgement.  
 
This project  builds on our preliminary  work  to develop and test strategies  to increase support staff’s 
self-efficacy,  supervision, and sense  of belonging to a professional community,  with opportunities 
for peer comparison and supervisor recognition as mechanisms to increase the use of evidence - 
based practice. The target practice for this study is data collection. We chose data collection because:  1) it is a component of every  evidence- based  intervention for children  with autism and is 
common to many mental health interventions for other children as well; 2) this foundational practice is essential to  measuring and monitoring outcomes and has been associated with more 
positive outcomes in and of itself; and 3) it makes possible objective assessment of the effectiveness of implementation strategies and supports iteration and improvement.  
ASSISTS  2019 -32 IRB Protocol,  version  4/11/[ADDRESS_175710] is hyperbolic discounting, 
in which people prefer more immediate gratification  (not expending effort to collect data) at the 
expense of long- term outcomes (data ultimately used to show child progress and inform future 
interventions).  
 
STUDY SAMPLE  AND  DATA SOURCE  
The study will begin human subject activities in summer 2019 (pending full approval from the 
City of Philadelphia IRB as the IRB of record, and signature [CONTACT_4007] a reliance agreement from the School  District of Philadelphia  Research  Review  Committee  and the Penn  IRB).) We will continue 
enrolling human subjects until 2021.  
 
Sample.  Participants  will include  30 BHTs  who provide  individual  support  to children  with autism 
in Philadelphia preschools, schools, daycares, or homes. 
 
Data  Source.  
 
Data in this objective  will come from:  
 
1. In-person observations (up to two hours each), or if infeasible due to COVID -19 
restrictions, one- hour interviews by [CONTACT_152575]’ data 
collection with data collected by [CONTACT_152576]. Observations that take place via videoconference or phone will not be recorded in any form. 
2. Two [ADDRESS_175711] data on their students. 
3. Qualitative interviews (in person, by [CONTACT_152577], or by [CONTACT_648]; 30 -60 minutes) to 
elicit contextual information about BHTs’ experiences using the app and collecting data. The researcher will take notes during these interviews and they will be audio- recorded.  
4. Data collection consistency, completeness and timeliness  of BHT ’s to understand the 
acceptability and utility of a mobile app developed in a partnership between study leads and the Mozzaz Corporation.  
The study team will not collect any identifiable student data. The study team will not share data collected through this study with BHTs’ supervisors. 
 
PROCEDURES  
We continue  to partner  with the Mozzaz  Corporation, a digital health  software  company, to create 
two versions of a mobile application to help BHTs who work with students with autism collect data.  The first version comprises  a basic electronic  platform  for data collection.  The second  version 
has the same basic electronic platform for data collection, plus additional features designed to increase motivation to collect data and ease the burden of data collection.  We will randomize 
BHTs  (n = 30) to use one of the two app versions  to evaluate the effect  of including these additional  
ASSISTS  2019 -32 IRB Protocol,  version  4/11/2024  Page  4 of 11  features  on BHTs’  rates  of data collection.  In the event  that participants  are recruited  from  different 
types of settings, we will work with the study statistician to implement appropriate stratified 
sampling strategies.  
 
We will recruit BHTs from agencies whose leadership have agreed to allow BHTs to participate 
in this project. Research staff will contact [CONTACT_152578] a plan to distribute information about the study in the following ways 1) 
leaders  will email  their team  describing the study and inviting  them  to participate  and/or, 2) agency 
leaders  and participating  BHT’s  will share BHT  emails  with research  staff who will email  BHT’s 
directly to invite them to p articipate. The email will contain an electronic link to an electronic 
consent to be contact[CONTACT_152579]. 
 
After BHTs consent to participate in the trial, we will randomize them in pairs to one of the two study arms. Members of the research team will teach BHTs how to use the app during a brief individual  meeting  that will occur  at the school  where the BHT  works,  at their agency,  or remotely, 
depending on BHTs’ preference and possible COVID -[ADDRESS_175712] data, and the determinants  of intention:  attitudes,  norms, and self-efficacy.  BHTs  will be compensated  
$[ADDRESS_175713] data daily for 3 weeks, or up to 15 sessions. All data collection will occur via the BHT’s smartphone, or if preferred, through the research  team’s  iPad.  The Mozzaz app and associated  server  is HIPAA  compliant.  BHTs  will only 
record  de-identified  data in  the mobile  app; neither  the app nor study staff  will collect  identifiable 
information about the students with whom the BHTs work. As originally written, this project 
included research  staff conducting in-person observations  of BHTs’  use of the app to verify  BHTs’ 
self-report data. Given COVID -[ADDRESS_175714] in- person 
observations:  
 
1. In the event that the BHT is working in person and in- person observation is possible : 
Research staff will coordinate with the BHT to facilitate in -person observations over the 
course of approximately three weeks. Research staff would complete up to observations over the course of approximately three weeks (each up to two hours long.)  
2. In the event that the BHT is working in person but in- person observation is not possible : 
In lieu of in-person  observations, research  staff will administer  weekly  one-hour interviews 
with the BHT about their experience using the app. Research staff would complete up to three one -hour interviews over the course of approximately three weeks.  
3. In the event  that the BHT  is working remotely:  Research  staff will coordinate  with the BHT 
to facilitate  remote  observations  through their video conferencing  platform.  Research  staff 
would complete up  to three one-hour observations  over the course of approximately three 
weeks.  
 
In each scenario, BHTs will be compensated $25/hour per observation or interview (up to six hours, up to $150) and $10 per ten- minute follow -up questionnaire ($20).  
ASSISTS  2019 -32 IRB Protocol,  version  4/11/[ADDRESS_175715] data 
(attitudes, norms, and self -efficacy) via REDCap. We also invite all participants to participate in 
an additional qualitative phone interview to probe deeper into the user experience and intentions to collect data. This optional interview will take about 30 to 60 minutes and BHTs will be compensated $25 for completion. 
 
In total,  participants  will be compensated  up to $220 for their participation  in the study. 
Specifically, they will be paid: 
• $25 for the initial training  and baseline questionnaires (about 30-60 minutes)  
• $25 for each set of observations or interviews  (up to six hours, up to $150)  
• $10 for two ~10 minute  follow-up questionnaires ($20)  
• $25 for qualitative  interview  about experience using the app (30-60 minutes)  
 
Timeline  Measures  
Baseline  • Demographic questionnaire  
• Intentions and determinants  questionnaire  
Trial  Period  Mobile  application  analytics  
 
 
 
Post- Trial  Period  • Intentions and determinants  questionnaire  
• System  Usability  Scale (SUS)  
• ASSISTS app feedback  form  
o Basic app arm 
o Behavioral  economics -informed  app arm  
• Post- trial qualitative  interview  guide  
 
ANALYSIS  PLAN  
There are three data collection quality metrics of interest: data collection consistency, timeliness, and completeness. Consistency was the percentage of intervals in which aides entered data per session. Timeliness was the delta (time difference in minutes) betwee n behavior occurrences and 
the aides’ data entry related to those behavior occurrences. Completeness was the percentage of metrics such as frequency, duration, severity, or accuracy that aides logged on behavior form entries out of the total number of metr ics for that behavior. These metrics were captured via web 
analytics in partnership with our digital health company.  The  research  team  will also conduct 
two ten -minute follow -up questionnaires with BHTs. 
 
The secondary outcomes of interest are: 1) the change in intentions to collect data and the determinants  of intention  (attitudes,  norms, and self-efficacy),  and 2) the usability  of the app. We 
will calculate the change in intentions and determinants of intention by [CONTACT_152580]. We will assess usability using the System Usability Scale (SUS) post-observation and by [CONTACT_152581].  
We will analyze outcomes as continuous variables  at the BHT  level  across  time points. Initially, 
ASSISTS  2019 -32 IRB Protocol,  version  4/11/2024  Page  6 of 11  all outcomes will be described and compared between groups using summary statistics (means, 
medians, and estimates of variance). For each measure, the analysis data set will contain one 
ASSISTS  2019 -32 IRB Protocol,  version  4/11/2024  Page  7 of 11  observation with each participant’s outcome measure at baseline and post- trial. To determine  the 
preliminary  efficacy  of our implementation  strategy, the behavioral economics  enhanced  app, we 
will compare the two study arms (basic app vs. enhanced app) on the primary outcome 
(proportion of time intervals BHTs take data) and the secondary measures (change in intentions to collect data and the determinants of intention [attitudes, norms, and s elf-efficacy], and app 
usability), using linear regression with random effects for BHT and time (baseline, post- trial 
period). The regression will include treatment arm, time (baseline and endpoint), and the interaction between group and time. The coefficient associated with the interaction will indicate 
the effect of one treatment arm versus the other on data collection.  
 
We also will examine appropriateness, acceptability and feasibility through qualitative analysis 
of the interviews conducted with all participating BHTs. Audio recordings of interviews will be transcribed and all transcripts will be loaded into qualitative  analysis software for data 
management and analysis. Thematic analysis will be guided by [CONTACT_152582]  (i.e., appropriateness, acceptability 
and feasibility), and grounded theory, which provides a systematic approach to identifying emergent themes and is used to generate robust theoretical models of social behavior in healthcare settings. This integrated approach uses an inductive process of iterative coding to identify recurrent themes, categories, and relationships in qualitative data. After exploring the data, a comprehensive coding scheme will be developed and applied to produce a fine-grained descriptive analysis. Study team members will separately code the transcripts and compare the results to assess the reliability of the coding scheme. Any disagreements in coding will be resolved through team discussion. After the coding scheme is finalized, coders will be required to code two transcripts in a row at high level of agreem ent (κ >.8) with the lead coder before 
independent coding of the rest of the transcripts.  A subset of transcripts  will be double- coded  for 
the reporting of inter- rater reliability.  
 
Data analysis  will inform  future  refinements  needed  to optimize  the development  of the app and 
provide the basis for a  peer -reviewed publication on the outcomes of the randomized controlled 
trial, as well as a subsequent grant application to test the effects of our implementation strategy in a fully -powered trial.  
 
2. Description  of Philadelphia  Department  of Public  Health,  Department  of Behavioral 
Health or Risk Management involvement 
This project  is investigator -initiated.  However,  it is a result  of many  conversations with community 
stakeholders, including DBHIDS leadership. DBHIDS is not formally involved with this project and will not receive any identified  data;  however, we will share study findings to ensure that policy 
is shaped by [CONTACT_53775], as consistent with best practices (e.g., present at Research Grand Rounds).  
 
3. Duration of Study  
 
The study plans to begin human subjects  activities  in Summer  2019 and run until May 2022. The  
end date has been  amended  in response to a pause in recruitment in schools caused  by [CONTACT_4113] - 19, . 
ASSISTS  2019 -32 IRB Protocol,  version  4/11/[ADDRESS_175716]  benefits to  the participant; however, participants  may  find 
satisfaction in sharing their ideas and experiences with research staff as their feedback may be 
utilized  to inform  future  funding. The benefit to the community  is that the results  may ultimately 
help enhance the implementation  of EBP.  The ratio  of risks  to benefit  is positive,  considering that 
we do not think that  the study poses considerable  risks and  that the scientific  yield  from  the study 
could be greatly beneficial. 
 
Dissemination . The findings from the research will be reported to the City of Philadelphia 
DBHIDS  through Research  Grand  Rounds, agencies  that provide child  mental  health  services,  and 
to the BHRS system that provides support to children with autism in schools so that the stakeholders will have the opportunity to review and discuss this information. Further, we will prepare findings for publication. 
 
5. Risks  to subjects  
 
SUBJECT  RISKS  
There  are no known physical or legal  risks  to participating  in the study. Participants  will be asked 
to answer questions about their practice and will also be observed. Self -report, brief observation, 
and semi -structured interviews could lead participants to feel some temporary emotional 
discomfort. The  investigator  or a member  of our clinically  trained team will  be available to speak 
with any participants who feel unduly distressed, and appropriate referrals will be made. Participants will not be required to participate and lack of participation will not impact their employment. Our experience in similar previous research is that support staff who are not interested in participating in the research will leave after hearing about the study. This does not impact  their  employment because we ask managers/leadership  to leave the room after  introducing 
us during the consenting process, so leadership is not aware if any staff declined participation. 
 
In the event that child abuse/neglect or suicidality/homicidality is identified upon observation, a 
member of our clinically trained team at the Penn Center for Mental Health (CMH) will follow - 
up with the support staff to ensure that a safety  plan is in place to ensure that any information  about 
child  abuse/neglect  or intent to harm  self or others has  been  reported  to the authorities,  as required 
by [CONTACT_2371]. In the event that staff misconduct is identified during observation, a member of our 
clinically  trained  team  will follow-up with the support staff and/or his/her supervisor to determine 
whether the event is reportable and to ensure that the report is filed if deemed appropriate. 
 
All research  staff at CMH  will be trained  by a member  of our clinically  trained  team  on mandated 
reporting requirements. In the event of any of the above circumstances, research staff will report events to a member of our clinically trained team and they will follow -up with the support staff 
within  2 business days of becoming aware  of any event  to ensure that any necessary  safety  and/or 
reporting measures have been taken and that the child’s support staff is knowledgeable about the occurrence and has taken action to address it.  
 
SUBJECT  CONFIDENTIALITY  
ASSISTS  2019 -32 IRB Protocol,  version  4/11/2024  Page  9 of 11  As part of informed consent and assent, participants will be informed that all information they 
provide will be kept confidential (unless it is determined that it must be reported as required by [CONTACT_2371]), within the personnel of the CMH. No information gathere d as part of this research will be 
shared with agency executive directors, supervisors, or DBHIDS (unless it is determined that certain information must be reported as required by [CONTACT_2371]). Participants will be asked to sign a 
consent  form  that thoroughly describes  the procedures  to be followed in the study and the type of 
assessments involved. The Philadelphia Department of Public Health Institutional Review Board 
will have  approved the  protocol and consent prior to the  initiation of  the study. The  University of 
Pennsylvania and the School District of Philadelphia Research Review Committee will sign authorization agreements so that the Philadelphia Department of Public Health Institutional Review Board can serve as the IRB of record. We will submit t hese signed authorization 
agreements  as a modification.  Participants  will be provided with copi[INVESTIGATOR_152572]. Mandell and the research team. All data will be coded with a subject identification number. The names that corre late to those numbers will be kept 
separate, such that any identifying information will be stored in one file, while experimental data will be kept in a separate file. Only [CONTACT_152588] and the research team will have access to these files. All project staf f will complete training on confidentiality through the Collaborative IRB 
Training Initiative (CITI) course.  
 
All data, including the master list linking identifiers to the ID number and recordings will be destroyed in 2027. NIH policy requires that data be retained for a period of [ADDRESS_175717] retain all study data until 2027, thus 8 years following study start. Assuming that data collection begins as planned in 2019, that means that the data of a participant who consented in 
2019 will be kept until 2027 (8 years later).  
 
Privacy and confidentiality is of the utmost importance given that a breach in privacy and/or confidentiality  could result  in serious  consequences  for participating  clinicians  (e.g.,  employment 
implications). Thus, breach of privacy and/or confidentiality are the biggest risk of participating in this study.  
 
To ensure  privacy,  self-report  measures  will be completed  either  by [CONTACT_152583] 
a HIPAA compliant web -based survey platform, e.g., REDCap or Qualtrics, hosted by [CONTACT_152584]. Participants  will have  the option of completing  measures  using paper - 
and-pencil or via web given our previous experiences that support staff prefer different options. 
Paper -and-pencil measures, only identified with ID numbers, will be sealed in a manila envelope 
and transported to Penn in a locked briefcase. Semi -structured interviews will be conducted in a 
private  location of the participant’s  preference.  In our previous  studies, this has typi[INVESTIGATOR_152573]- person in an open office in the school or agency where the support staff works. 
The participant  interviews  with the research  staff and the content  of the interview  is recorded  and 
then later transcribed and de -identified by [CONTACT_152585].  
 
To ensure  confidentiality,  we will use the following  methods:  (a) all self-report  data,  rating  scales, 
observations, and interviews  will be kept  in a locked filing  cabinet  and/or  on password- protected  
ASSISTS  2019 -32 IRB Protocol,  version  4/11/2024  Page  10 of 11  servers, that can only be accessed by [CONTACT_3462]; (b) subject identity will be masked using 
numeric codes and password- protected master list which only [CONTACT_152588] and the research team 
will have access to; (c) data will be entered directly into passw ord-protected files which only [CONTACT_152589]  and the research  team  will know, and (d) files kept on the computer will only be identified 
with subject numbers and will not contain identifying information. 
 
DATA DISCLOSURE  
The proposed research will include data from support staff and supervisors who work in school 
settings  in the City of Philadelphia. The final dataset  will include quantitative  and qualitative  data 
for each support staff and supervisor who participated. The final dataset will be stripped of 
identifiers  prior to sharing. Release of data for data sharing will occur  after publication of the main 
findings from  the dataset.  We will make the data  and associated  documentation available to  users 
under our own auspi[INVESTIGATOR_152574]- drive to users. A data -sharing agreement 
must be signed that accounts for (1) commitment to using the data only for research; (2) IRB approval at the host institution, (3) a  plan for securing the data using appropriate technology, and 
(4) an agreed  upon plan to destroy or return the data upon completion.  
 
6. Numbers  of participants  
[ADDRESS_175718] information for Principal  Investigator  
 
[CONTACT_5627]:  David  Mandell  
Degree(s):  ScD 
Title:  Professor and Director, Penn Center for Mental Health 
Agency:  University  of Pennsylvania Perelman  School of Medicine 
Address:  [ADDRESS_175719], Room 
Philadelphia, PA [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone:  215- 573- 7494  
E-mail:  [EMAIL_3124]  
8. Notation if requesting  exemption from  or alteration of written  consent  documentation 
and/or waiver of HIPAA authorization 
We are requesting  a waiver  of written  documentation  of consent  from  the PDPH  IRB for supervisors  and 
BHTs  who participate  in the qualitative  interview  over the phone  part of this research  project.  Because 
these interviews  will be done over the phone, we  will not have  an opportunity to  collect  a signed copy of 
the consent  form.  Before  the scheduled  interview  takes place,  research  staff will send  a copy of the consent 
form to the participant via email.  During  the call but before  the interview  begins,  the research  staff will go 
through the  required  elements  of informed  consent  and answer  any questions  the supervisor  or BHT  might 
have. If  they agree  to participate,  then the member  of the  research  team conducting  the call will note the 
participant’s  name [CONTACT_152587] a consent  form.  
 
This research  component presents  no more than minimal risk of harm  to subjects  and involves no 
procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research context. The primary  risk related  to study participation  is the breach  of confidentiality  of the audio recording.  We 
ASSISTS  2019 -32 IRB Protocol,  version  4/11/2024  Page  11 of 11  minimize  this risk by [CONTACT_152586] a HIPAA- compliant  platform 
(REDCap)  and a HIPAA -compliant  drive.  The waiver  of documentation of consent  will not adversely 
affect  the rights  and welfare of the subjects , since we will still go through all required  elements  of 
informed consent  over the phone  and send the consent  form to the participant  via email  prior to the phone 
call. 