 
 
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
 
Adapting a Parenting Intervention to Promote Healthy Screen Time Habits in Young 
Children with Behavior Problems  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Updated: June 1, [ADDRESS_1009399] decade in young children’s access to mobile devices (e.g., 
smartphones, tablets) has posed new and significant challenges to parents in managing their 
children’s screen media use.1,2 For parents of young children with externalizing behavior 
problems, managing children’s time with screen media (“screen time”) is especially important 
and represents a significant public health priority.  Studies have identified early externalizing 
behavior problems as a risk factor for increased screen time in young children,3,4 and increased 
screen time is associated with higher levels of externalizing behavior problems and other 
negative outcomes (e.g., sleep problems, obesity).5,[ADDRESS_1009400] will focus on adapting a group- based parenting intervention, 
the School Readiness Parenting Program (SRPP).  
Objectives  
1) Develop the screen time adapted parenting intervention for parents of preschool -aged 
children with externalizing behavior problems to intervene more directly around screen time, 
including:  
a. Adapting the existing manual for the targeted behavioral parenting intervention (SRPP) to infuse intervention strategies around screen time.  
b. Implementing an open trial to collect initial data on utility, feasibility, and acceptability of the screen time adapted parenting intervention.     
c. Revising the manual based on: (i) data from the open trial, and (ii) feedback from an 
experts in behavioral parenting interventions and early media use, as well as community 
stakeholders, including parents and parenting interventions providers.   
2) Examine the feasibility, acceptability, and initial efficacy of the screen time adapted parenting 
intervention in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_2269].  We expect that, in comparison to controls 
receiving the standard intervention, families receiving the screen time adapted intervention 
will show increased reported use of use of positive technology -related parenting strategies 
for managing child screen time (e.g., monitoring, limit -setting), decreased frequency of 
overall child screen time, and increased proportion of child screen time that is educational.  
Study Design  
The study took place over two years and was  divided into two phases. In phase 1, we 
developed a manual to infuse SRPP with key screen time intervention components without 
extending the length of the intervention or reducing the focus on externalizing behavior 
problems. We developed  detailed session guides, parent handouts, and revised fidelity 
checklists. Following development, we conducted  an open trial with 1 0 families recruited from 
participants of a summer camp for children with behavior disorders (Summ er Academy). The 
Summer Academy program runs for 8 weeks (June- August) each summer and includes a once 
weekly (on Wednesdays) parent intervention group using the SRPP model. Parents choose to 
participate in a morning group (after child drop -off) or an afte rnoon group (before child pi[INVESTIGATOR_9107]). 
Open trial participants participated  together in one group on Wednesday morning (the more 
popular time slot in past years of Summer Academy), simultaneously and for the same length of 
time as the original parenting groups  (1.5-hour group sessions weekly over 8 weeks). We 
collect ed data on feasibility, fidelity, and parent satisfaction, as well as pre- , post -, and 1- month 
follow- up measures of child screen media use and parent behavior. The manual was revised 
based on feedback from parents and expert consultants. In phase 2, we conducted a pi[INVESTIGATOR_738785] 20 families to receive the adapted intervention 
and 20 families to the control group receiving the original SRPP. Two pairs of clinicians with 
master’s level training, supervised by [CONTACT_15957] -I Hart, led each group. The intervention for both study 
arms was delivered in 1.5- hour group sessions weekly for [ADDRESS_1009401] were recruited from families attending Summer 
Academy, an 8 -week summer camp for 50 preschoolers with externalizing behavior problems. 
The program included a classroom -based curriculum targeting child school readiness skills (i.e., 
academic and social -emotional) and a mandatory once- weekly group parenting intervention 
(i.e., SRPP). Eligibility criteria for the summer program included elevated externalizing behavior problems, child general cognitive ability of [ADDRESS_1009402] demographics of summer 
program participants, study participants were low -income and largely Black/African American. 
For the 2019 Sum mer Academy program, 89% of families were Black/African American, and the 
median reported annual income range of the primary caregiver was $23,493 -  $27,827. Families 
were recruited through partnerships with local preschools and Head Start programs. Teachers shared information about the program with parents of students they identified as having 
behavioral concerns. Interested parents contact[CONTACT_738792], and the parent and child completed screening for eligibility. For the open trial, we invited parents who had been accepted into the Summer Academy program to participate in the adapted curriculum and 
complete additional measures of screen time and satisfaction. We had a sample target of [ADDRESS_1009403], all parents completing the consent process 
were informed that new elements on managing children’s screen time were being tested in the 
program, and they might or might not be assigned to a group that contained these elements.  [ADDRESS_1009404], though 3 did not begin participation in the summer camp, and therefore did not receive any intervention.   
Intervention   
The screen time adapted parenting intervention was an adaptation of the School Readiness 
Parenting Program (SRPP), which is an 8 -week evidence- based parenting program for parents 
of preschool -aged children with externalizing behavior problems. The SRPP is designed to 
target child externalizing behavior problems specifically, as well as to help parents promote their 
children’s school readiness skills (early academics and social -emotional/behavioral functioning). 
The SRPP contains traditional aspects of behav ioral management strategies (e.g., improving 
parenting skills and the parent -child relationship; discipline strategies such as time out) that 
have historically been implemented and found efficacious in behavioral parenting intervention programs. The SRPP f ollows a group Parent -Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT) model and also 
uses motivational interviewing and modeling problem -solving approaches. The SRPP utilizes a 
large group format (10- 15 parents) with weekly sessions lasting 1.5 hours. Parents received 
initial didactic information on skills involving positive parent -child interaction (i.e. the child-
directed interaction or “special time” skills) and use of effective commands and time out for 
discipline (i.e. parent -directed interaction). Parents then broke into subgroups of 3- [ADDRESS_1009405] ivities, parents practiced their newly acquired skills with their 
own children while the other parents in the subgroup observed, recorded, and provided 
feedback on the parents’ performance. Parents rotated through actually practicing the skills and 
serving as the observers. In this manner, parents were being trained in how to be the “therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]” 
in terms of knowing what to look for, providing feedback, and then trying the skill themselves. 
The therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]’s role during these subgroup activities was to help the  parents who were 
observing as well as provide feedback to parents who were practicing their skills. In addition to a focus on improving the parent -child relationship and reducing externalizing behavior problems, 
specific sessions of the SRPP also directly  targeted parental interactions during children’s 
learning activities. Setting up homework and household structure and routines to support 
behavioral and academic functioning (e.g., through good sleep hygiene) was also addressed. In its original form, SRPP  did not address management of children’s screen time.  
To adapt the SRPP intervention, we  first reviewed the literature on how screen media use 
affects children’s behavior and academic outcomes, as well as previous screen media 
interventions, to guide the content of the adapted parenting intervention.  Four major themes 
were identified: (1) setting screen media routines, (2) monitoring and limiting screen time, (3) 
choosing educational content, and (4) encouraging positive caregiver -child media interactions. 
Changes were made to session objectives and materials to include these themes without 
lengthening sessions. For example, screen media was integrated into discussions on reward 
systems and behavioral strategies like differential attention. Key adaptations included: (1) using 
media- relevant examples for behavioral principles, (2) adding discussions on media routines 
alongside other daily routines (e.g., sleep), and (3) incorporating media- related check -ins during 
existing progress reviews.  
Experts in child media use and parenting reviewed both the initial draft of the intervention 
protocol and the results of the open trial and changes were made based on their suggestions. 
Changes made included adding content around caregiver modeling of healthy screen habits, 
addressing the harms of using media to soothe children, and discussing developmental 
changes in media routines.  The revised intervention protocol was then used for the pi[INVESTIGATOR_4265], 
with the original SRPP curriculum serving  as the control condition.  
The parent group for the open trial was led by a master’s -level clinician with previous 
experience as a group leader of SRPP, along with Co- PI [INVESTIGATOR_738786], who had extensive experience 
delivering parent training interventions. Before the open trial, Co -PI [INVESTIGATOR_738787], 
with Co -I Hart (co -developer of the SRPP). Co- PI [INVESTIGATOR_738786], the clinician, and Co -I Hart also met 
for [ADDRESS_1009406], two master’s 
level clinicians with experience delivering parent training interventions were recruited to lead the 
screen time adapted parenting intervention groups, while two others led the original SRPP 
(control) groups.  
Outcomes and Assessment   
Study outcomes were assessed in both trials at a baseline (pretest), posttest (immediately after the 8 -week intervention), and approximately 2 months following the end of the intervention 
(follow- up0. The primary caregivers were compensated $25 at the baseline timepoint, $[ADDRESS_1009407] timepoint, and $45 at the follow -up time point for their completion of measures. 
Caregivers in the open trial who completed an additional semi -structured interview were 
compensated $50. The pre-  and post -test questionnai re measures were completed by [CONTACT_738793]. Families were contact[INVESTIGATOR_530] [ADDRESS_1009408] to complete measures online or by [CONTACT_648], to avoid the burden of an in- person 
appointment.  
Program feasibility and satisfaction.  We used measures of parent enrollment, attendance at 
sessions and homework completion between sessions, and clinician adherence to the protocol 
coded from videotapes to assess feasibility. Parent satisfaction was measured using the 
Treatment Attitude Inventory (TAI), which is a widely used measure of satisfaction with parenting 
programs. The TAI was administered at the posttest.  Caregivers in the open trial were 
additional ly invited to complete a semi -structured intervi ew about their experiences and 
thoughts on the adapted intervention  at the follow -up time point.   
Screen media use patterns.  At each time point, caregivers were asked to report  for the most 
recent weekday and the most recent weekend day: (1) the child’s total amount of screen time, 
(2) the proportion of screen media content that the child watched that was educational  (3) the 
shows, movies, or apps used; and (4) whether the parent co -used screen media with the child 
on those days.  Caregivers in the open trial were also asked  to submit screenshots of the app 
use summary page from the inbuilt Screen Time (iOS) or Digital Wellbeing (Android) tools of any 
device the child used, from which information about total daily use of that device and the name [CONTACT_738795] (7 days) was gathered. They received 
$10 for each set of screenshots (up to $30 over all timepoints).  
Technology- related parenting skills.  Technology -specific parenting skills were measured 
using items from the Technology -related Parenting Scale (TPS), which assesses parents’ use of 
screen time rules and enforcement strategies. Parents’ perceived efficacy in using electronic 
media and managi ng children’s screen time was assessed using the Perceived Parental 
Efficacy subscale of the Parent Perceptions of Technology Scale (PPTS). The TPS and PPTS 
were given at the pretest, posttest, and follow -up assessments.  
Child behavior.  Child externalizing behavior problems were measured using the total score for 
externalizing behavior on the Behavior Assessment Scale for Children (BASC).  
 
 
 
 
 
Statistical Analysis Plan 
The primary goal of the proposed open trial was to inform the revision of the adapted 
intervention to be used in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_4265], while the primary goal of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_738788]. As such, we acknowledged that the pi[INVESTIGATOR_738789]. Instead, sample size for the pi[INVESTIGATOR_738790].,[ADDRESS_1009409] size estimates, treatment satisfaction, and 
dropout rate.  
Acceptability/feasibility.  Descriptive statistics were used to inspect participant attendance, 
homework completion, and parent satisfaction measures (TAI), as well as treatment integrity 
and fidelity for the intervention. Scores of 80% or higher on percentage of treatment component s delivered  were considered evidence of feasibility for the delivery of the treatment. 
These thresholds were based on attendance rates recorded for previous SRPP groups and other group -based PCIT treatments, as well as typi[INVESTIGATOR_738791].  
Improvement in outcomes.  Preliminary outcome data for the open trial were explored using 
examination of effect sizes and paired samples t -tests on scores for technology -related limit 
setting and self -efficacy, total amount of screen time, and proportion of screen time that was 
educational. For the pi[INVESTIGATOR_4265], we conducted ANCOVAs with pretest scores as a covariate for 
the posttest and [ADDRESS_1009410] both screen media use 
and parenting treatment effects, including annual household income and household size (to approximate income- to-needs ratio) and caregiver education. We also added externalizing 
behavior as a control variable because children who received the standard SRPP had 
significantly higher levels of externalizing behavior at pre -test on the BASC -3, t(28) = - 2.156, p = 
.04, compar ed to children who received the adapted SRPP intervention. We also examined 
effect sizes for change in each group. We hypothesized that parents in the adapted group would report decreased screen time, increased proportion of screen time that was educational, increased scores on technology -related parenting skills,  and increased frequency of co -use of 
media with children.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
References  
1.  Solomon- Moore E, Matthews J, Reid T, et al. Examining the challenges posed to parents 
by [CONTACT_738794] : A qualitative investigation. BMC 
Pediatr . 2018;18:1- 12. doi:10.1186/s12887 -018-1106- y 
2.  Radesky JS, Eisenberg S, Kistin CJ, et al. Overstimulated consumers or next -generation 
learners? Parent tensions about child mobile technology use. Ann Fam Med. 
2016;14(6):503 -508. doi:10.1370/afm.1976  
3.  Radesky JS, Silverstein M, Zuckerman B, Christakis DA. Infant self -regulation and early 
childhood media exposure. Pediatrics . 2014;133(5):e1157. doi:10.1542/peds.2013- 2367  
4.  Ansari A, Crosnoe R. Children’s hyperactivity, television viewing, and the potential for 
child effects. Child Youth Serv Rev . 2016;61:135- 140. 
doi:10.1016/j.childyouth.2015.12.018.Children 
5.  Inoue S, Yorifuji T, Kato T, Sanada S, Doi H, Kawachi I. Children’s media use and self -
regulation behavior: longitudinal associations in a nationwide japanese study. Matern 
Child Heal J . 2016;20:2084- 2099. doi:10.1007/s10995- 016-2031 -z 
6.  Christakis DA, Zimmerman FJ, DiGiuseppe DL, McCarty CA. Early television exposure 
and subsequent attention problems in children. Pediatrics . 2004;113(4):708- 713. 
7.  Whitehead AL, Julious SA, Cooper CL, Campbell MJ. Estimating the sample size for a 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_539314] a continuous outcome variable. Statisical Methods Med Res . 
2016;25(3):1057 -1073. doi:10.1177/0962280215588241 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  