December 3, 2018Comparing the Efficacy of a Dual-Frequency Laser-Emitting 
Device, the "Invisared-RED Elite", With a Sham Device as Therapy 
for the Loss of Adipose Tissue (Body Fat) and Aesthetics in 
Overweight Individuals  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]Clinical Trial Protocol  Cover Page 
for the clinical study
Invisa-RED Elite Clinical Trial Protocol 
Sponsor: 
Stephen Joseph Reardon 
AES International LLC 
[ADDRESS_90047]. NW 
Acworth, GA [ZIP_CODE] 
([PHONE_1923]
Investigator: 
[CONTACT_82606] 
[ADDRESS_90048] 
Hixson, TN  [ZIP_CODE] 
([PHONE_1924]
IRB Approved at the 
Protocol Level 
Dec 03, 2018
Purpose of the Study 
The trial is d
esigned to provide  the empi[INVESTIGATOR_82595]-RED Technology Elit e Low-level Laser Therapy (LLL T) device with a 
sham device when used in the tre atment of individuals for weight loss and 
aesthetics.  At the conclusion of the trial; the change in body fat percentage, and the 
weight and inches lost of the two groups will be statistically analyzed to determine 
the efficacy of the invisa-RED Technology Elite in weight loss and/or aesthetics 
therapy. 
Background “An estimated 160 million America ns are either obese or overwei ght. Nearly three-
quarters of American men and more than 60% of women are obese o r overweight. 
These are also major challenges for America’s children – nearly  30% of boys and 
girls under age 20 are either obese or overweight, up from 19% in 1980. 
Health risks such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes, osteoarthritis, and 
chronic kidney disease increase when a person’s BMI exceeds 23.  In 2010, obesity 
and overweight were estimated to have caused 3.[ADDRESS_90049] of 
which were from cardiovascular c auses. Research indicates that if left unaddressed, 
the rise in obesity could lead to future declines in life expec tancy in countries 
worldwide
.”  Christopher J.L. Murray Professor, IHME Director, Chair, De partment of Health Metrics Sciences
The invisa-RED Technology Elite device has been developed to as sist in weight loss 
therapy that counters these trends.  
Criteria for Participants 
The number of participants is projected to be forty (40). 
There will be an equitable distri bution of male and female part icipants. 
Women who are pregnant, trying to get pregnant, or nursing will  be excluded from 
the study, as they should not receive Low-level Laser Therapy ( LLLT). There is no 
evidence of harm to a an unborn baby [CONTACT_82599], so for medical legal reasons we recommend never treatin g such individuals.  
The participants will be between the ages of 18-65 years.  
The ethnicity of the participant s will be equitably distributed . 
Inclusion criteria will be indiv iduals that may benefit from a weight loss therapy. 
Exclusion criteria will include the following
: 
•If you are pregnant, trying to get pregnant or nursing laser light therapy
should be received only after the end of these conditions. Ther e is no
evidence of harm to a an unborn baby [CONTACT_82600], so for medical lega l reasons we recommend never t reating areas
directly over a developi[INVESTIGATOR_82596].
•Individuals with hypertension, l ight sensitive epi[INVESTIGATOR_002], cancer , heart disease,
infectious skin disease, and severe varicose veins should not use this device.
•People suffering from infectious and acute disease such as a fe ver should not
use this device.
•People who have hemorrhagic disea se, vascular ruptures, skin in flammation,
or any disease of the skin should not use this device.
•People who have immune system dy sfunction such as Leukemia, Hem ophilia,
etc., and light sensitive person s should not use this device.
•Individuals with a history of melanoma, raised moles, suspi[INVESTIGATOR_82597] s lesions,
keloid scar formation, or healing problems should not undergo laser light
therapy.
•Individuals with active infections, open lesions, hives, herpet ic lesions, cold
sores, or tattoos and permanent make-up in the area of treatmen t should not
undergo laser light therapy.
•People who have used isotretinoin (commonly known as Accutane),tetracycline, St. John’s Wort, or any photo sensitizing drugs i n the last year
should not undergo laser light therapy.
•Individuals with autoimmune diseases such as Lupus, Scleroderma , or
Vitiligo should not undergo laser light therapy.
•Individuals who have pacemakers or other electro-stimulation de vices
surgically implanted should not undergo laser light therapy.
•Any insulin dependent individual  should consult their physician  before
undergoing laser light therapy.
•All individuals considered “vulnerable” such as children, pregn ant women,
nursing home residents or other institutionalized persons, students,employees, 
fetuses, prisoners, and persons with decisional inca pacity.
Methods a
nd Procedures 
The trial is designed to prove the efficacy and safety of the i nvisa-RED Technology 
Elite Low-level Laser Therapy (LLLT) device. The trial will com pare results between 
two groups; the first will be tre ated using a fully functional invisa-RED Technology 
Elite device; this group will be internally designated the Usual Care Group.  The 
second, a control group, will be  treated utilizing a nonfunctional invisa-RED 
Technology Elite device; this gro up will be referred to internally as the Sham Group.  
The sham device will consist of an invisa-RED Technology Elite device that will 
appear to operate as the Usual Care Group device to the operator, but the laser 
diodes will be disabled and will receive no power. If staff or a participant questions 
the efficacy of the sham device,  an assertion may be made that only a near infrared, 
nonvisible frequency of light, is being employed.  
The trial will be conducted employing a double blind study meth odology; 
participants will be randomly a ssigned to each group through a drawing, neither 
participants nor clinicians will know to which trial group they  are assigned. To 
ensure the double blind; treatme nt for the two groups will occu r on separate days of 
the week. All participants will receive therapy at  the Cross C hiropractic Center 
located in Hixson, TN. Group 1 w ill be assigned Monday, Wednesd ay, Friday, and 
Group 2; Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday. Additionally staff ad ministering the trial 
therapy will be assigned to work with one (1) group exclusively .  
A simplified weight loss protocol  will be employed based on the  “Consultation 
Protocol” from the invisa-Red Tr aining Manual.  All study parti cipants will undergo 
nine (9) therapy sessions of 20 minutes each; using a singular protocol setting for 
pulse (3.5s) and delay (0.2s), b ut power settings will be based on the participants 
Fitzpatrick Scale skin type.  For skin types i and ii a power s etting of 7 will be used, 
for skin types iii and iv a powe r setting of 6, for skin types v and vi a power setting of 
4 will be employed.  At the conclu sion of the nine (9) therapy sessions; the change in 
body fat percentage, weight, and inches lost of the two groups will be statistically 
analyzed to determine the effica cy of the invisa-RED Technology  Elite as a weight 
loss therapy.  Any medical errors  will be included in the stati stical analysis. 
Staff Training and Certification All staff involved in conducting the clinical trial will underg o training and be 
certified on the use, safety, an d clinical procedures of the invisa-RED Technology 
Elite. 
Data Analysis and Data Monitoring 
 
The measured weight loss and total inches lost per participant from the two groups 
will be statistically evaluated using an Independent T-Test wit h a P value of .05. 
 
The study is classified as a minimal risk trial of short durati on therefore a detailed 
plan for monitoring the data for  participant safety is not requ ired. 
 
Data Storage and Security 
 
All individuals participating in the trial will be assigned a p articipant number. 
Subsequently all clinical records and reports will reference on ly the participant 
number, ensuring that partic ipants remain anonymous. 
Because of the low num ber of trial participants, only paper rec ords will be 
maintained for all clinical and personal data.  Records will be  kept in locked storage 
and physical access will only be on a need to know basis.  A pa rticipants’ personal 
data correlating the participati ng individuals name [CONTACT_82605]. All analytics will be performed using only data masked or redacted of 
any personal information.  
 
 
Risk/Benefit Assessment 
 
Applying the test for the determination of risk established by [CONTACT_82601] “Common Rule” found in 45 CFR 46, Subpart A the rule states; 
 
 “Minimal risk means that the probability  and magnitude of harm or discomfort 
anticipated in the research are not greater in and of themselves  than those ordinarily 
encountered in daily life or during the performance of rou tine physical or psychological 
examinations or tests.  
 
We have determined that only a m inimal risk is presented to par ticipants of the trial 
and therefore believe a finding that the device as used  in this research is Non-
Significant Risk and thus qualifies for an abbreviated IDE under 21 CFR 812.2(b). 
 
See the detail minimal risk criteria analysis below: 
  
i. The device is NOT intended as an implant that presents a potent ial for 
serious risk to the health, safe ty, or welfare of a subject. 
The invisa-RED Elite employs no implante d devices as part of any treatment or 
therapy.    
ii. The device is NOT purported or r epresented to be for a use in
supporting or sustaining human life that presents a potential f or
serious risk to the health, safe ty, or welfare of a subject.
The invisa-RED Elite is only to be used as directed for weight loss therapy and
aesthetics 
and is not represented or empl oyed as a li fe sustaining device or
therapy
.
iii. The device is NOT for a use of substantial importance in diagno sing,
curing, mitigating, or treating disease, or otherwise preventin g
impairment of human health that presents a potential for seriou s risk
to the health, safety, or welfare of a subject.
The invisa-RED Technology Elite is to be  used only as directed for weight loss
therapy
 and aesthetics. If weight loss is the goal of the therapy, the treatments
should be 
a part of a holistic weight  loss program, which may include diet,
exercise, and 
behavior modification in the form of co unseling or group
therapy
.
iv. The device does NOT otherwise present a potential for serious risk to
the health, safety, or w elfare of a subject.
The invisa-RED Elite is classified as an FDA Class II device and has passed all
FDA electromagnetic co mpatibility (EMC) standards.
The invisa-RED Elite devi
ce employs Class 3b laser diodes in a syst em of
“paddles” each containing multiple diod
es. Class 3B lasers are hazardous for
eye exposure; therefore during therapy protective eyewear is recommended for
staff, the indi
vidual undergoing treatment, and any others in the room.  Eye
safety is further enhanced by [CONTACT_64896]
d invisa-RED Elite clinical procedures,
which 
are designed to eliminate exposure of the eyes of the patien t and
proximate in
dividuals to direct laser light. These clinical procedur es dictate
that
 the paddles are to be 1) placed on the area to be treated, 2) secured if
required, and then 
and only then 3) the system is activated and treatment
begun. 
 This eliminates the chance of any direct lase r light entering the eye.
Class 3B lasers can heat skin and materials but are not considered a burn
hazard
. However treatment protocol stan dards found in the users manu al do
recommend 
power settings, pulse and delay be adju sted for the patients
Fitzpatrick Scale skin type; as differing skin tones r
esult in a vari able
coefficient of absorption of
 electromag netic energy. If  these recommendations
are not followed, the ther
apy may result in mild sunburn like effect and or skin
sensitivity. Additionally each patient is asked to verbally attest to his or her
comfort level at 
the start of each ther apy session an d further instructed to
notify staff of any discomf
ort at any time.
As stated in the user manual and stressed during invisa-RED Elite device 
Training and Certification the following  contraindications and precautions for 
patients will apply: 
If you are pregnant, trying to ge t pregnant or nursing  laser light
therapy should be received only after the end of the
se conditions. There
is no evidenc
e of harm to a an unborn baby [CONTACT_82602], so for medical legal reasons we recommend
never treating areas directly over a developi[INVESTIGATOR_82596].
Individuals with hypertension, ligh t sensitive epi[INVESTIGATOR_002], 
cancer, he art
disease, infectious skin disease, and
 severe varicose veins should not
use this device.
People suffer
ing from infe ctious and acute disease such as a fever
should not us e this device.
People who have hemorrhagic dise ase, 
vascular rupt ures, skin
inflammatio
n, or any disease of the skin should not use this device.
•People who have immune system dy sfunction such as Leukemia,
Hemophilia, 
etc., and light sensitive persons should not use this device.
•Use of laser light therapy i
n the ea rs, nose, eye, or throat is not
recommended.
•Individuals with a 
history of mela noma, raised mole s, suspi[INVESTIGATOR_82598], keloid scar formation, or heali
ng problems should not un dergo
laser light therapy.
•Individuals with active infections, o
pen lesions, hives,  herpetic lesions,
cold sores, or tattoos and 
permanen t make-up in the area of treatment
should not un dergo laser light therapy.
•People who have used isotretinoin  (commonly 
known as Accu tane),
tetr
acycline, St. John’s Wort, or any photo sensitizing drugs in the last
year should not undergo laser light therapy.
•Individuals with autoimmune diseases such as Lupu s, Scleroderma, or
Vitiligo should not underg
o laser light therapy.
•Individuals who have
 pacemakers or other electro-stimulation de vices
surgically implanted should not under go laser light therapy.
•Any insulin d
ependent individual should consult their physician  before
undergoing l
aser light ther apy.
All prospective participants interviewed for the trial will be vetted using the 
invisaRED Technologies Elite guidelines of indications and cont raindications. Upon 
following all guidelines for indi cations and contraindications and employing both 
standard procedures for eye safety and treatment protocols, a p articipant’s risk may 
best be compared to exposure to direct sunlight. 
Subjects of the study receiving the invisaRED Technologies Elit e therapy may 
receive the following health and aesthetic benefits: 
•Body fat reduction through laser  assisted lipolysis or *photobi ostimulation
which h as been shown to increase cellular meta bolism
•Sculpting of targeted body areas  through adipose tissue reducti on and skin
tightening.
•Stretch mar k fading
•Elimination or reduction of cellulite
•Skin tightening and enhanc ed collag en producti on
•Increase blood flow to areas of epi[INVESTIGATOR_49196], dermis, hypodermis, and connectiv e
tissue to stimulate cellular respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516]
•Detoxificati on due to improved blood circulation and stimulatio n of lym phatic
transport.
Subject Identification, Recruitment And Consent/Assent At roadw
ay intersections in close proximity to the Cross Chirop ractic Clinic signage 
will be erected containing the verbiage:  “Weight Loss Clinical  Study, 40 Participants, 
([PHONE_1925]” in order to recruit study volunteers from the c ommunity.
The clinic’s patients will be provided an opportunity to volunt eer for consideration 
as a trial participant. The primary investigator will conduct all subject interviews an d obtain informed 
consent. A thorough disclosure o f all clinical process, contraindications, and any risk 
will be discussed with candidates for the trial.  All candidates will be older than the age of majority in the st ate of Tennessee (18 
years old) but none shall be older than 65 years of age.  
No candidates of diminished capacity will be considered for inc lusion in the trial. 
Capacity is a functional assessment and a clinical determination about a specific 
decision that can be made by [CONTACT_82603] n familiar with a patient’s case. The four 
key components addressed during the candid ates capacity evaluation include: 1) 
communicating a choice, 2) understanding, 3) appreciation, and 4) 
rationalization/reasoning. 
There shall be no cost incurred by [CONTACT_82604].  No monetary remuneration will be offered participants in the study.  However an 
offer will be made “post blind” to the pa rticipants who received treatment using 
the sham device for an additional nine (9) sessions of treatments using a fully 
functional invisa-RED Technology Elite device.  This offer will provide the 
participants treated with the sham devi ce the opportunity to benefit from the 
weight loss and aesthetics therapy. 
Requirements for Human Subject Protection Training  
The Primary Investigator and clinical associates conducting the  trial will complete 
the Collaborative Institutional T raining Initiative (CITI) cour se GCP for Clinical 
Trials with Investigational Drug s and Medical Devices (U.S. FDA  Focus). 