    
 1    
       
IN SITU RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
 Study Number:   17-I-112 
 Title:  Evaluation of the Fluoride Dose Response of a Modified In situ Caries Model  
 Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_365051] T Zero, DDS, MS,  
    Oral Health Research Institute  
    [ADDRESS_456110]  
    Indianapolis, IN  [ZIP_CODE]- 2876   
    Phone: 317- 274-8822  
    FAX: 317- 274-5425  
    Email: [EMAIL_6993]
 
  Study Manager:   Jennifer Tran, CCRC 
 Study Coordinator:  Liliya Lukantsova  
 Co-Investigators:   Anderson Hara , DDS, PhD 
    Frank Lippert, PhD  
 Investigation Site:   Oral Health Research Institute  
    Indiana University School of Dentistry  
 Version: Final     16 Nov 2017  
 
    
 2   TABLE OF CONTENTS  
1.  RATIONALE AND STUDY OBJ ECTIVE  ..................................................................... 4 
2. STUDY DESIGN ............................................................................................................... 5 
2.1 Study Schedule:  ........................................................................................................ [ADDRESS_456111] of Study  ....................................................................................................... 9 
5.2 Clinical Procedures  .................................................................................................... 9 
5.3 Lifestyle Requir ements  ............................................................................................ 10 
5.4 Informed Consent Process  ...................................................................................... 11 
5.5 Oral/Hard Soft Tissue Examination  ......................................................................... [ADDRESS_456112] Consent  .................................................................................................  20 
9.4 Data Collection  ................................................................................................... 20 
9.5 Adherence to Protocol  ........................................................................................ 20 
9.6 Records Retention  .............................................................................................. 21 
9.7 Investigator’s Final Report  .................................................................................. [ADDRESS_456113] of several systematic quantitative evaluations (Marinho et al., 2003; Twetman et al., 2003), which prov ide the highest standard of evidence for the 
effectiveness of fluoride dentifrice. Marinho et al. (2003) based their conclusions on a meta -analysis of [ADDRESS_456114] (average reduction in Decay, Missing, and Filled 
Surfaces (DMFS) of 24%) on the permanent dentition. In addition they concluded that the effectiveness  of fluoride dentifrice may be relatively greater in individuals with a higher 
caries experience, with increased fluoride concentration, increased frequency of use, and with supervised brushing. There was no evidence that the effect was dependent on backgr ound exposure to fluoridated water. Twetman et al. (2003) reached similar overall 
conclusions from their systematic review.  
The current levels of fluoride dentifrice products that are marketed worldwide generally fall in the range between 1000 –  1500 ppm F, although dentifrices with lower fluoride 
concentrations are marketed in some countries . All fluoride toothpaste sold in the US is in 
the 1000- 1100 ppm F range. Walsh et al. (2010) reported based on a network meta -
analysis that the relative anticaries ef fects of fluoride toothpastes increased with higher 
fluoride concentration. Based on 74 trials involving the caries scores (DMFS) in the mixed 
or permanent dentition, the anticaries effect of fluoride toothpaste was 23% for 1000/1055/1100/1250 ppm F and 36% 2400/2500/2800 ppm F; however, toothpastes with 440/500/[ADDRESS_456115] er, NY in 1994 (Adv Dent Res 9:169- 340, 1995). While intra- oral models 
have been in use for the past forty years, a "Consensus Conference of Intraoral Models" (ADA, Chicago, Sept. 1990) clearly identified the need for validation of intra- oral caries 
models  for their potential use as methods of evaluating the efficacy of fluoride dentifrices 
and other fluoride- containing dental products. Based on this conference and the [COMPANY_002]ster 
Models conference, there is general agreement among researchers in the field th at 
appropriately validated in situ models represent an acceptable approach for testing the anticaries potential of fluoride products.  
Previous work by [CONTACT_365054] a modification of the Koulourides intra- oral 
model (Koulourides et al., 1974) has sufficient sensitivity and reproducibility to respond in 
dose- response manner to meet the requirements for model validation (Proskin et al., 
1992). The model, which uses partially demineralized enamel as the starting hard tissue substrate, permits the evaluation of the ability of the test dentifrice to enhance net remineralization.  Our current model has been validated based on its  response to different 
dentifrice fluoride concentrations - 0, 250, 500 and 1100 ppm fluoride (Zero et al., 1994; 
    
 5   Zero, 1995; Zero et al., 2005) as well as in several more commercially funded in situ 
studies testing fluoride dentifrice products that also included fluoride dose response 
controls (unpublished data). An additional capability of the model involves testing  the acid 
resistance of  remineralized enamel specimens . This test provides the capability to 
compare the acid resistance of  the mineral  deposited during the in situ remineralization 
phase after treatment with different test products .  
Over  the past [ADDRESS_456116] been experiencing increasing difficult y in recruiting 
subjects with mandibular partial dentures t hat meet our inclusion criteria. One of the 
reasons for the failure is the lack of sufficient room in the posterior buccal flange area of  
the subjects’  partial dentures to accommodate two 4 × [ADDRESS_456117] redesigned the model so that the enamel specimens (4 mm  round) are placed in the posterior denture tooth area of their denture 
and thus eliminate the requirement for having sufficiently large buccal flange area.  We 
have already identified several potential subjects that only qualify for specimen placement in denture teeth and not in the buccal flange area.  We have already successfully 
conducted an  in vitro feasibility exercise to demonstrate the practicality of this technique. 
Furthermore, w e have been placing specimens in the denture teeth location for several 
other in situ model studies including  studies using our new biofilm model and this has not 
presented to be a problem  for the subjects . The alteration of the denture teeth does not 
affect the occlusal part of the artificial tooth and thus does not alter a functional part of the denture.  
An additional aspect of the modified model will be to use bovine enamel and not human 
enamel as has been our usual practice.  We are facing increasing difficulty in obtaining a 
supply of human teeth for our research studies  due to a decreasing supply and anticipated 
regulatory changes requiring informed consent . Most i n situ model systems use either 
bovine or human teeth as the hard tissue substrate.  From the  perspective of clinical 
relevance, human teeth would be the most appropriate to use  (Zero, 1995) . Bovine enamel 
are known to have structural and chemical differenc es and to be more porous  than human 
enamel (Lippert et al ., 2013) and it is more vulnerable to acid dissolution than human 
enamel in an artificial caries model systems (Featherstone & Mellberg, 1981; Lippert et al ., 
2013; Lippert &  Lynch, 2014).  However, the resulting lesions are practically 
indistinguishable from each other (Lippert & Lynch, 2014) , and these differences result in 
quantitative differences and not qualitative differences in their response in in situ model 
studies  (Mellberg, 1992; Lippert & H ara, 2012). Bovine enamel can therefore be 
considered an acceptable alternative to human enamel.   
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the fluoride dose response of different dentifrice fluoride concentrations -  0, 250, [ADDRESS_456118] their teeth cleaned to 
remove all accessible plaque and calculus  and will be provided with a non- fluorid e 
    
 6   dentifrice to use until their next visit.  At the beg inning of each testing period, two gauze-
covered 4 × [ADDRESS_456119]’s  mandibular  partial denture.  In addition,  two gauze-
covered [ADDRESS_456120] products.  Changes in the 
mineral content of the enamel specimens w ill be assessed using the SMH and TMR .  
Enamel fluoride uptake (EFU) will be determined us ing the mic rodrill enamel biopsy 
technique.  In addition the net acid resistance (NAR) and the comparative acid resistance 
(CAR) of the remineralized  enamel specimens  will be determined.  
 
2.1 Study Schedule : 
 Visit 
[ADDRESS_456121] Tissue exam  X X (v2 only)   X (v13  only)  
Salivary Flow  X    
Inclusion/Exclusion criteria  X X   
Continuance Criteria   X X  X 
Randomization    X  
Adverse Event monitoring   X X X 
Dental Prophylaxis   X   
Placement of specimens    X   
Removal of specimens      X 
Issue washout  tooth paste    X   
Return washout  tooth paste    X  
Issue study products and diary    X   
Return study products and diary       X 
Study close -out    X (v 13  only)  
 
    
 7   3. STUDY POPULATION  
3.1 Source and Number of Subjects  
Potential subjects will be selected from the OHRI’s IRB approved database of persons 
previously accepted into the partial denture panel  (IRB #11 10007150) . Potential subjects  
will be screened to determine eligibility to participate in this study. [ADDRESS_456122]:  
1. provide voluntary, written informed consent ; 
2. be between 18 and 85 years old;    
3. understand and be willing, able and likely to comply wit h all study procedures and 
restrictions;   
4. be wearing a removable mandibular partial denture with sufficient room in one posterior 
buccal flange area to accommodate two enamel specimens (required dimensions 12 ×  
7 mm) and room on the  same side to accommodat e two 4  mm round specimens in the 
buccal surface of two posterior denture teeth ;  
5. be willing and capable of wearing their removable partial denture  24 hours a day for 
four (4), two-week treatment periods;  
6. be willing to allow study personnel  to drill specim en sites (as described #4 ) in their 
mandibular partial denture;  
7. be in good medical and dental health  with no active caries or periodontal disease;  
NOTE; subjects presenting at screening with caries may continue in the study if their carious lesions are res tored prior to beginning treatment 1.   
8. have a salivary flow rate in the range of normal values (unstimulated whole saliva flow 
rate ≥ 0.2 mL/min; gum base stimulated whole saliva flow rate ≥ 0.8 mL/min) . 
 3.2.[ADDRESS_456123] may:  
1. currently be  pregnant, intending to become pregnant during the study period  or breast 
feeding;  
2. currently have any medical con dition that could be expected to interfere with the 
subject’s safety during the study period;   
3. currently  be taking antibiotics or have taken antibiotics in the two weeks prior to the 
beginning treatment 1;  
4. have participated in another clinical study or rec eipt of an investigational drug withi n 30 
days of beginning treatment 1; or  
5. be taking fluoride supplements, required to use a fluoride mouthrinse or have received a professional fluoride treatment in the two weeks preceding specimen placement ; 
6. be taking or  have ever taken bisphosphonate drugs (e.g., Fosamax, Actonel and 
Boniva) for the treatment of osteoporosis;  
 
    
 [ADDRESS_456124] s from the study at any time. The Investigator will document the 
reason for withdrawal for any discontinued subjects. Subjects withdrawn for medical 
reasons will be referred to a physician/dentist by [CONTACT_365055]- significant. All subjects who 
discontinue participation before the completion of the study will be encouraged to return for an exit oral soft tissue examination.  
 
4. TEST TREATMENTS  
The following products applied with a provided, marketed toothbrush will be used in this 
study : 
1. 0 ppm F (placebo, negative control)  
2. 250 ppm F as NaF (dose- response control)  
3. 500 ppm F as NaF  (dose- response control)  
4. 1100 ppm F as NaF (positive control)  
 
The test products  will be provided by G laxoSmithKline as part of the ISS funding 
mechanism using their Sensodyne sodium fluoride/silica toothpaste base formulation.  The 
test products and fluoride -free washout toothpaste will be supplied in plain white tubes. 
Each tube will  have a study label affixed. Each study label will contain, but not be limited 
to, protocol number, product code letter (for treatment products only), directions for storage, emergency contact [CONTACT_365056] “For Clinical Trial Use Only”.  
 Care shoul d be taken with the supplied study products and their labels so that they are 
maintained in good condition. It is important that all labels remain intact and legible for the duration of the trial. Subjects should be instructed to not remove or deface any part of the study label.  
 Subjects will also receive a fluoride- free washout  toothpaste and standard toothbrush for 
home use during the [ADDRESS_456125] prior to dispensing (five tubes per product will be weighed and average 
weight determi ned).  At the end of each treat ment period, subjects will be required to return 
all product containers (including empty ones) to the study site.  The tubes will be 
individually weighed upon return and that number subtracted f rom the average wei ght will 
be rec orded on the treatment dispensing log.  
 The amount of test product used for each study treatment will  be compared to daily 
product usage recorded on the subject’s diary.  Significant discrepancies will be discussed 
with the study subject, as needed.  Subjects who miss 15% or more treatments within the 
two week treatment period will be considered non -complia nt. The reason for non-  
compliance will be noted in the subjects study records.  
 4.[ADDRESS_456126] of Study  
This study will be perfor med according to GLP and GCP.  SOP’s for all procedures are on 
file with the Quality Assurance Manager of the Oral Health Research Institute.  
  
5.2 Clinical Procedures  
Visit 1: Scree ning – Subjects who have been recruited for the study  via a telephone 
interview  will sign in at the study site for t his and all subsequent visits.  At this time, they will 
complete an informed consent statement, authorization for the release of health information for research form  and demographic form . Upon review of these documents,  an 
update of their medical history/medications  and the inclusion/exclusion criteria, each 
    
 [ADDRESS_456127] will be given an oral soft /hard tissue exam (OS HT) prior to their acceptance in to 
the study.  Their mandibular partial denture will be examined to determine if specimens can 
be held in one buccal flange area and the posterior teeth of the same side, as previously 
described. They will then provide a stimulated and unstimulated saliva s ample to 
determine salivary flow rate.  If no contraindications to their participation are discovered 
and the subject  meet s the study requirements, the subject  will be accepted into the study.   
 
Visit 2: Dental Cleaning Treatment  Period 1 – Two to three day s prior to the beginning of 
Treatment Period 1, subjects will return for a professional dental prophylaxis.  The subject’s 
mandibular partial denture will be prepared to hold the enamel specimens. A minimum area of [ADDRESS_456128]’s partial 
denture and specimen sites in the buccal surface of two denture teeth on the same side of 
the partial denture will also be prepared. A temporary filling (Coe -Soft) will be placed in the 
cut out areas of the parti al denture.  Subjects will be given fluorid e-free toothpaste to use at 
home for the next two to three days until they return for their next visit . They will be 
encouraged to remove their partial denture at night until their next visit . 
 
Visit 3: Begin Treat ment Period 1 – Each subject will receive an OST examination, answer 
continuation quest ions and have their medical history/ medication information updated.  The 
four enamel partially demineralized specimens will be placed in the buccal flange /posterior 
teeth areas on one side of the subject's mandibular partial denture.  All subjects will be 
instructed to wear their partial denture containing the  enamel specimens 24 hours a day 
except during the cleaning of their natural teeth (twice per day) and for short per iods to 
rinse their mouth out with tap water after meals and snacks.  Subjects will be instructed on 
the brushing method and perform their first brushing under supervision at the Institute.  
 
Visit 4 : End Treatment Period 1  – Two weeks following Visit 3, t he subjects will return to 
the Institute and receive an oral soft tissue examination,  answer continuance criteria 
questions and update their medical history/ medication information . The enamel specimen s 
will be  removed from their partial denture and the hollow s will be filled with a temporary 
dental filling until the next treatment visit.  They will be told to use their regular t oothpaste 
until they return and encouraged to remove their lower partial denture at night . 
 
Visits 5 -13 – The procedures outlined abov e will be repeated until each s ubject has used 
each of the four  test product s. At Visit [ADDRESS_456129] their partial denture r epaired (if not going on to another in situ study)  and 
their participation in the study will end.  
 5.[ADDRESS_456130] discontinue all regular oral 
hygiene practices (products and procedures) and use only the study fluoride- free 
toothpaste and toothbrush provided,  twice daily,  with the exception of interdental 
cleaners, e.g. dental floss, if this is their normal practice.  
    
 [ADDRESS_456131] wear their lower partial denture 24 hours a day, except when cleaning it, during  each 14- day treatment period. Subjects will be encouraged to 
remove their mandibular partial denture at night during the washout and lead in periods.  
4. Subjects may use a non- zinc fixative  like Poligrip® on their upper denture but no 
adhesive is permitted i n the lower partial denture.  
5. Subjects must refrain from eating canned sardines during the course of the study and may not eat hard candy  when the specimens are in place.  
 5.[ADDRESS_456132]’s signing of the document.  The study representative will sign and 
date (and give the time) the consent form to confirm the consent process was  completed 
prior to initiation of any st udy procedures.  The subject will be given a copy of the signed 
document.  
 
5.5 Oral/Hard  Soft Tissue Examination  
The study dentist will complete an oral soft and hard tissue (OSHT) examination at screening, oral har d tissue (OHT) at Visit 2 and 13 and an or al soft tissue (OST) 
examination at each study visit. The exams will be conducted via a visual examination of the oral cavity and perioral area utilizing a standard dental light, dental mirror, gauze, and periodontal probe and tongue blade, as needed. The soft tissue structures examined will involve the labial mucosa including lips, buccal mucosa, mucogingival folds, gingival mucosa, hard and soft palate, tonsillar and pharyngeal areas, tongue, sublingual area/floor of mouth, submandibular area, major saliv ary glands, head and neck and TMJ. 
Observations will be listed as “Normal” and “Abnormal” and abnormalities will be described.  
The hard tissue structures examined will include assessing for enamel irregularities, tooth fracture, pathologic tooth wear, cav itated lesions, residual  roots, faulty restorations and 
implants.  Observations will be listed as “Absent” or “Present” and conditions noted as 
present will be described  
 5.[ADDRESS_456133]  be ≥ 0.2 mL/min and the stimulated saliva flow rate must be ≥ 0.8 
mL/min for study qualification.  
 
5.[ADDRESS_456134] the 
date, and the time of the morning (a.m.) and evening (p.m.) of each brushing and any 
deviation from the brushing regimen.  In addition, subjects will also record any new or 
changes in pre- existing medical conditions, medications or treatments or any change in 
signs or symptoms that may occur.   
Subject s will be required to bring th e completed diary to the end of treatment visit.  Study 
staff will review the Diary Card with the subject to confirm treatment compliance and clarify listed medical conditions, medications and treatments.  
 5.[ADDRESS_456135]’s mandibular partial denture (see Figure 1). The subject’ s denture will be prepared 
for the  study by [CONTACT_40397] a hollow in the buccal flange area on one side of the partial 
denture and in the teeth of the same side  large enough to accommodate the enamel 
specimens.  Four gauze- covered enamel specimens  (two 4  × 4 mm square and two 4 mm 
round)  will be mounted on  the partial denture  as described previously.  The enamel 
specimens will be mounted in such a manner that the  gauze- covered enamel surface of 
the specimen is flush with the surface of the buccal flange/teeth  of the subject's partial 
denture. The two square enamel specimens will be luted in place in the buccal flange area 
of the partial denture using a light -cured dental composite (Triad VLC material, Dentsply 
Int., York, PA). Great care will be taken to avoid contaminating the enamel surface of the specimens with the luting material. The round specimens placed in t he buccal surface of 
the denture teeth will be mounted in place with DentuSil™ - Silicone Soft Reline Material 
(The Harry J.Bosworth® Company, Skokie, IL) or an equivalent material.  The Dentusil™ 
material will be placed in the drilled sites and the enamel specimens carefully inserted so that they be mounted flush with the buccal surface of the denture teeth when fully seated. Again great care will be taken to avoid contaminating the enamel surface of the specimens with the luting material. Upon completion o f the study the subject’s part ial denture will be 
repaired.  The location where the enamel specimens will be placed on the subject’s partial 
denture are not functional part s of the denture, and the experimental procedures will not 
cause any permanent damage to the denture.   
Prior to placement  in the subjects’  partial  dentures,  all enamel  specimens  will be
 sterilized  
by [CONTACT_178773].  
    
 [ADDRESS_456136], will be recorded.  Serious 
AEs include any events resulting in death, decreased life expectancy, life- threatening 
situations, persistent or permanent disability/incapacity, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or congenital anomaly/birth defect.  Within [ADDRESS_456137] substrate for the preparation of 
the 4 x 4 mm specimens in the existing situ caries model. The t eeth will be collected and 
transported to OHRI in a saturated thymol solution. Upon receipt, the teeth will be sorted and cleaned. The teeth will then be stored in saturated thymol solution during sample preparation procedures.  
 Teeth will be selected base d on the following criteria:  
• Free of caries and major restorations;  
• No discoloration and no markings, such as cracks, when viewed under a microscope at 20× magnification;  
• Sufficient tooth surface to provide a large size specimen to meet study requirements.  
 

    
 [ADDRESS_456138] substrate  for the preparation of the 4 mm 
round specimens  in the modified in situ caries model.  Upon receipt  at OHRI , the teeth will 
be sorted, cleaned and stored in 0.1% thymol solution during sample pre paration 
procedures.  
 
Teeth will be selected based on the following criteria:  
• Have no discoloration and no markings, such as cracks, when viewed under a microscope at 20× magnification.  
• Sufficient tooth surface to provide a large size specimen to meet study requirements.  
 
Approximately  two specimens will be obtained from the buccal surface of each human or 
bovine tooth.  For the 4 × 4 mm  specimens,  longitudinal sections approximately 3 mm in 
thickness will be made parallel to the selected tooth surfaces. The tooth sections will then 
be cut into 4 mm × 4 mm specimens using a Buehler Isomet low -speed saw. Each block 
will be ground and polished to create flat surfaces [Zero et al., 1990].  
 For the 4 mm round 
specimens, a core of enamel 4 mm in diameter will be prepared from each bovine tooth by 
[CONTACT_365057] a hollow -core diamond drill bit.   
The square and round specimens will be ground and polished to create planar parallel dentin and enamel surfaces. All grinding/polishing will be done on a polishing surface moistened with deionized water (dw). The dentin side will be ground flat using 500 grit silicon carbide paper, followed by [CONTACT_365058]. A small orientation cut will be placed on each block ( see Figure 2  and 3). The enamel surface of 
each specimen will be ground using 1200 grit silicon carbide paper followed by 2400 and then 4000 grit silicon carbide paper. After the grinding procedures are completed, the enamel specimens will be sonicated in deionized water (dw) for two minutes and then placed under running dw for three minutes. The polishing step will involve the use of a 1 
micrometer (μm) diamond suspension on a polishing cloth. The enamel specimens will then be rinsed under a steady stream of dw, sonicated for two minutes in 2% microliquid soap and then rinsed again with dw for three minutes. Resulting specimens will  have a 
thickness range of 1. [ADDRESS_456139] a minimum polished surface of 3 
mm × 3 mm in the center of the enamel surface.  
    
 15   Figure 2  
4 x 4 mm Human Enamel  Specimen   
 
 
Figure 3  
4 mm Round Bovine Enamel Specim en 
 

    
 16   6.2 Lesion Creation 
The square and round enamel specimens will be partially demineralized using a 
modification of the method described by [CONTACT_364655] [1987]. The 4 x 4 mm human enamel 
specimens will be immersed for 24 and the 4 mm  round bovine specimens will be 
immersed for 1 8 hours at 37º C under static conditions in 40 ml of an acid buffer (0.05 
mol/L lactate), 50% saturated with respect to hydroxyapatite and with 0.2% (wt/vol) 
carbopol 907 (BF Goodrich Co., [LOCATION_003]) added (pH adjust ed to 5.0 using KOH), and then 
rinsed thoroughly  with deionized water. The demineralized enamel specimens will then be 
stored in a moist environment to prevent dehydration.  
6.[ADDRESS_456140] a continuous, uniform shiny surface, with no 
matt areas. Lesions with matt area(s) will be rejected. The following criteria will be used to select specimens for inclusion in the st udy: 
• The lesioned areas of each specimen should be of equal and uniform opacity; and  
• The lesioned areas of each specimen should possess a surface shine when exposed to light, thereby [CONTACT_365059].  
6.[ADDRESS_456141] will be used to assess changes in the mineral status of partially 
demineralized enamel specimens. SMH will be measured using a Wilson 2100 Hardness 
Tester. Each enamel specimen will be secured on a 1- inch square acry lic block with sticky 
wax and then placed on the microhardness tester. Five baseline indentations spaced 100 µm apart will be placed with a Knoop diamond under a 50 gram load in the center of a flattened, polished sound enamel specimen. SMH will be determi ned by [CONTACT_365060] 2100 -  Clemex CMT Software (version 6.0.011). 
For enamel specimens to be acceptable for use in the study, the mean of the five baseline indentation length must be 43 ± [ADDRESS_456142] deviat ion of  ≤ 3µm.  
After in vitro demineralization, the enamel specimens will be again SMH tested by [CONTACT_365061] 100 µm to the left of the baseline indentations (see Figures 2 and 3). To 
qualify for the study, the mean (n = 5) indentation lengths of the  partially demineralized 
specimens must be 120 ± [ADDRESS_456143] deviation of ≤ 10µm. After 14 days of 
intra-oral exposure the enamel specimens will be again SMH -tested by [CONTACT_365062] 100 µm to the right of the baseline indentations (se e Figure 2 and 3). The 
extent of remineralization will be calculated based on the method of [Gelhard et al., 1979].  
  %SMH recovery =  (D1-R)/(D 1-B) ×100 
B = indentation length (µm) of sound enamel specimen at baseline  
D1 = indentation length (µm) after in vitro demineralization  
    
 17   R = indentation length (µm) after intra- oral expos ure. 
6.4.2 Enamel Fluoride Uptake  
The microdrill enamel biopsy technique as described by [Sakkab et al., 1984] will be used  
to analyze the fluoride content of the partially demineral ized enamel specimens. Each 
enamel specimen will be mounted perpendicular to the long axis of a drill bit attached to a 
specially designed microdrill, and drilled to a depth of ~100 µm through the entire lesion (four cores per specimen; see Figures 2 and 3).  
The drilling and sample collection will be performed in a static -controlled atmosphere to 
prevent loss of enamel powder due to charging effects. The enamel powder sample, pooled from the four drilling samples, will be transferred to an analyzer cup cap.  20 
microliters (μl) of 0.5 Molar (M) Perchloric Acid (HClO
4) will be added to the enamel 
powder and the cap gently swirled to dissolve the powder. To the analyzer cap containing 
the 20 μl of HClO 4/enamel powder, 40 μl of citrate/ ethylene- diamine -tetraacetic acid 
(EDTA) buffer and 40 μl of de -ionized water will be added and immediately analyzed for 
fluoride content using a fluoride specific electrode and pH/Ion meter. The diameter of the 
drill hole will be determined using a calibrated microscope interfaced with an image analysis system. The amount of fluoride- uptake by [CONTACT_365063] µg F/cm
2.  
6.4.[ADDRESS_456144] whether the dentifrice im parts acid resistance to the enamel after 14 days  of intra -
oral exposure, a second in vitro demineralization will be repeated following the same protocol as described above on the two human and two bovine enamel specimens. SMH 
will be then evaluated by [CONTACT_1299] 5 indentations 100  µm to the right  of the indentations 
placed in situ remineralization (See Figures 2 and 3) . The %NAR will be calculated by [CONTACT_365064] [Corpron et al., 1986]:  
 % Net Acid Resistance = [(D1 -D2) / (D1 -B)] * 100   
B= Indentatio n length (µm) of sound enamel at baseline  
D1= Indentation length (µm) after first in vitro demineralization  
D2= Indentation length (µm) after second in vitro demineralization 
Acid resistance is indicative of any protection that the treatments and intra- oral exposure 
may afford the enamel specimens. The net loss of enamel due to clinical caries is the 
result of multiple cycles of demineralization and repair (remineralization).  It is well 
established that repaired enamel is more resistant to subsequent acid c hallenges.  
    
 [ADDRESS_456145] and second acid challenges:  
 % Comparative Acid Resistance = [(D2- R) / (D1 -B)] * 100  
B= Indentation length (µm) of sound enamel at baseline  
R= Indentat ion length (µm) of enamel after in situ remineralization  
D1= Indentation length (µm) after first in vitro demineralization  
D2= Indentation length (µm) after second in vitro demineralization 
6.4.5 Transverse Microradiography  
Sections, approximately 100 µm in thickness, will be cut parallel to the orientation cut ( as 
shown in Fig ures 2 and 3), after completion of the SMH analysis, using a Silverstone -
Taylor Hard Tissue Microtome (Scientific Fabrications Laboratories, [LOCATION_003]). The sections 
will be placed in the TMR -D system and X -rayed at 45 kV and 45 mA at a fixed distance 
for 12 s. An aluminium step wedge will be X -rayed under identical conditions. The digital 
images will be analyzed using the TMR software v.[IP_ADDRESS]. Sound enamel will be assumed to be 87% v/v mineral.  
 Lesions will be analyzed after in situ demineralization and the following three parameters calculated:  
1. Integrated Mineral Loss - ∆Z= [(lesion depth x 87) - area under the curve*]  
2. Lesion Depth –  L (83% mineral i.e. 95% of the mineral content  of sound enamel)  
3. Maximum mineral density at the surface- zone – SZmax  
Note; *area under the curve which relates volume % mineral at distances from the specimen surface with respect to section thickness.  
 6.5 Laboratory Data  
After the analyses are completed, all enamel specimen surface microhardness , transverse 
microradiography  and enamel fluoride uptake data will be reviewed by [CONTACT_1961] [INVESTIGATOR_365052].  The investigator will document this review 
and documentation wil l be filed with the laboratory study files.  
6.6 Specimen Retention  
Laboratory specimens will be retained by [CONTACT_365065].   
    
 19   7. STATISTICAL ANALYSES AND SAMPLE SIZE JUSTIFICATION  
7.1 Statistical Analyses  
The mean %  SMH recovery will be calculated using the five sets of indentations within 
each enamel specimen.  The mean fluoride uptake will be calculated using the four 
samples within each enamel specimen.  The mean % SMH recovery , mean fluoride uptake , 
mean acid resis tance and mean ∆Z, L, SZ max will be computed for the  two enamel 
specimens within a subject for each specimen location (buccal flange or tooth) by 
[CONTACT_3148]; if  a subject is missing an enamel specimen, the available enamel specimen will 
be used.  Analyses of  fluoride uptake will be performed after using a natural logarithm 
transformation because the measurements generally are not normally distributed.  The 
validation of the new model will involve two types of evaluations . 1) Analysis level 
evaluation:  The treatments will be compared using analysis of variance models (ANOVA) 
suitable for a crossover study.  The models will include random effects for subject and fixed 
effects for study period, product, specimen location , and the location -by-product 
interaction.  The random effects will model the correlation and variances over time within a 
location and the correlation between locations.  The primary comparisons of interest will be 
to determine if the specimens placed in the tooth find the same comparisons to be 
statistically significant as the specimens placed in the buccal flange.  In addition, although 
likely to be underpowered, the analyses will also include an evaluation of the equivalence 
of the two locations . This will involve calculating a 95% confidence interval for the ratio 
between the tooth and buccal flange locations  for the relative difference between 
treatments (treatment difference divided by [CONTACT_365066]).  A 5% significance 
level will be used for all tests.  No alpha- level adjustments for mul tiple comparisons 
adjustments will be applied.  2) Data level evaluation:  Agreement between the data from 
the tooth and buccal flange locations will be evaluated using Bland- Altman plots and 
intraclass correlation coefficients (ICCs).  
7.[ADDRESS_456146] deviation of the differences between treatments in the crossover model to be 10% for % SMH recovery.  With a sample size of 
[ADDRESS_456147] 80% power to detect a difference between any two treatments of 6% for % SMH recovery, assuming two- sided tests each 
conducted at a 5% significance level.  Due to expected dropouts during the crossover 
study, the study will enroll [ADDRESS_456148] udy will be conducted in compliance with the US Code of Federal Regulations 
(CRF) governing informed consent (21 CFR 50), Institutional Review Board (IRB) (21 CFR 
56), and with applicable regulations governing Investigator conduct (21 CFR 312).  
  
    
 20   9. OBLIGA TION OF THE INVESTIGATOR  
9.1 Advertising  
All potential advertising materials used to recruit subjects for this study will be submitted to 
the relevant IRB.   
 
9.2 Institutional Review  
The IRB approval for this study will be obtained from:  
 
Indiana Universit y, Office of Human Subjects  
Lockefield Building, Suite [ADDRESS_456149] Consent  
Written informed consent will be obtained from all subj ects prior to their enrollment into the 
study.  The consent form will comply with all applicable regulations governing protection of 
the participants in the study, and include basic elements specified in the US. Code of Federal Regulations, 12 CFR 50.25(a).  A signed copy of the consent form will be given to 
the subject and the o riginal one will be retained by [CONTACT_737].  In order to ensure 
confidentially, the Investigator will store the consent forms separate from the CRFs.  
 
9.4 Data Collection  
Data will be collected on source documents/ CRFs created by [CONTACT_737].  
 9.4.1 Case Report Forms  
Case report forms will be used for recording all data not entered directly into computers.   
The Investigator will be responsible for maintaining original consent forms, CRFs and other source documentation.  
 The CRFs that will be used,  unless otherwise indicated are:  
• Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
• Continuance Criteria 
• Oral soft tissue  
• Oral hard tissue  
• Adverse event  
• Serious adverse event  
• Subject Accountability  
 
9.[ADDRESS_456150] be approved by [CONTACT_1201].  Any clarification to the protocol will be 
documented in the study file.    
    
 21   9.6 Records Retention  
At the conclusion of the study, all records, relevant medical/dental records, copi[INVESTIGATOR_365053], and informed consent forms for all subjects treated with the drug or employed as a control in the study are retained by [CONTACT_13177] a peri od of time not less than 10 
years.  
 9.7 Investigator’s Final Report  
Following the completion of the study the Investigator shall prepare an integrated clinical and final study report.  The final report will include a general description of the conduct of 
the study including protocol deviations, subject withdrawals, a discussion of AEs, safety 
data, and laboratory analysis. This report will be approved and signed by [CONTACT_737].  
 
10. REFERENCES  
Clinical aspects of de/remineralization of teeth: proceedings of Models Conference 
1994. [COMPANY_002]ster, [LOCATION_001], June 11– 14, 1994. Adv Dent Res. 1995;9:169– 340. 
Corpron RE, Clark JW, Tsai A, More FG, Merrill DF, Kowalski CJ, Tice TR, Rowe CE.  Intra-oral effects of a fluoride- releasing device on acid- softened enamel.  J Am Dent 
Assoc 1986; 113:383-388. 
Featherstone JD, Mellberg JR. Relative rates of progress of art ificial carious lesions in 
bovine, ovine and human enamel. Caries Res 1981;15(1):109– 14. 
Gelhard TBFM, ten Cate JM, Arends J: Rehardening of artificial enamel lesions in vivo. Caries Res 1979;13:[ADDRESS_456151], EC, Housc h, T. An intraoral model used 
for studies of fluoride incorporation in enamel. J Oral Pathol. 1974;3:185 –196. 
Lippert F, Butler A, Lynch RJM. Characteristics of methylcellulose acid gel lesions created in human and bovine enamel. Caries Res 2013;47(1):50– 5. 
Lippert F, Hara AT. Fluoride dose- response of human and bovine enamel caries 
lesions under remineralizing conditions. Am J Dent 2012;25(4):205– 9. 
Lippert F, Lynch RJ. Comparison of Knoop and Vickers surface microhardness and transverse microradiography f or the study of early caries lesion formation in human and 
bovine enamel. Arch Oral Biol. 2014;59(7):704- 710.  
Marinho VC, Higgins JP, Sheiham A, Logan S (2003c). Fluoride toothpastes for preventing dental caries in children and adolescents. Cochrane Datab ase Syst Rev 
1:CD002278.  
Mellberg JR: Hard -tissue substrates for evaluation of cariogenic and anti -cariogenic 
activity in situ. J Dent Res 1992; 71: 913– 919. 
Proskin HM, Chilton NW, Kingman A. Interim report of the ad hoc committee for the consideration of  statistical concerns related to the use of intra- oral models in 
submissions for product claims approval to the American Dental Association. J Dent Res 71 1992;(Spec Iss):949- 952. 
    
 22   Sakkab NY, Cilley WA, Haberman JP. Fluoride in deciduous teeth from an anti -caries 
clinical study. J Dent Res 1984;63:1201- 1205.  
Twetman S, Axelsson S, Dahlgren H, Holm AK, Kallestal C, Lagerlöf F, et al. Caries -
preventive effect of fluoride toothpaste: a systematic review. Acta Odontol Scand 
2003;61:347- 355. 
Walsh T, Worthington HV, Glenny AM, Appelbe P, Marinho VC, Shi X. Fluoride 
toothpastes of different concentrations for preventing dental caries in children and adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2010;1:CD007868.  
White DJ. Use of synthetic polymer gels for artificial cario us lesion preparation. Caries 
Res 1987;21:228- 242. 
Zero DT: In situ caries models. Adv Dent Res 1995;9:214 –230. 
Zero D, Chin JR, Kelly S, Eckert G, Venell JA, Engelman EE. Efficacy of natural toothpastes in an in situ caries model. J Dent Res 84(Spec Iss A ): Abst. 3259, 2005, 
(www.dentalresearch.org).  
Zero D, Featherstone JDB, Fu J, Hayes AL, Vogel GL. Response of a de/remineralization in situ model to fluoride dentifrice (abstract). Caries Res 1994;28:208.  
Zero DT, Rahbek I, Fu J, Proskin HM, Featherstone JDB. Comparison of the iodide permeability test, the surface microhardness test and mineral dissolution of bovine enamel following acid challenge. Caries Res 1990:24:181- 188. 