  
 
 
 
 
Neural Response to Food Stimuli: FMRI Changes Following Cognitive Behavioral 
Therapy for Binge Eating Disorder  
 
Principal Investigator:   [INVESTIGATOR_450315] M. Chao, Ph.D., CRNP  
University of Pennsylvania School of Nursing, Dep t. of 
Biobehavioral Health Sciences  
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Dep t. of Psychiatry  
[ADDRESS_573876], Room 323  
Philadelphia, PA [ZIP_CODE]  
[PHONE_9434]  
[EMAIL_8635]  
   
IRB Number:    829018  
 
ClinicalTrials.gov Number   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Study Site:    Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_71971];  
Neuroscience Neuroimaging Center  
University of Pennsylvania;  
Center for Weight and Eating Disorders  
                       University of Pennsylvania  
 
Initial Version:   January 22, 2018 , version 1. 1 
 
Amended:    June 12, 2018, version 2.[ADDRESS_573877] 21, 2020, version 4.0  
 
  
NEURAL RESPONSE BED   page 1 
Version 4.0 
Study Summary  
Title Neural response to food stimuli: fMRI changes following cognitive 
behavioral therapy for binge eating disorder  
Short Title  NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
IRB Number  [ADDRESS_573878] controlled, open label  
Study Duration  3 years  
Study Center(s)  Single -center  
Objectives  The purpose of this research is to conduct a randomized controlled trial 
(RCT) assessing the impact of CBT on neural responses to binge eating 
stimuli. Females with a BMI>25 kg/m2 and BED will be randomized to 
either a 16 -week, one -on-one CBT intervention (n=20) or a waitlist 
control (WL; n=20). Both groups will have blood oxygen level -
dependent (BOLD) functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) 
scans at baseline and after the 16 -week intervention. During the scans, 
participants will complete the following  tasks: 1) food -specific stop 
signal task (SST), and 2) script -driven imagery of binge foods. 
Number of 
Subjects  40 
Main Inclusion and 
Exclusion Criteria  Key Inclusion: BMI >25 kg/m2; binge eating disorder as diagnosed by 
[CONTACT_2681] -5 criteria; female  
 
Key Exclusion:  Weight > 158.8 kg; left -handedness; pregnancy or 
lactation; current diagnosis of severe major depression or other 
psychiatric disorder that significantly interferes with daily living; active 
suicidal ideation; presence o f conditions that may int erfere with 
magnetic resonance imaging; use of weight loss medications or other 
agents known to affect body weight or blood glucose; type 1 or 2 
diabetes mellitus; visual, auditory, or other impairment affecting task 
performance  
Reference therapy  Waitlist control group  
Statistical 
Methodology  Mixed -effect s linear models  
Safety Evaluations  Adverse events   
Data and Safety 
Monitoring Plan  Drs. Chao an d the co -investigators  will be resp onsible for  monitoring 
the data quality and the ongoing safety of subjects.   
NEURAL RESPONSE BED   page 1 
Version 4.0 
1. BACKGROUND AND STUDY RATIONALE  
1 Background and Relevant Literature  
Binge Eating Disorder (BED). BED is a serious public health problem. It is characterized by 
[CONTACT_188103], in a discrete period of time, an amount of food that is larger than most people would 
consume under similar circumstances. Patients report a sense of loss of control over eating, 
followed by [CONTACT_450337].1 The p revalence of BED is 2.8% among US adults.2 
BED effects twice as many females as males but is comparable in prevalence across racial/ethnic 
groups.2 BED has a chronic course and leads to progressive weight gain if left untreated .3,4 BED 
and obesity are highly comorbid, and the frequency of binge eating epi[INVESTIGATOR_450316] (BMI).[ADDRESS_573879] a higher prevalence of 
medical and psychiatric morbidities compared to individuals without BED, including metabolic 
syndrome, functional impairment, and  lower quality of life.6,7 Patients with BED differ behaviorally, 
psychologically, genetically, and physiologically from persons with other forms of obesity and 
eating disorders7-11; notably,  these individuals have high levels of dietary disinhibition and food 
reward sensitivity.12,13 BED re presents a vulnerable phenotype of obesity for which there is an 
urgent need for better treatment approaches.  
 
Critical Need for Better BED Treatment Approaches. Treatment options for BED remain limited 
and are often not sufficient for patients. Current available treatments include psychotherapy, 
behavioral weight loss, and pharmacotherapy. A specific type of psychotherapy, cognitive 
behavioral therapy (CBT), is the most effective treatment for BED.14 CBT is associated with 
significantly higher binge eating abstinence rates than no treatment and abstinence rates are 15 -
44% higher in CBT than behavioral weight loss.15-[ADDRESS_573880] demonstrated two primary defi cits in people with BED relative 
to in dividuals without this disorder —disinhibition and food reward sensitivity.12,[ADDRESS_573881] diminished activation 
in the prefrontal cortex (PFC), orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), and inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) when 
completing  inhibitory control tasks.[ADDRESS_573882] sensitivity (i.e., PFC, OFC, insula, 
ventral tegmen tal area (VTA), and ventral striatum (VS).22-26 Only one study has examined the 
relationship between neural mechanisms and BED treatment outcomes. In that study, participants 
completed a monetary incentive delay task during a pre -treatment fMRI. Compared to individuals 
who achieved remission with BED, those who continued to binge following treatment with 
sibutramine and/or CBT showed less a ctivation of specific frontostriatal brain regions during pre -
treatment fMRI scans.[ADDRESS_573883] common method of fMRI measures the blood 
oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal, which uses cerebral blood flow to delineate regional 
activity in the brain.[ADDRESS_573884] a randomized controlled trial (RCT) assessing the 
impact of CBT on neural responses to binge eating stimuli. Females with  a BMI >25kg/m2 and 
BED will be randomized to either a 16 -week, one -on-one CBT intervention (n=20) or a waitlist 
control (WL; n=20). Both groups will have blood oxygen level -dependent (BOLD) functional 
magnetic resonance imaging  (fMRI) scans at baseline and after the 16 -week intervention. During 
the scans, participants will complete the following tasks: 1) food -specific stop signal task (SST), 
and 2) script -driven imagery of binge foods. 
2.1 Primary Objective  
Aim 1:  Compare differenc es between the CBT and WL groups at week [ADDRESS_573885].  
Hypothesis 1: Since CBT for BED involves successful management of dietary disinhibition, we 
propose that participants will have favorable pre - to post -treatment changes in regions of interest 
(ROIs) that are associated with inhibitory control. We hypothesize that the CBT group, compared 
with the WL group, will have increased activation in the PFC, IFG, OFC, and insula during the 
food-specific SST.  
 
Aim 2:  Compare differences between the CBT and WL groups at week 16 in changes in BOLD 
fMRI response to recall of binge foods (i.e., script -driven imagery).  
Hypothesis 2: CBT teaches participants how to reduce responsiveness to binge foods. Thus, we 
propose that  CBT will alter neural responses in regions that promote food reward. We hypothesize 
that after treatment, the CBT group, compared to the WL group, will have decreased activation in 
the PFC, OFC, insula, VTA, and VS in response to script -driven imagery of binge foods.  
 
Aim 3: Determine whether pre -treatment neural activation on the SST and script -driven imagery 
task predict differences between CBT responders and non -responders ( >[ADDRESS_573886] 28 days).  
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 3 Hypothesis 3: Results from other p sychiatric disorders show that patients with greater 
dysfunction in neural circuitry related to their disease are less likely to respond to treatment. We 
predict that relative to CBT responders, non -responders will have lower pre -treatment BOLD 
activation in the inhibitory control ROIs during the SST and higher pre -treatment BOLD 
activation in the reward ROIs during the script -driven imagery task.  
2.2 Secon dary Objectives  
Aim 4:  Assess the associations between pre - to post -treatment behavioral changes in reported 
binge eating epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] (percent reduction and categorical response), in reward -based eating drive, 
and in dietary inhibition, and pre - to post -treatment neural changes on the SST and script -driven 
imagery task.  
[ADDRESS_573887] and to binge -eating script -driven imagery.  
3.1.2  Secondary Study Endpoints  
Secondary study endpoints include changes in binge eating epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] (percent reduction and 
categorical response), in reward -based eating drive, and in dietary inhibition . 
[ADDRESS_573888] -controlled trial of a 16 -week CBT intervention for females with 
a BMI >25 kg/m2 and BED as diagnosed by [CONTACT_2681] -5 criteria (n=40).[ADDRESS_573889] assessments at baseline and after 16 weeks, with each assessment 
including neuroimaging with BOLD fMRI. We use 16 weeks for our follow -up assessment based 
on previous studies in different conditions  (e.g., depression33,34 and anxiety38) demonstrating 
discernible changes in neural function immediately after CBT. Also, CBT treatment effects for 
BED are most robust at [ADDRESS_573890] 3 of the following:  
i. consuming food more rapi[INVESTIGATOR_340186];  
ii. eating until uncomfortably full;  
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 4 iii. consuming large amounts of food when not hungry;  
iv. consuming food alone due to embarrassment;  
v. feeling disgusted, depressed, or guilty after eating a large amount of food.  
c. Significa nt distress about the binge epi[INVESTIGATOR_450317].  
d. Binge epi[INVESTIGATOR_450318], on average, at least once per week for 3 months.  
2. Ages 18 to 45 years of age  
3. BMI >25 kg/m2 
4. Premenopausal  
5. Able to provide informed consent  
6. Right -handed  
7. Eligible female patients will be: 
• Non-pregnant, evidenced by a negative urine dipstick pregnancy test  
• Non-lactating  
• Surgically sterile or postmenopausal, or they will agree to continue to use an 
accepted method of birth control during the study  
Acceptable methods of birth control are:  hormonal contraceptives; double barrier 
method (condom with spermicide or diaphragm with spermicide); intrauterine 
device; surgical sterility; abstinence.  
8. Understand and be willing to comply with all study -related procedures and agree to 
participate in the study by [CONTACT_109348]  
5.3 Exclusion Criteria  
1. Weight > 158.8 kg (350 lbs, due to scanner weight restrictions)  
2. Supi[INVESTIGATOR_450319] (with arms folded above) > 70 cm or sagittal diameter > 50 cm 
(due to scanner dimension re strictions)  
3. Pregnant or nursing (or plans to become pregnant in the next 5 months)  
4. Evidence of psychiatric disorder that significantly interferes with daily living  
5. Active suicidal ideation  
6. Self-reported t ype [ADDRESS_573891] body weight (e.g., oral 
glucocorticoids, second -generation antipsychotic medications)  in the past [ADDRESS_573892] 12 months, including at -risk 
drinking (current consumption of ≥ 14 alcoholic drinks per week)  
10. Self-reported use of illicit drugs within the past 30 days  
11. Presence or history of orthopedic circumstances, metallic inserts, pacemaker, 
claustrophobia, or other conditions that may interfere with magnetic resonance imaging  
12. Loss of ≥ [ADDRESS_573893] 3 months  
13. History of (or plans for) bariatric surgery  
14. Visual, auditory, or other impairment that would affect  task performance  
15. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_450320]  
16. Participation in individual psychotherapy for BED in the prior 3 months  
17. Inability to attend treatment and lack of capacity to provide informed consent  
18. Any serious or unstable medical or psychological condition that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_1070], would compromise the patient’s safety or successful participation in the 
study  
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 [ADDRESS_573894] control 
is 9 months  ([ADDRESS_573895] and then 4 months of CBT treatment) . 
6 Procedu res 
6.1 Recruitment, accrual, and retention.   
We will recruit participants at a single site – the Center for Weight and Eating Disorders at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, [LOCATION_003] - through local media advertisements and 
news shows/outlets, as we ll as Internet -based advertising outlets and flyers  and brochures  around 
our community.  We also will advertise using clinician referrals from primary care clinics affiliated 
with the University of Pennsylvania Health System . We will be recruiting from the  university -based 
website, iConnect, which allows access to their volunteer registry data of potential participants . We will 
use study condition terms such as  “binge eat* ”; “eating disorder *”; and/or obesity.  Recruitment may 
also use Penn media services (e.g., communications) and social media (e.g., Facebook, Twitter ; 
please see attached for information about Facebook recruitment ). We conservatively estimate a 
drop-out rate of 25% based on prior experience in our labs and will enroll [ADDRESS_573896] lasted >4 months with attrition rates 
<20%.49-[ADDRESS_573897] in proceeding ( e.g., check 
for handedness, substance use history, binge eating, and MRI eligibility). We request  a waiver of 
written documentation of c onsent for the telephone and  questionnaire screen. Those who appear 
to meet eligibility criteria and remain interested in the trial will  be scheduled for an in -person 
interview.  
 
Screening and intake visit. Following the initial telephone screening assessment, eligible 
participants will attend a 3.5 -hour intake visit at the Center for Weight and Eating Disorders at the 
University of Pennsylvania. At the screening visit, candidates will meet individually with study 
staff, including a study nurse practitioner or physician . We will obtain the following:  
• Informed consent  (general and individual consents for audiorecording)  
• MRI-eligibility checklist  
• Diagnostic and psychological interview to assess for BED and frequency of binge  
epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841] (Eating Disorder Examination52) 
• Psychiatric exam using the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI)53 and 
Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale54 
• Routine medical history and physical exam including height, we ight, and urine pregnancy 
test 
• Interview for script -driven imagery of bin ge foods task (described below)  
• Practice session of the food -specific SST to minimize the learning effects of the 
experiment  
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 6 • Questionnaires  (emailed via REDCap or printed)  
o Eating Disorder Examination Questionnaire52 
o Eating Inventory55 
o Reward -Based Eating Drive Scale56 
o Loss of Control Over Eating Scale57 
o Yale Food Addiction Scale58 
o Food Craving Questionnaire – Trait and State versions59 
o Beck Depression Inventory -II60 
o Barratt Impulsiveness Scale61 
o Clinical Impairment Assessment Questionnai re62 
o Short  Form 36  Health Survey  63 
o Yale-Brown Obsessive Compulsive  Scale - Binge Eating64 
o National Institute of Nursing Research  Index of Self -Regulation65 
 
Throughout the study, participants will be asked to keep a menstrual cycle diary. Individuals who 
do not wish to participate in the research study will receive recommendations for alternative 
treatments for binge eating disorder if they are interested.  
 
6.2.1  FMRI Study Assessment Visits   
After participants complete the screening procedures, provide their informed consent to 
participate, and are enrolled into the study, they will complete two study assessment visits (one 
at baseline and one after the 16 week treatment).  
 
Planning for the Assessment Visit  
Study assessment visits will be scheduled for the morning and last approximately 105 minutes 
(60 minutes in the fMRI scanner and 45 minutes to complete questionnaires and physical 
measurements; Figure 1). The visit will be held at the Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_71971]. 
Participants will be asked to fast (including no caffeine or alcohol) for at least [ADDRESS_573898] positive will be withdrawn. 
Participants will change into a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_450321], without shoes, on a calibrated 
electronic scale (BWB 800S, Tanita Corp ., Tokyo, Japan) and will have their waist circumference 
and blood pressure measured. They will then complete a self -report measure of current mood 
(i.e., the Profile of Mood States, Brief Form68) and visual analog scales for stress, hunger, food Figure 1 . Summary of Assessment Visit. POMS -BF=Profile of  Mood States, Brief Form; VAS=Visual 
analog scales for stress, hunger, food cravings, fatigue; RSDI Scale=Response to Script -Driven Imagery 
Scale; BE=binge eating; EDE=Eating Disorder Examination; RBEDS=Reward -Based Eating Drive 
Scale; TFEQ=Three Factor Ea ting Questionnaire; BDI=Beck Depression Inventory  
 

NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 7 cravings, and fatigue level. They also will be required to demonstrate understanding of the task 
and use of the response device prior to entering the scanner .    
 
Imaging equipment.  We will use a clinically approved 3.0 Tesla Siemens Prisma  scanner 
equipped with 64-channel head coil. BOLD fMRI sequences include automatic higher order 
shimming and both prospective and retrospective motion correction.  Gradient performance allows 
4 mm isotropic voxels at TR=2 sec and 3 mm isotropic voxels at TR=3 sec (3T). The system uses 
a transmit/receive head coil.  
 
The research scanner is equipped with stimulus delivery and monitoring systems for fMRI 
research. Thi s includes Sanyo SXGA 4200 lumens projectors with Sanyo Long Throw zoom lens  
for rear -view/rear projection onto Mylar screens. Video signals are carried into the magnet room 
using a Lightwave FiberLynx  optical -fiber VGA connection. Both the projector and the FiberLynx 
units are housed in custom RF shield boxes with filtered power receptacles. Images are viewed 
through mirrors mounted on the head coils.  
Audio stimuli will be presented via air-conduction headphones and  an Avotec audio system which 
is equipped with two different styles of head phones to accommodate variance in patient head 
size. Responses will be monitored using a color -coded keypad made of non -ferromagnetic 
components (FORP Current Design Inc., Philadelphia, PA) installed at the 3T system.  
The MRI scan procedures have been designed to last [ADDRESS_573899] of time and data quality, if necessary, scans will be 
skipped or re -run at the discretion of the research team.   
 
Protocol for structural MRI (5 minutes).  A magnetization -prepared, rapid acquisition gradient 
echo (MPRAGE) image will be acquired for anatomic overlays of functional data and spatial 
normalization using the following parameters: TI/TR/TE=1100/1810/3.51ms, flip=9°, 
matrix=256x192, FOV=240x180mm, slices=160, slice thickness=1mm.  
 
Protocol for BOLD fMRI (~10 minutes).  Resti ng and Task fMRI data will be acquired using a 
whole -brain, single -shot, multi -slice, gradient -echo EPI [INVESTIGATOR_450322]: 
TR/TE = 3000/32 ms, flip = 90°, FOV = 192 × 192 mm, matrix = 64 × 64, 46 slices, slice 
thickness/gap = 3 mm/0 mm . The resulting nominal voxel size was 3.0 × 3.0 × 3.[ADDRESS_573900] and the binge -
eating script -driven imagery second.  
 
BOLD fMRI Task (Food -Specific SST; ~25 Minutes ). The SST is a measure of response 
inhibition, or the ability to inhibit a prepotent response. In this task, we will use an event -related 
design. Participants will be asked to perform the SST using a modified version with high and low 
calorie food images as we have used in a current ongoing trial. Neutral items will include office 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 8 supplies. This task will be run twice including: Run 1) 2 blocks with each block consisting of  high-
calorie foods vs neutral items, and Run 2) [ADDRESS_573901] scans. 
Participants are instructed to press keys as quickly and as accurately as possible to indicate the 
direction of the foo d or the office supplies . Following a 32 -trial practice, stop signals ( change in 
the color of the frame around the image ) are presented on 25% of trials for a 32 -trial practice and 
task blocks of 64 trials each.  The initial stop delay in each block is 250 ms and adjusts by 50 ms 
increments depending on whether the participant is able to successfully inhibit a response.69 The 
adjusting stop delay allows the determination of the delay at which  inhibition occurs on 
approximately 50% of trials. All trials consist of a 500 -ms warning stimulus followed by a 1,000 -
ms go signal (left - and right -facing arrows) and 1,[ADDRESS_573902] one image from each of the following categories: salty snacks; sweet snacks; fast 
foods; and desserts. Each low -calorie block will contai n at least one image from each of the 
following categories: non -starchy vegetables; fruit; leafy vegetables; and starchy vegetables.  
 
BOLD fMRI Task (Binge -Eating Script -Drive Imagery; ~15 minutes).  During  the intake visit we 
will collect information for the binge eating script -driven imagery task using methods previously 
established.72,73 We will use both binge eating and neutral scripts that are customized for each 
participant. Binge scripts will be based on the participants’ descriptions of two binge epi[INVESTIGATOR_450323]. Participants will be instructed to describe the epi[INVESTIGATOR_450324]. 
Neutral -relaxing scripts will be developed by [CONTACT_450338] a neutral -relaxing 
situation that they have experienced. We will ask the par ticipant to describe two binge situations 
and two neutral -relaxing situations. Scripts will be developed using a Scene Construction 
Questionnaire, which includes specific stimulus and response details.74,[ADDRESS_573903] the script on an audiotape. Each script will be 2.5 minutes in length 
when read aloud. Each individual will receive training on how to generate and maintain a mental 
image for 30 seconds during the intake visit and will be reminded of these techniques on 
assessment days.73  
 
During the task, participants will be instructed to lie quietly with eyes closed. Each script will be 
presented in randomized, counter -balanced order with four trials pres ented using a block design 
(two trials each of binge eating and two trials of neutral control). Each trial will include a 1 -min 
quiet baseline period followed by a 2 .5-minute imagery period where the participant will be 
instructed to remember the experienc e as vividly as possible, in all of its details, both while the 
2.5-minute  recording plays (script listening) and for an additional 30 seconds after where they 
continue imaging the story while lying in silence (scene imagery). Next, there will be a [ADDRESS_573904] -Treatment Visit (Waitlist Group Only)   
After individuals in the WL group complete their second fMRI assessment, they will be offered 
CBT treatment. For Specific Aim 3,  the WL group will be asked to complete a brief assessment 
after their last CBT session to measure treatment response (i.e., the number of BE epi[INVESTIGATOR_450325] 28 days).  
6.2.[ADDRESS_573905] condition. We will use a permuted randomized block design 
that randomly mixes blocks of different sizes (2 to 6) to assign [ADDRESS_573906] the ra ndomization using a computer -generated  algorithm.80 
7 Study Intervention s 
CBT Intervention. The CBT intervention (Table 1) will consist of weekly, 50 -minute individual 
meetings for 16 weeks with a clinician trained in CBT for binge eating disorder. The treatment will 
be administered us ing a manualized treatment protocol adapted from Fairburn81 and Mitchell.82 
The overall goals of CBT  for BED are to interrupt binge -eating behavior, learn self -management 
strategies to help reinstitute more normal eating habits, change erroneous beliefs about weight 
and shape and develop healthier attitudes towards one’s body. Participants are taught a v ariety 
of skills including identifying triggers of binge eating epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841], correcting beliefs or thought 
patterns related to binge eating, and altering attitudes regarding food and eating. Homework is 
assigned at each session so participants can practice th e skills that they have learned. To monitor 
treatment integrity and adherence, treatment sessions will be reviewed under the supervision of 
Drs. Wadden  or Chao . This treatment has been tested in a number of trials for BED43 and we 
anticipate seeing 50% of individuals with full remission from binge eating and a 68 -90% reduction 
in the number of binge eating epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841].83  
 
Table 1. CBT for BED Intervention  
Stage  Aim Weeks  
1: 
Introduction  • Jointly creating a formulation of the processes maintaining the eating 
disorder  
• Establish real -time monitoring of eating and other relevant thoughts and 
behavior  
• Provide education about body weight regulation and fluctuations, the 
physical complications and the adverse effects of dieting  
• Introduce weekly weighing  
• Introduce a pattern of regular eating  1-4 
 
2: Transition  • Jointly reviewing progress  
• Identify barriers to change  
• Modify the formulation as needed  5-[ADDRESS_573907] of the CBT treatment.  
7.1 Vulnerable Populations:  
Children, pregnant women, fetuses, neonates, or prisoners are not i ncluded in this research study.  
Although not directly targeted, mentally  disabled persons, economically or educationally 
disadvantaged persons, and/or employees or students of the University of Pennsylvania will not 
be denied enrollment and any special protections and/or additional safeguards will be undertaken 
in order to pro tect the rights and welfare of these subjects from coercion or undue influence as 
appropriate.  
 Plan Stage Three  
3: Main body 
of treatment  Address key mechanisms that are maintaining BED  
• Overevaluation of shape and weight  
• - Provide education about overevaluation and its consequences  
• - Reduce unhelpful body checking and avoidance  
• - Relabel unhelpful thoughts or feelings such as “feeling fat”  
• - Develop previously marginalized domains of self -evaluation  
• - Explore the origins of the overevaluation  
• Dietary restraint  
• - Change inflexible dietary rules into flexible guidelines  
• - Introduce previously avoided food  
• Event triggered changes in eating  
• - Develop problem -solving skills to directly tackle such events  
• - Develop skills to accept and modulate intense moods  7-14 
4: Final stage  • Provide education about realistic expectations  
• Devise a short -term plan for the months following treatment  
Devise a long -term plan to minimize relapse in the future  15-[ADDRESS_573908]  
(16 weeks)  T2 Intervention 
(16 weeks)  T3 
Informed Consent - General  X      
Informed Consent - Audiorecording 
BED Assessment  X   X  X 
Informed Consent - Audiorecording 
treatment sessions  X  X  X  
Demographic and Clinical Variables        
Review inclusion/exclusion criteria  X      
Demographics  X      
Medical history and physical exam  X      
Prior/concomitant medications  X   X  X 
Review medication changes and 
updates     X  X 
Vital signs (BP, HR)  X      
Pregnancy test  X      
MINI  X      
Menstrual diary  X X X X   
BMI X X X X  X 
Profile of Mood States (Brief Form)   X  X   
Scales for stress, hunger, food 
cravings, fatigue   X  X   
Responses to Script -Driven Imagery 
Scale   X  X   
Outcome Measures  
fMRI scan (SST, Script -driven imagery)   X  X   
Eating Disorder Examination  X   X  X 
Reward -Based Eating Drive Scale   X  X   
Three Factor Eating Questionnaire   X  X   
Additional Questionnaires  (described in 
Section 6.2)   X  X  X 
Intervention adherence/fidelity  
Sessions attended, skill builders 
completed    X    
Adverse event/unanticipated problems 
assessment   X X X  X 
 Note. T1=Baseline; T2=16 week follow -up. T3=Assessment of post -CBT treatment outcomes for the 
waitlist group only. SST=Stop signal task.  
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 [ADDRESS_573909] to follow -up: In the case of subjects who do not return to the  Center  for study procedures 
and cannot be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530], study personnel will make vigorous and repeated attempts (minimum 
of 3) to contact [CONTACT_423]. These at tempts will include at least [ADDRESS_573910] sizes of 
0.93 or larger in BOLD signal between groups with 80% power controlling for type 1 errors at 5% 
using a one -sided test.  
 
8.[ADDRESS_573911] descriptive statistics 
(including mean and standard deviation for continuous variables such as age and standard 
percentages for categorical variables such as gender).  
 
8.2.[ADDRESS_573912].  Statistical significance will be defined as 
p<0.05 in analyses.  
 
The primary analysis will only include responses to high calorie food, since the CBT intervention 
is designed to improve inhibition to “bad” (i.e., high-calorie) foods. Response -inhibition -related 
BOLD activity will be tested using similar analytic strategies as previous trials.86-88 Analysis of data 
indicating changes in each ROI will be conducted using a mixed -effects general linear model with 
time (baseline vs 16 weeks) an d trial type (stop vs go) as within -subject factors and group (CBT 
vs WL) as a between -subjects factor.[ADDRESS_573913] been found between successful vs 
unsuccessful stops, we will not distinguish these a priori . 90 Exploratory contrasts will be 
conducted using the same analysis procedures to examine specificity to energy density (contrast 
with high - and low -calorie foods) and general inhibitory behavior (high -calorie food vs neutral and 
low-calorie  food vs neutral). We will also examine differences among the CBT and WL groups in 
brain -behavior correlations using correlations between BOLD activation in the ROIs with the 
behavioral measure (SSRT).  
 
The primary analysis  for aim 2 will be the  script -listening time-block . We will use a similar 
approach as above to examine data from recall of binge eating epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]. In the mixed -effects 
general linear model, analysis of data indicating changes in each ROI will be conducted using 
time (baseline vs 16 weeks) and trial type (binge food vs neutral) as within -subject factors and 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 13 group (CBT vs WL) as a between -subjects factor. Percent reduction in binge eating epi[INVESTIGATOR_450326] a statistical covariate.  
8.[ADDRESS_573914] Population(s) for Analysis  
We will use an intention -to-treat approach of all randomized participants for all primary analyses. 
Additional analyses will be conducted with protocol -compliant participants.    
9 Safety and Adverse Events  
9.1.1  Definitions  
[IP_ADDRESS]  Adverse Event  
An adverse event  (AE) is any symptom, sign, illness or experience that develops or worsens in 
severity during the course of the study.  Intercurrent illnesses or injuries should be regarded as 
adverse events.  Abnormal results of diagnostic procedures are considered to be  adverse events 
if the abnormality:  
• results in study withdrawal  
• is associated with a serious adverse event  
• is associated with clinical signs or symptoms  
• leads to additional treatment or to further diagnostic tests  
• is considered by [CONTACT_450339]  
[IP_ADDRESS]  Serious Adverse Event  
Adverse events are classified as serious or non -serious.  A serious adverse event  is any AE 
that is:  
• fatal 
• life-threatening  
• requires or prolongs hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408]  
• results in persistent or significant disability or incapacity  
• a congenital anomaly or birth defect  
• an important medical event  
 
Important medical events are those that may not be immediately life threatening, but are clearly 
of major clinical significance.   They may jeopardize the subject, and may require intervention to 
prevent one of the othe r serious outcomes noted above. All adverse events that do not meet any 
of the criteria for serious should be regarded as non-serious adverse events .  
[ADDRESS_573915] with subjects, study personnel will be responsive to reports of adverse events 
with specific questioning , and, as appropriate, by [CONTACT_5148] . The investigator will report all 
adverse events includi ng serious adverse events (SAE) and  suspected unexpected seri ous 
adverse reactions (S[LOCATION_003]Rs) (as defined below) to the Penn IRB. Information on all adverse 
events will be recorded immediately in the source document and reported immediately, and also 
in the appropriate adverse event module of the case report form (CRF).  Information on study 
name, subject identifica tion, event (i.e., diagnosis), and reporter identification (e.g., name) will be 
collected and recorded in the source document (as detailed below). All serious adverse events 
will be reported to the IRB within [ADDRESS_573916] -
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 14 treatment follow -up period . Serious adverse events that are still ongoing at the end of the study 
period will be followed up until either resolved or stable .  Any serious adverse event that occurs 
after the study period and is considered to be possibly related to the study interventi on or study 
participation will be recorded and reported immediately.  
11 Relationship of AE to Study  
• Probable: Good reasons and sufficient documentation to assume a causal relationship  
• Possible: A causal relationship is conceivable and cannot be dismissed  
• Unlikely: The event is most likely related to an etiology other than the trial product  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_450327].  
12 Outcome Categories and Definitions:  
• Recovered: Fully recovered or by [CONTACT_450340]  
• Recovering: The condition is improving and the subject is expected to recover from the event. 
This term should on ly be used when the subject has completed the trial  
• Recovered with sequelae: As a result of the AE, the subject suffered persistent and     significant 
disability/incapacity (e.g. became blind, deaf, paralysed). Any AE recovered with sequelae 
should be r ated as an SAE  
• Not recovered  
• Fatal  
• Unknown  
[ADDRESS_573917] -
treatment follow -up period as stated in the protocol.   
At a minimum the following information will be reported:  
• Study identifier  
• Study Center  
• Subject number  
• A description of the event  
• Date of onset  • Current status  
• Whether study intervention was discontinued  
• The reason why the event is classified as 
serious  
• Investigator assessment of the association 
between the event and study intervention  
 
Additionally all  other events (unanticipated  problems, adverse reactions, unanticipated adverse 
device effects and subject complaints  will be recorded and report ed with respect to institutional 
and federal policies as described in the Penn Manual . 
[ADDRESS_573918] of 1996 (HIPAA).  Those 
regulat ions require a signed subject authorization informing the subject of the following:  
• What protected health information (PHI) will be collected from subjects in this study  
• Who will have access to that information and why  
• Who will use or disclose that information  
• The rights of a research subject to revoke their authorization for use of their PHI.  
All electronic PHI will be maintained by [CONTACT_450341], institutionally secured and managed devices, and institut ionally approved third -party 
computing environments.  Should PHI need to be transferred, it will be done so through the use 
of a Penn -approved encrypted portable drive or a Penn -approved secure encrypted file transfer 
solution.  
 
In the event that a subject  revokes authorization to collect or use PHI, the investigator, by 
[CONTACT_5151], retains the ability to use all information collected prior to the revocation of subject 
authorization. For subjects who have revoked authorization to collect or use PHI, attempt s will 
be made to obtain permission to collect at least vital status (i.e. that the subject is alive) at the 
end of their scheduled study period.  
 
Where possible, data will be entered directly into our password protected database, REDCap. 
All data pertaini ng to the study will be saved on the Center for Weight and Eating Disorders’ 
password -protected server.  Paper copi[INVESTIGATOR_20045], questionnaires, interviews, lab 
results, and any correspondence will be kept in the case record in locked offices.   
 
The consent form will clearly state that the research involves use of audiorecording and 
participants will be fully informed about the purposes, procedures, storage, security, 
confidentiality, and use of the recordings. Audio recording will be used to eva luate CBT 
intervention fidelity. They will not be transcribed. Individuals will be informed that participation in 
the study is not contingent  upon agreeing to be recorded during CBT sessions . All participant 
recordings will be kept in a locked filing cabin et and password -protected computer. Participants 
can request that the recordings be paused or stopped at any time, and they will be informed that 
they have the right to refuse audiorecording at any time. Records will be maintained, retained, 
and destroyed per applicable Federal and local regulations. The recordings will not be used 
publically. Research staff will have access to recordings.  
[ADDRESS_573919] . 
17 Study Monitoring, Auditing, and Inspecting  
The investigator will permit study -related monitoring, audits, and inspections by [CONTACT_1383]/IRB, the 
sponsor, government regulatory bodies, and University compliance and quality assurance groups 
of all study related documents (e.g. source documents, regulatory documents, data collection 
instruments, study data etc.).  The investigator w ill ensure the capability for inspections of 
applicable study -related facilities (e.g. pharmacy, diagnostic laboratory, etc.).  
 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 16 Participation as an investigator in this study implies acceptance of potential inspection by 
[CONTACT_64376] a nd applicable University compliance and quality assurance 
offices.  
18 Ethical Considerations  
The principal investigator (PI) will initiate and enroll subjects only after receiving IRB approval of 
the protocol and the informed consent documents. All recruiting materials used in the study will 
have IRB approval. Progress reports regarding the study will be submitted to the IRB in 
accordance with institutional and regulatory guidelines.  
 
The study will be performed in compliance with the FDA Code of Federal Regulations for Good 
Clinical Practice (GCP). These procedures ensure the protection of the rights and the integrity of 
the subjects, adequate and correct conduct of all study procedure s, adequate data collection, 
adequate documentation, and adequate data verification.  
 
Before being enrolled, subjects will be provided informed consent. The nature, scope, and 
possible consequences of the study will have been explained in a form understan dable to them. 
A copy of the consent document will be given to the subject. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_450328].   
 
Subject confidentiality will be maintained throughout the study according to applicable guidelines, 
regulations and IRB requirements. All laboratory samples, study clinical data, and reports of 
results will de -identify individual subjects. Subjects will be identified by [CONTACT_10573], date of birth, 
gender and subject number only for use in data collection. Published data will p rovide subject 
numbers only if needed for clarity of presentation (e.g., in individual event listings).  
 
The study will be conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. The study will be 
conducted in accordance with the ICH GCP guidelines. The investigators will comply with all 
applicable regulatory and legal requirements, ICH GCP guidelines, and the Declaration of Helsinki 
in obtaining and documenting the informed consent.  
[ADDRESS_573920] control groups than with active BED treatment. 91 88 87 86 
 
Risks of MRI  
Flying objects : The known risks associated with this study are minimal. Implanted medical devices 
and metallic foreign fragments inside a participant’s body may pose a risk if the participant were 
to enter the MRI magnet room. The greatest risk is a magnetic object flying through the air toward 
the magnet and hitting someone. To reduce this risk, we require that all people involved with the 
study remove all metal from th eir clothing and all metal objects from their pockets. No metal 
objects are allowed to be brought into the magnet room at any time. In addition, once participants 
are in the magnet, the door to the room will be closed so that no one inadvertently walks int o the 
magnet room.  
Magnetic fields health risks:  There is no known health risk associated with exposure to magnetic 
fields during an MRI.  
Discomfort.  Some people become uncomfortable or claustrophobic (fearing the enclosed space) 
while inside the scanner. Fatigue, anxiety and discomfort are potential adverse effects associated 
with the fMRI study. There are minimal risks from the loud noise associated with the MRI scanner 
and from the discomfort of lying on a hard surface. We will attempt to minimize these risks by 
[CONTACT_450342], and by [CONTACT_450343]. In our experience, participants who are well informed of the purpose of the study and 
who are accompanied throughout the procedures by a re sponsible member of the research team 
tolerate the testing well and without complications. Tests are administered by [CONTACT_450344]. Exposure to radiation 
with magnetic resonance measureme nts is far less than that resulting from a single X -ray. 
Thousands of patients have been safely studied at the Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_450329]. However, some individuals become uncomfortable or 
claustrophobic while inside the magnet. Participants who are uncertain whether they can tolerate 
the scanning environment can complete a “mock” scan on similar equipment prior to the research 
scans.  If participants become uncomfortable during completion of study procedu res, they may 
withdraw immediately from the study.  
 
Incidental findings : This MRI is not a clinical scan. It is possible that during the course of the 
research study, the research staff may notice an unexpected finding(s). In the event of abnormal 
findings , the participant will be contact[CONTACT_450345]’s report 
and structural images to be sent to participants and/or their physician. These possible finding(s) 
may or may not be significant and m ay lead to anxiety about a person’s condition and to further 
work -up by a physician.   
 
Pregnancy:  Although there are no known risks related to MRI on pregnant women or a fetus, there 
is a possibility of yet undiscovered pregnancy related risks. Since there is no possible benefit fro m 
participating in this protocol for a pregnant woman, we will exclude pregnant women.  At fMRI 
scans, participants will be asked to attest to pregnancy status. Participants who are unsure or 
who believe that they may be pregnant will be given a urine pregn ancy test.  
 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 [ADDRESS_573921] occasionally repor ted tingling or twitching sensations in their 
arms or legs. Further, because of the strong magnetic field, participants with pacemakers, certain 
metallic implants, or metal in the eye cannot participate in this study. These exclusions will be 
reviewed care fully with the research technician prior to scanning. Although there are no known 
risks of MRI on pregnant women or the fetus, there is a possibility of yet undiscovered pregnancy 
related risks.  
 
Loss of Confidentiality Risk  
Because information about part icipant’s identity and voice recordings will be collected and stored 
for research purposes, there is a chance that the information could be viewed or heard by [CONTACT_450346], there is a potential for loss of conf identiality. 
Participants will only be audio recorded with their express permission, though there is a risk of 
loss of privacy or breach of confidentiality that may occur from disclosure of private information 
while being recorded. The study team will work  to uphold the privacy of the participants in several 
ways. Communications made among study staff regarding participants will use ID numbers only 
and never include names or other personal information. All participant data and recordings will be 
kept in loc ked files. In all data sets, we will use ID numbers only. A separate dataset linking names 
with ID numbers will be accessible only by [CONTACT_450347].  
 
If unforeseen risks are seen, they will be reported to the Office of Research Integrity and 
Compliance.  
[ADDRESS_573922] reductions in the number of binge eating epi[INVESTIGATOR_450330]. They may also 
experience an improvement in their mood and a reduction in eating disor der psychopathology. 
However, it is possible that they may not receive any benefits from participating in this study (i.e., 
they may not experience improvements in their symptoms of BED). Study participants may also 
gain satisfaction from the knowledge tha t they are contributing to a better understanding of brain 
function and the etiology of BED, which may lead to improved prevention and treatment options.  
[ADDRESS_573923] demonstrated the 
safety of fMRI scans and efficacy of CBT for BED. Research staff will monitor subjects closely 
during their participation. We anticipate that after CBT treatment  participants will show reductions 
in their symptoms of binge eating disorder. Results of this study hold promise of significantly 
improving the management of BED and its associated complications.  
22 Informed Consent Process / HIPAA Authorization  
Following the screening telephone call, trained c linical assessors will meet in person with all 
potential participants to describe the study, its requirements, and its likely risks and benefits. 
Participants will be provided a written copy of the Consent Form/HIPAA Authorization at this 
meeting and will be given an opportunity to read it and have all of their questions answered. 
Persons who wish to participate in the study will be asked to give their written consent at the time 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 19 of consent discussion and will then continue with the screening visit. Participants will also be 
permitted to discuss the consent form and procedures and return the signed form and continue 
with the screening at a later date  (within 2 months) , if they prefer. Participants will be told that 
they can contact [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_205013]. The 
study team member who reviews the consent document will emphasize that participation in the 
study is voluntary and that medical care will not b e influenced by [CONTACT_450348].  The consent process will take place in a private office or exam room to help 
protect subject privacy.  Subject comprehension of the nature of the study will be assessed using 
interactive conse rvation methods (e.g., asking the potential subject to paraphrase different points 
of discussion, asking open -ended questions, encouraging questions).  
Audiorecordings. Study staff will ask participants if they are willing to have their eating disorder 
exam ination interview audiorecorded. This will be done at the time of recording and is optional, 
however it will be helpful to assess interrater reliability. Participants will also be asked if they are 
willing to have their CBT sessions recorded  before each se ssion . Recordings will be used to 
assess treatment fidelity, but are not mandatory to participate in the study.  
[IP_ADDRESS]  Waiver of Written Documentation of Consent  
We are requesting a waive r of the requirement to obtain a signed consent form for the phone 
screenin g. The only record linking the subject and the research would be the consent document 
and the principal risk would be potential harm resulting from a breach of confidentiality. Each 
subject will be asked whether the subject wants documentation linking the subject with the 
research, and the  subject's wishes will govern.   
[ADDRESS_573924] Stipends or Payments  
Participants will be compensated $100 for each of the MRI scans completed, for a total of $200. 
Participants will also receive $5 at each of the 16 CBT treatment sessions (total of $80 during the 
study) to help cover travel  costs . “Greenphire ClinCard” will be used as a payment option.
NEURAL RESPONSE BED   page 1 
Version 4.0 
25 References  
 
1. DSM -5 APA. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. Arlington: American Psychiatric 
Publishing 2013.  
2. Hudson JI, Hiripi E, Pope HG, Kessler RC. The prevalence and correlates of eating disorders in 
the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Biol Psychiatry 2007;61:348 -58. 
3. Pope Jr HG, Lalonde JK, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_450331], et al. Binge eating disorder: a stable syndrome. Am J 
Psychiatry 2006.  
4. Fairburn CG, Cooper Z, Doll HA, Norman P, O'Connor M. The natural course of bulimia nervosa 
and binge eating disorder in young women. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2000;57:659 -65. 
5. Grucza RA, Przybeck TR, Cloninger CR. Prevalence and correlates of binge eating dis order in a 
community sample. Compr Psychiatry 2007;48:124 -31. 
6. Javaras KN, Pope HG, Lalonde JK, et al. Co -occurrence of binge eating disorder with psychiatric 
and medical disorders. The Journal of clinical psychiatry 2008;69:266 -73. 
7. Hudson JI, Lalonde  JK, Coit CE, et al. Longitudinal study of the diagnosis of components of the 
metabolic syndrome in individuals with binge -eating disorder. The American journal of clinical nutrition 
2010;91:1568 -73. 
8. Branson R, Potoczna N, Kral JG, Lentes K -U, Hoehe MR,  Horber FF. Binge eating as a major 
phenotype of melanocortin 4 receptor gene mutations. N Engl J Med 2003;348:[ADDRESS_573925] meal intake, and appetitive 
hormones in binge eating disorder. Ph ysiol Behav 2004;81:735 -40. 
10. Johnson J, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626] R, Williams J. Health problems, impairment and illnesses associated with 
bulimia nervosa and binge eating disorder among primary care and obstetric gynaecology patients. Psychol 
Med 2001;31:1455 -66. 
11. Striegel‐Moore RH, Dohm FA, Wilfley DE, et al. Toward an understanding of health services use 
in women with binge eating disorder. Obes Res 2004;12:799 -806. 
12. Schag K, Teufel M, Junne F, et al. Impulsivity in binge eating disorder: food cues elicit increas ed 
reward responses and disinhibition. PLoS One 2013;8:e76542.  
13. Schag K, Schönleber J, Teufel M, Zipfel S, Giel K. Food ‐related impulsivity in obesity and Binge 
Eating Disorder –a systematic review. Obes Rev 2013;14:477 -95. 
14. Berkman ND, Brownley KA, P eat CM, et al. Management and Outcomes of Binge -Eating Disorder. 
2015.  
15. Vocks S, Tuschen ‐Caffier B, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_450332] R, Rustenbach SJ, Kersting A, Herpertz S. Meta ‐analysis 
of the effectiveness of psychological and pharmacological treatments for binge eating disorder. Int J Eat 
Disord 2010;43:205 -17. 
16. Grilo CM, Masheb RM. A randomized controlled comparison of guided self -help cognitive 
behavioral therapy and behavioral weight loss for binge eating disorder. Behav Res Ther 2005;43:1509 -25. 
17. Grilo CM, Mash eb RM, Wilson GT, Gueorguieva R, White MA. Cognitive –behavioral therapy, 
behavioral weight loss, and sequential treatment for obese patients with binge -eating disorder: A 
randomized controlled trial. J Consult Clin Psychol 2011;79:675.  
18. Wilfley DE, Welc h RR, Stein RI, et al. A randomized comparison of group cognitive -behavioral 
therapy and group interpersonal psychotherapy for the treatment of overweight individuals with binge -eating 
disorder. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2002;59:713 -21. 
19. Ricca V, Castellini G , Mannucci E, et al. Comparison of individual and group cognitive behavioral 
therapy for binge eating disorder. A randomized, three -year follow -up study. Appetite 2010;55:656 -65. 
20. Balodis IM, Molina ND, Kober H, et al. Divergent neural substrates of inh ibitory control in binge 
eating disorder relative to other manifestations of obesity. Obesity 2013;21:367 -77. 
21. Aron AR, Robbins TW, Poldrack RA. Inhibition and the right inferior frontal cortex. Trends Cogn Sci 
2004;8:170 -7. 
22. Schienle A, Schäfer A, H ermann A, Vaitl D. Binge -eating disorder: reward sensitivity and brain 
activation to images of food. Biol Psychiatry 2009;65:654 -61. 
23. Dodds CM, O’Neill B, Beaver J, et al. Effect of the dopamine D [ADDRESS_573926] [COMPANY_004]598809 
on brain responses to re warding food images in overweight and obese binge eaters. Appetite 2012;59:[ADDRESS_573927] circuit function in high BMI individuals with compulsive 
overeating: similarities with addiction. Neuroimage 2012;63:1800 -6. 
25. Weygandt M, Schaefer A, Schienle A, Haynes JD. Diagnosing different binge ‐eating disorders 
based on reward ‐related brain activation patterns. Hum Brain Mapp 2012;33:[ADDRESS_573928] Neurosci 2016:nsw049.  
27. Balodis IM, Grilo CM, Kober H, et al. A pi[INVESTIGATOR_173464] –Striatal recruitment during 
reward processing to persistent bingeing follo wing treatment for binge ‐eating disorder. Int J Eat Disord 
2014;47:[ADDRESS_573929] JA, Nichols TE. Handbook of functional MRI data analysis: Cambridge 
University Press; 2011.  
29. Brooks SJ, Stein DJ. A systematic review of the neural bases  of psychotherapy for anxiety and 
related disorders. Dialogues Clin Neurosci 2015;17:261.  
30. Klumpp H, Fitzgerald DA, Phan KL. Neural predictors and mechanisms of cognitive behavioral 
therapy on threat processing in social anxiety disorder. Prog Neuropsyc hopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 
2013;45:[ADDRESS_573930] of cognitive behavioral therapy 
for social anxiety disorder on the neural dynamics of cognitive reappraisal of negative self -beliefs: 
randomiz ed clinical trial. JAMA psychiatry 2013;70:1048 -56. 
32. Lipka J, Hoffmann M, Miltner WH, Straube T. Effects of cognitive -behavioral therapy on brain 
responses to subliminal and supraliminal threat and their functional significance in specific phobia. Biol 
Psychiatry 2014;76:[ADDRESS_573931] Neurosci 2014;9:487 -93. 
34. Fu CH, Williams SC, Cleare AJ, et al. Neural responses to sad facial expressions in major 
depression following cognitive behavioral therapy. Biol Psychiatry 2008;64:505 -12. 
35. Seminowicz DA, Shpaner M, Keaser ML, et al. Cognitive -behavioral therapy increases prefrontal 
cortex gray matter in patients with chronic pain. The Journal of Pain 2013;14:1573 -84. 
36. DeVito EE, Worhunsky PD, Carroll KM, Rounsaville BJ, Kober H, Potenza MN. A preliminary study 
of the neural eff ects of behavioral therapy for substance use disorders. Drug Alcohol Depend 2012;122:[ADDRESS_573932] neural targets of treatment: changing 
brain function in substance addiction. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 201 3;37:2806 -17. 
38. Young KS, Burklund LJ, Torre JB, Saxbe D, Lieberman MD, Craske MG. Treatment for social 
anxiety disorder alters functional connectivity in emotion regulation neural circuitry. Psychiatry Research: 
Neuroimaging 2017;261:44 -51. 
39. Patricia  Ribeiro Porto M, Oliveira L, Mari J, Volchan E, Figueira I, Ventura P. Does cognitive 
behavioral therapy change the brain? A systematic review of neuroimaging in anxiety disorders. 2014.  
40. Ball TM, Stein MB, Ramsawh HJ, Campbell -Sills L, Paulus MP. Sing le-subject anxiety treatment 
outcome prediction using functional neuroimaging. Neuropsychopharmacology 2014;39:1254 -61. 
41. Klumpp H, Roberts J, Kennedy AE, et al. Emotion regulation related neural predictors of cognitive 
behavioral therapy response in soc ial anxiety disorder. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 
2017;75:106 -12. 
42. Thompson DG, Kesler SR, Sudheimer K, et al. FMRI activation during executive function predicts 
response to cognitive behavioral therapy in older, depressed adults. The Amer ican Journal of Geriatric 
Psychiatry 2015;23:[ADDRESS_573933] 1997;21:347 -52. 
45. Excellence NIfC, Britain G. Eating disorders: Core interventions in the treatment and management 
of anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa and related eating disorders:  National Institute for Clinical Excellence; 
2004.  
46. Wadden TA, Faulconbridge LF, Jones ‐Corneille LR, et al. Binge eating disorder and the outcome 
of bariatric surgery at one year: a prospective, observational study. Obesity 2011;19:[ADDRESS_573934] AJ. Binge eating disorder and night eating syndrome: 
a comparative study of disordered eating. J Consult Clin Psychol 2005;73:1107.  
48. Robinson KA, Dennison CR, Wayman DM, Pronovost PJ, Needham DM. Systematic review 
identi fies number of strategies important for retaining study participants. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] 2007;60:757 -65. 
49. Faulconbridge LF, Ruparel K, Loughead J, et al. Changes in neural responsivity to highly palatable 
foods following roux ‐en‐Y gastric by[CONTACT_6476], sleeve g astrectomy, or weight stability: An fMRI study. Obesity 
2016;24:1054 -60. 
50. Wadden TA, Berkowitz RI, Womble LG, et al. Randomized trial of lifestyle modification and 
pharmacotherapy for obesity. N Engl J Med 2005;353:2111 -20. 
51. Wadden TA, Volger S, Sarw er DB, et al. A two -year randomized trial of obesity treatment in primary 
care practice. N Engl J Med 2011;365:1969 -79. 
52. Cooper Z, Fairburn C. The eating disorder examination: A semi ‐structured interview for the 
assessment of the specific psychopatholog y of eating disorders. Int J Eat Disord 1987;6:1 -8. 
53. Sheehan D, Lecrubier Y. The Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview Version 6.0 (MINI 6.0). 
Medical Outcomes System Inc: Jacksonville, FL 2010.  
54. Posner K, Brent D, Lucas C, et al. Columbia -suicide severity rating scale (C -SSRS). [LOCATION_001], 
NY: Columbia University Medical Center 2008.  
55. Stunkard AJ, Messick S. Eating inventory: Psychological Corporation; 1988.  
56. Epel ES, Tomiyama AJ, Mason AE, et al. The reward -based eating drive scale: a se lf-report index 
of reward -based eating. PLoS One 2014;9:e101350.  
57. Latner JD, Mond JM, Kelly MC, Haynes SN, Hay PJ. The loss of control over eating scale: 
development and psychometric evaluation. Int J Eat Disord 2014;47:[ADDRESS_573935] Behav 2016;30:113.  
59. Cepeda -Benito A, Gleaves DH, Williams TL, Erath SA. The development and validation of the state 
and trait food -cravings questionnaires. Behav T her 2001;31:151 -73. 
60. Beck AT, Steer RA, Brown GK. Beck depression inventory -II. San Antonio 1996;78:[ADDRESS_573936] MS. Factor structure of the Barratt impulsiveness scale. J Clin Psychol 
1995;51:768 -74. 
62. Bohn K, Fairburn CG. The clinical impairment assessment questionnaire (CIA). Cognitive 
behavioral therapy for eating disorders 2008.  
63. Jenkinson C, Coulter A, Wright L. Short form 36 (SF36) health survey questionnaire: normative 
data for adults of working age. BMJ 1993;306:1437 -40. 
64. McElroy SL, Arnold LM, Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_450333], et al. Topi[INVESTIGATOR_450334]: a randomized, placebo -controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry 2003;160:255 -61. 
65. Fleury J. The index of self -regulation: development  and psychometric analysis. J Nurs Meas 
1998;6:3 -17. 
66. Committee IE. International Expert Committee report on the role of the A1C assay in the diagnosis 
of diabetes. Diabetes Care 2009;32:[ADDRESS_573937] 
brain regions to intake, anticipated intake, and images of palatable foods. Neuroimage 2013;67:322 -30. 
68. Shacham S. A shortened version of the Profile of Mood States. J Pers Assess 1983;47:305 -6. 
69. Logan GD, Sc hachar RJ, Tannock R. Impulsivity and inhibitory control. Psychological Science 
1997;8:60 -6. 
70. Blechert J, Meule A, Busch NA, Ohla K. Food -pi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]: an image database for experimental research 
on eating and appetite. Food cravings 2015:40.  
71. Foroni F, Perg ola G, Argiris G, Rumiati RI. The FoodCast research image database (FRIDa). 2013.  
72. Jastreboff AM, Sinha R, Lacadie C, Small DM, Sherwin RS, Potenza MN. Neural Correlates of 
Stress -and Food Cue –Induced Food Craving in Obesity Association with insulin lev els. Diabetes Care 
2013;36:394 -402. 
73. Sinha R. Modeling stress and drug craving in the laboratory: implications for addiction treatment 
development. Addict Biol 2009;14:84 -98. 
74. Sinha R, Lovallo WR, Parsons OA. Cardiovascular differentiation of emotions. Psychosom Med 
1992;54:422 -35. 
NEURAL RESPONSE BED  
CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This material is the property of the University of Pennsylvania.   
 4 75. Miller GA, Levin DN, Kozak MJ, Cook III EW, McLean Jr A, Lang PJ. Individual differences in 
imagery and the psychophysiology of emotion. Cognition and Emotion 1987;1:367 -90. 
76. Sinha R. Chroni c stress, drug use, and vulnerability to addiction. Ann N Y Acad Sci 2008;1141:105 -
30. 
77. Hopper JW, Frewen PA, Sack M, Lanius RA, Van der Kolk BA. The Responses to Script -Driven 
Imagery Scale (RSDI): assessment of state posttraumatic symptoms for psychob iological and treatment 
research. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment 2007;29:[ADDRESS_573938] of menstrual cycle phase on corticolimbic 
brain activation by [CONTACT_450349]. Brain research 2010 ;1363:81 -92. 
79. Schulz KF, Grimes DA. Generation of allocation sequences in randomised trials: chance, not 
choice. The Lancet 2002;359:[ADDRESS_573939] J. Blocked randomization with randomly selected block sizes. Int J Environ Res Public Health 
2010;8:15 -20. 
81. Fairburn CG. Cognitive behavior therapy and eating disorders: Guilford Press; 2008.  
82. Mitchell JE, Devlin MJ, de Zwaan M, Crow SJ, Peterson CB. Binge -eating disorder: Clinical 
foundations and treatment: Cambridge Univ Press; 2008.  
83. Dingemans A , Bruna M, Van Furth E. Binge eating disorder: a review. Int J Obes 2002;26:299 -307. 
84. Thirion B, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_342370] P, Mériaux S, [COMPANY_002] A, Dehaene S, Poline J -B. Analysis of a large fMRI cohort: 
Statistical and methodological issues for group analyses. Neuroimage 20 07;35:105 -20. 
85. Desmond JE, Glover GH. Estimating sample size in functional MRI (fMRI) neuroimaging studies: 
statistical power analyses. J Neurosci Methods 2002;118:115 -28. 
86. Boehler CN, Appelbaum LG, Krebs RM, Hopf J -M, Woldorff MG. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_450335] —conjunction analyses of the stop -signal task. Neuroimage 2010;52:[ADDRESS_573940] we been asking the right questions when assessing response 
inhibition in go/no -go tasks with fMRI? A meta -analysis and cr itical review. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 
2013;37:11 -23. 
88. Pawliczek CM, Derntl B, Kellermann T, Kohn N, Gur RC, Habel U. Inhibitory control and trait 
aggression: neural and behavioral insights using the emotional stop signal task. Neuroimage 2013;79:264 -
74. 
89. Monti MM. Statistical analysis of fMRI time -series: a critical review of the GLM approach. Front 
Hum Neurosci 2011;5.  
90. Verbruggen F, Logan GD. Models of response inhibition in the stop -signal and stop -change 
paradigms. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2009;33:[ADDRESS_573941] controlled pi[INVESTIGATOR_450336] -help for binge eating disorder. Behav Res Ther 2013;51:723 -8. 
 