1 
v. 2/18/16  Trial of Randomized Antibiotic Administration in 
Percutaneous Nephrolithotomy  
 
Bradley A. Morganstern, David Leavitt, Sammy E. Elsamra David Hoenig, Arthur D. 
Smith and Zeph Okeke  
Smith Institute for Urology, North well 
New Hyde Park, [LOCATION_001]  
 
INTRODUCTION  
For large renal stone burdens and/or complex stones, Percutaneous 
Nephrolithotomy (PCNL) has become the mainstay for treatment, replacing open kidney 
stone surgery since it’s intr oduction in [ZIP_CODE]. However, PCNL is not without its 
complications, specifically infectious. The procedure carries up to 25% incidence of 
infectious complications with approximately 1% rate of severe sepsis even with 
completely sterile conditions2. Therefore, the use of antibiotics becomes paramount, but 
to date there are no PNCL specific guidelines for the appropriate duration and class of 
antibiotics. This fact leaves the practicing urologists to their own subjective experiences 
to the guide them. In addition, in an age where there are increasing numbers of resistant 
microbes the judicious use of antibiotics is in even more paramount3.  
 General guidelines by [CONTACT_545849] [ADDRESS_714392]/2nd generation cephalosporins or aminoglycoside + 
metronidazole or c lindamycin  and the alternative for allergies being aminoglycoside/ 
sulbactam  or fluoroquinolone4. The guidelines also include a clause for extended use of 
antibiotics if external uri nary catheter s are in place. Of note, only a few studies have been 
conducted  that help to guide these recommendations and these were carried out with 
relatively small sample size s. 
In 2002 Dogan et al reported, in a small prospective randomized study (n=81 ), no 
difference in infectious complications with the use of a single perioperative dose of 
ofloxacin versus continued use until the nephrostomy tube was removed5.  A 
retrospective match control study in 2012 reported the importance of perioperative 
antibi otics in reducing the fevers postoperatively (1.9% vs 22.0%, p <0.0001) in patients 
2 
v. 2/18/16  who received them versus patients who did not (all patients had negative preoperative 
urine cultures)3. Another randomized prospective study (n=191) concluded no difference  
in the use of ampi[INVESTIGATOR_10312] -sulbactam versus cefuroxime with a single  administration being 
sufficient6. The most recent randomized prospective study (n=73) published this year 
found no difference in septic complications with a single perioperative dose of 
ceftriaxone compared to the addition of continued oral 3rd generation cephalosporins2. 
Whereas these studies support the notation that 24 hours of antibiotics may be sufficient 
in low risk patients undergoing PCNL further, larger studies are needed to esta blish firm 
guidelines.  
We purpose a randomized intention to treat prospective study to explore the 
duration and type of antibiotics in a larger population then previously studied. We 
hypothesize that there will be no difference in complications between tw o groups: 1) 24 
hours of perioperative antibiotics versus 2) Continued antibiotics until the removal of any 
external catheters. We will model the antibiotics choices and duration after the 2013 
AUA Urologic Surgery Antimicrobial Prophylaxis  recommendations , modified by [CONTACT_545850]. Our objective is to  compare the clinical efficacy of a 
single -day protocol with a short -course p rotocol  for PCNL . Our hope is to reduce the use 
of possibly unnecessary prolonged antibiotic administration , reduce hospi[INVESTIGATOR_545845].   
 
Primary Objective : 
 
To compare the clinical efficacy of a single -dose protocol (antibiotics for 24 
hours) with a short -course protocol (antibiotics continued until external catheters are 
removed) for PCNL.  
 
 
Patient Recruitment and Randomization  
 
All patients meeting exclusion and inclusion criteria  for the study, who require a  
PCNL for treatment of kidney stone disease will be approached for enro llment in the 
3 
v. 2/18/[ADDRESS_714393] the opportunity to discuss participation further with family and/or advisors.  
If an individual chooses to enroll, the consent form will be signed before the procedure 
begins. Once an individual joins the study and informed consent is obta ined, the subject 
will receive a signed copy of the consent form.  Individuals may chose not to be enrolled 
in the study or may withdraw from the study at any time without repercussions to 
subsequent care.  
All subjects of childbearing potential who are not  surgically sterile will be given a 
urine pregnancy test during the screening exam.  
Patients agreeing to participate in the study will be randomized on the day of surgery. 
Stratified randomization will be utilized to balance the number of patients  between  the 
two groups. Subjects will be randomly assigned by a 1:1 ratio to either:  
1. Antibiotics for a period of [ADDRESS_714394] keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007], will be further 
developed upon approval of this protocol.  
 
Inclusion criteria:  
 
1. Patients >18 years old.  
2. Negative urine culture within 1 month prior to procedure  
4 
v. 2/18/16  3. Renal Calculi which would optimally require PCNL for treatment .  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
 
1. Patients <[ADDRESS_714395] for greater than 1 week duration  
6. Patients under going planned, multi -staged procedures  
7. Immunosuppressed patients  
8. Pregnant women (urine HCG obtained at PST)  
9. Patients with more than one allergy to antibiotics  
10. Patients who are breastfeeding  
 
Intervention  
 
Antibiotics Regiment /External Catheter Procedure  
 
 At our institution there has been no standardized utilization of administration of 
antibiotics and it has been at the discretion of the attending as to the duration. The typi[INVESTIGATOR_545846]  (as defined by [CONTACT_21198])  patient would start with 
perioperative antibiotics within 6 0 minutes prior to procedure and continued for a 
duration of 5 -7 days. I f no signs or symptoms of systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome ( SIRS ), as defined as two or more signs in cluding temperature <36 °C or 
>38°C, heart rate >90/min, respi[INVESTIGATOR_697] >20min or PaCO2 <32mmHg, or white blood 
cell count <4000/mm3 or >[ZIP_CODE]/mm3, or sepsis occurred they may be continued longer . 
5 
v. 2/18/[ADDRESS_714396]-operative day two if no 
signs of infection or ureteral obstruction occur  (based on clinical signs of flank pain w ith 
clamp trial, CT, or nephrostogram) .  
 In accordance with AUA guidelines we use Ancef, a 1st generation cephalosporin, 
as the primary antibiotics. It would be started within 60 minutes of the procedure. Dosing 
would be 1 gram  IV every 8 hours and would be adjusted for renal dosing as needed: 
creatinine clearance of 35 -54 would be every 8hrs; 11 -34 would give on time dose then 
decrease by 50% and administer every 12 hrs; <10 will give usual one time dose then 
decrease dose by 50% and administer every 24hrs; if on hemodialysis will supplement 1g 
at time of dialysis. If the patient has an allergy to penicillin or cephalosporin then Cipro 
would be used. It would started within 120 minutes of the procedure, as per AUA 
recommendations, at 400mg IV and would be continued every 12hrs if patient has a 
normal creatinine clearance. If the creatinine clearance is between 5 -29 then the patient 
would receive 200mg IV every 18 hours and if on dialysis then the patient would get 
200mg IV 12 hours after dialysis. Regardless  of which antibiotic that is used they would 
either be discontinued after 24 hours or continued until both external catheters are 
removed (using the usual timing defined above). If the SIRS or sepsis occurs then the 
patient would be treated according the clinical indicated or based on the presence of 
positive blood, urine cultures and the sensitivities. The patient would remain in the study 
as it is an intention to treat design. With this regiment confounders should be minimal as 
the majority of patients will be treated with Ancef and the point of antibiotics is 
preventative since the patients are deemed not infected at the started per exclusion 
criteria.  
 
Surgical procedure  
 
For patients undergoing PCNL, a temporary retrograde ureteral catheter will be 
placed with the patient in dorsal lithotomy  or prone  position  (according to surgeon 
preference) .   The distal end of the ureteral catheter will be connected to a syringe with 
6 
v. 2/18/[ADDRESS_714397].  The patient ’s initially approached i n lithotomy are then  repositioned 
into the prone position with all pressure points well padded, and then re -prepped and 
draped.  The collecting system is then delineated with a retrograde pyelogram via contrast 
instillation through the previously placed ur eteral catheter.  The appropriate calyx of 
entry is the determined, targeted and punctured with an [ADDRESS_714398] clinical manner by 
[CONTACT_545851] -trained endourologists  with high -volume stone practices (Zeph Okeke , 
David Hoenig  and Arthur Smith).  
 
Follow -up 
All patients are seen in the office within [ADDRESS_714399] -operative or sooner if 
clinical indicated (signs of infection after discharge or needs removal  of external 
catheter). Patients are instructed to contact [CONTACT_545852]. The 
research team will carry periodic reviews of both inpatient and outpatient  records to tract 
any complications that occur within 30 days of the procedure.  
Outcomes  
 
Primary Outcomes:  
 Postoperative infection  
 Infection -related events:  
o Fever  
o Bacteriuria  
o Bacteremia  
 
7 
v. 2/18/16  Secondary Outcomes:  
1. ICU for hypotension postoperatively  
2. Length of stay (LOS)  
3. Need for additional lithotripter energy modalities  
4. Intraoperative complications  
5. Immediate postoperative complications  
6. Postoperative complications within 30 days of the procedure  
7. Stone cultures  
8. Operative time (duration of the surgical procedure, beginning with 
percutaneous access and ending with closure of the surgical track)  
9. Adverse and allergic reactions to antibiotics  
10. Incidence of clostridium difficile  infection  
11. Evidence of Systemic Inflammatory Response Sydrome (SIRS)  
 
 
 
Sample Size Calculation  
 
The proposed sample size for this study is n=290 subjects  (n=145 per group ).   
 
As a non -inferiority trial, antibiotics for 24 hours will be considered non -inferior 
to antibiotics for continued antibiotics if the difference in the rate of feve r is less than 5% 
(δ=margin of inferiority).  More formally, let p24 and pC be the rate of fever for 
antibiotics for 24 hours and antibiotics continued until catheters are removed, 
respectively.  The following are the null hypothesis and alternative hypoth esis: 
H0: d = p24 – pC ≥ δ vs.  
HA: d = p24 – pC < δ  
 
Based on estimates from Tuzel et al2., the rate of fever using 24 hours of 
antibiotics = 11% and the rate of fever using antibiotics until external catheters are 
removed = 16%, and assuming a non -inferi ority margin of 5%, a target of 145 subjects 
8 
v. 2/18/16  per group (n= 290 in total) would yield 80% power to determine that 24 hours of 
antibiotics is not inferior to continued antibiotics, assuming a  1-sided α -level of 0.05.  
 
Data Analysis  
 
Intention to Treat (ITT) :   
The primary analyses will be based on the ITT population.  The ITT population 
will be defined as any subject who is randomized, regardless of whether the subject 
completes the full course of antibiotics.  
 
Statistical Methods:   
Descriptive statistics (means ± standard deviations or  medians and interquartile 
range [25th percentile, 75th percentile] for continuous data; frequencies and percentages 
for categorical data) will be calculated by [CONTACT_19313] (antibiotics for 24 hours or antibiotics 
until external ca theters are removed).   
 
The two -sample t -test or Mann -Whitney test will be used to compare these two 
groups for continuous variables.  The chi -square test or Fisher’s exact test, as deemed 
appropriate, will be used to compare these two groups for categori cal outcomes (i.e. 
fever, bacteriuria, bacteremia, etc.)  
 
LOS and operative time will be analyzed by [CONTACT_545853], i.e., computing  the Kaplan -Meier product limit curves, where group 
will be the stratification variable.  [ No data will be considered censored.]   The two 
groups will be compared using the log -rank test.  The median LOS / operative time and 
corresponding 95% confidence intervals for each group will be obtained from the 
Kaplan -Meier Product -Limit Estimates.  
 
A result will be considered statistically significant at the p<0.05 level of 
significance.  All analyses will be performed using SAS version 9.3 (SAS Institute, Cary, 
NC).   
9 
v. 2/18/[ADDRESS_714400] 
of care. T his study is looking to compare the clinical efficacy of a single -day protocol 
with a short -course protocol for PCNL. Our hope is to reduce the use of possibly 
unnecessary prolonged antibiotic use, reduce hospi[INVESTIGATOR_545847].  All serious adverse events and unanticipated problems 
will be reported in compliance with the NSLIJHS IRB policy.  
 
Some possible serious side effects from antibiotics may include:  
 diarrhea that is watery or bloody;   
 white patches or sores inside your mouth or on your lips;  
 skin rash, bruising, severe tingling, numbness, pain, muscle weakness; fever, 
swollen glands, body aches, flu symptoms;  
 unusual bleeding (nose, mouth, vagina, or rectum), purple or red pi[INVESTIGATOR_263097] s pots 
under your skin;  
 urinating less than usual or not at all;  
 seizure (black -out or convulsions);  
 or severe skin reaction -- fever, sore throat, swelling in your face or tongue, 
burning in your eyes, skin pain, followed by a red or purple skin rash that  spreads 
(especially in the face or upper body) and causes blistering and peeling.  
 Another type of infect ion named Clostridium  difficile  
 
Less serious side effects may include:  
 
 pain, swelling, or a hard lump where the injection was given;  
 stomach pain, nausea, vomiting, loss of appetite;  
 skin rash or itching;  
 rectal itching; or  vaginal itching or discharge.  
 
These side effects are general for all patients who get antibiotics and are very rare.  All 
patients will be monitored for potential side effects.  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plans  
 
10 
v. 2/18/[ADDRESS_714401] David Leavitt Bradley 
Morganster n will also be responsible for compi[INVESTIGATOR_545848], day to day oversight 
of research and ensuring the integrity and privacy of the data. During the review process 
the principal investigator, along with th e other investigators will evaluate whether the 
study should continue unchanged, require modification/amendment, or close to 
enrollment. The principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_158225] (IRB) have the 
authority  to stop or suspend the study or r equire modifications.  
This protocol presents minimal additional risks to the subjects outside of those 
traditionally associated with PCNL .  Ad verse events or other problems are not 
anticipated. In the unlikely event that such events occur, serious and unan ticipated and 
related adverse events or unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others will 
be reported in writing within [ADDRESS_714402] to FDA regulation (antibiotics are being 
used via approved guidelines), nor are the antibiotics being exported for research. 
This co nclusion has been reached but exploring outline of FDAAA801 on provided 
by [CONTACT_545854].gov.  
References:  
1. Fernstrom I, Johansson B. Percutaneous pyelolithotomy. A new extr action 
technique. Scandinavian Journal of Urology and N ephrology 1976;10:257 -9 
2. Tuze l E, Aktepe O, Akdogan B. Prospective Comparative Study of Two 
Protocols of Antibiotic Prophylaxis in Percutaneous Nephrolithotomy. Journal 
of Endourology 2013; 27: 172 -176.  
11 
v. 2/18/16  3. Gravas S, Montanari E, Geavlete P, Onal B, Skolarikos A, Pearle M, Sun Y, 
Rosette  J. Postoperative Infection Rates in Low Risk Patients Undergoing 
Percutaneous Nephrolithotomy With and Without Antibiotic Prophylaxis: A 
Matched Case Control Study. The Journal of Urology 2012; 188:843 -847. 
4. American Urologic Assiociation’s Pocket Guide fo r Urologic Surgery 
Antimicrobial Prophylaxis May 15, 2013.  
5. Dogan H, Sahin A, Cetinkaya Y, Akdogan B, Ozden E, Kendi S. Antibiotic 
Prophylaxis in Percutaneous Nephrolithotomy: Prospective Study in 81 
Patients. Journal of Endourology 2002; 16:649 -653. 
6. Seyrek  M, Binday M, Yuruk E, Akman T, Alson R, Yazici O, Berberoglu Y, 
Muslumanoglu A. Perioperative Prophylaxis for Percutaneous 
Nephrolithomy: Randomized Study Concerning the Drug and Dosage. Journal 
of Endourology 2012;11:1431 -1436.  
 