        Investigations of Ear Tip Performance, Perceptions, and Experiences (IETPPE) [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] May 5th, 2024                     
PROTOCOL General Procedures  Participants completed three phases: Listening Session #1, Earmold Fabrication, and a Listening Session #2. See Figure 4.2. The primary distinction among listeners was the material-type of earmold they received first. There are three material-types and thus three groups that participants could be initially assigned to. All participants received and were tested with each of the three material-type groups. Earmolds were connected to the same Unitron T-Stride M behind-the-ear hearing aid.   Figure 4. [ADDRESS_1202064] study. 
   Specific Procedures Listening Session #[ADDRESS_1202065]. All participants were eventually fit with and underwent testing with each earmold material-type. Participants were randomly assigned to one of three arms, using a 1:1 allocation ratio, each with a different initial material type. The three material-type groups included a control group (EMCTRL) made by a professional manufacturer, and two in-house study groups that were 3D printed using Resin (EMRES) and PLA (EMPLA ). See Figure 4.3. Randomization was completed a priori via a list generated by a custom Microsoft Excel script. This script randomly sequenced three blocks of ten numbers equally containing values from [ADDRESS_1202066], from 1 to 3, indicating which arm of the study they were allocated to.         Figure 4. 2 Workflow study diagram across material-type groups 
   Earmold Fabrication Period  After completing Listening Session #01, ear impressions were digitally scanned and edited using commercially available 3D editing software. The physical ear canal impression was then sent to a third-party earmold manufacturer. Each participant was made three earmolds, for an overall total of [ADDRESS_1202067]-party earmold served as the control earmold. The in-house earmolds were made from two different material-types and served as the study earmolds. To control for style of earmolds, all earmolds were made in a skeleton style with a sound bore that accommodates size #13T tubing and a separate select-a-vent (SAV).    Listening Session #02  Once all earmolds were fabricated and received, participants were scheduled for Listening Session #02. This stage involved collecting objective acoustic measurements and subjective perceptual ratings while wearing each of the earmolds. A stock Unitron T-stride M behind-the-ear hearing aid was programmed to simulate a flat, mild, sensorineural hearing loss at 

[ADDRESS_1202068], within group, repeated measures analysis of variance (RM-ANOVA) to compare the effect of 3D printed material across outcome measures. Assumption testing for normality, outliers, and sphericity were utilized. Outliers were assessed on an individual basis, using Cook’s D and a strict cutoff of 0.5. Sphericity was evaluated using Mauchly's test for Sphericity with a criteria of .05. If sphericity was violated, then both Geisser & Greenhouse and Huynh Feldt  correction factors were used, with the latter being used when epsilon was greater than .075. Pairwise t-tests with Bonferroni correction were used for planned comparisons.  