 
 
Inhaled Beta- adrenergic 
Agonists to Treat Pulmonary 
Vascular Disease in Heart 
Failure with preserved EF (BEAT 
HFpEF): A Randomized 
Controlled Trial  
 
NCT# 02885636 
 
July 21, 2016 
Version 1 21Jul2016   1 
 Inhaled Beta- adrenergic Agonists to Treat Pulmonary Vascular Disease in Heart Failure with 
preserved EF (BEAT HFpEF): A Randomized Controlled Trial  
 
  Abstract :  
Heart failure (HF) is the most common cause of pulmonary hypertension (PH, WHO Group 2) 
(1). Approximately half of patients with HF have preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF)  (2); PH is common 
in this cohort and is clearly associated with increased mortality  (3)(4)(5)(6). While early stages of 
HFpEF are characterized by [CONTACT_328081], recent studies have shown that the majority of patients 
referred for invasive assessment display significant pulmonary vascular disease (HFpEF -PH) manifest 
by [CONTACT_328082] ( 7)(8).  
Patients with HFpEF-PH frequently display right ventricular (RV) dysfunction, which is associated with 
even worse outcome, independent of the severity of PH  (9).  We have recently shown that the RV in 
HFpEF displays greater afterload- dependence as compared to healthy controls  (9), suggesting  that 
there may be greater opportunity to improve hemodynamics and functional capacity with pulmonary 
vasodilators in this population.  We have also shown that even in the earliest stages of HFpEF, there is 
abnormal pulmonary vasodilation associated with impaired RV reserve. (10)  This suggests potential for 
patients with HFpEF to benefit from pulmonary vasodilators, but no approved therapi[INVESTIGATOR_328067].  
 
Our group has recently shown that the pulmonary vasculature in patients with HFpEF-PH is very 
favorably responsive to beta- adrenergic stimulation from intravenous dobutamine (11). Compared to 
controls, dobutamine produced significantly greater reductions in pulmonary artery (PA) pressure, 
resistance and more improvement in PA compliance in subjects with HFpEF. This observation serves  
as the guiding hypothesis for the proposed study: that acute treatment with an inhaled beta- agonist 
(albuterol) can improve pulmonary vascular function at rest and during exercise in patients with HFpEF-
PVD.  Demonstration of such an acute effect from a novel inhaled therapy would represent a major step 
forward in the potential treatment of  a large population of patients with pulmonary vascular disease for 
whom there is currently no effective pharmacotherapy.  
 
 
   
Principal Investigator:  
 
[INVESTIGATOR_328068] A. Borlaug,  MD  
 
Co-Investigator s  
 
Yogesh N. V. Reddy, MD and Masaru Obokata, MD  
 
   
Version 1 21Jul2016   2 
 A. Rationale: In contrast to heart failure (HF) with reduced EF, there is no effective treatment  for HF 
with preserved EF ( HFpEF ).  Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is highly prevalent in HFpEF and is 
associated with right ventricular (RV) dysfunction and increased mortality, particularly when both the 
former and latter are present .  Recently,  we have also  shown that there is depressed pulmonary artery 
(PA) vasodilation during exercise, e ven when resting indices of function are normal . This is associated 
with impaired RV reserve and reduced exercise capacity. Dobutamine, a nonselective β -agonist, 
improves PA vascular function at rest in HFpEF, but is limited by [CONTACT_328083]. Albuterol is  an inhaled β -agonist  routinely used 
to treat reactive airway  diseases  that could provide an alternate way of improving PA vascular function 
in patients with HFpEF- PH.   
B. Hypothesis:   Acute inhaled albuterol will improve PA vascular function at rest and during exercise in 
subjects with HFpEF- PH. 
 
C. Innovation:  
• The hypothesis proposed is based on our own data and has not been entertained by [CONTACT_328084] β -agonists (albuterol ) have  never been suggested to treat HFpEF 
• The use of exercise hemodynamics to measure an intervention’s effect is highly novel while also being clinically meaningful.  Very few centers in the world could carry out this study . 
• This application is based upon a highly innovative hypothesis that HFpEF is caused by [CONTACT_328085] r esting diastolic dysfunction.  
• The concept of a therapy  that can be given prophylactically before activity in HFpEF is  highly 
innovative.  
• The commonly used bronchodilator albuterol has never  been tested as a pulmonary vasodilator. 
If effective this could lead to further studies in other forms of pulmonary hypertension  
D. Significance:   
• HFpEF currently affli cts 2 -3 millio n Americans , and with the aging population the prevalence is 
growing by 1% per year.  This makes identification of effective treatment s a major unmet public 
health need that will change our practice. 
• Mayo is already a leader in the invasive characterization of HF, and publication of the results of these studies will further enhance our international reputation as a center of excellence.    
• By [CONTACT_328086], this trial will enhance referrals  
of patients with unexplained dyspnea and exercise intolerance to Mayo . 
• Identification of a beneficial effect of albuterol  on hemodynamics w ould provide critical 
preliminary data to support a larger Mayo -centered, NIH-sponsored clinical trial of chronic  
albuterol  therapy in HFpEF . 
E. Brief Synopsis of Methods:  
1) Enroll subjects with normal EF referred to the cath lab for evaluation of dyspnea.  
2) Measure resting and exercise hemodynamics  with expi[INVESTIGATOR_328069] . 
3) After exercise, in a randomized, double- blinded fashion, administer inhaled albuterol  or placebo  
(prepared by [CONTACT_15446]) . 
4) Repeat rest -exercise hemodynamics/expi[INVESTIGATOR_328070]. 
5) Compare resting and exercise hemodynamic response after albuterol  or placebo relative to the 
initial assessment  (analysis of covariance, ANCOVA) .  
6) Perform simultaneous echo with measurement of RV function using tissue Doppler 
echocardiography  and PA flow using pulsed wave Doppler of the RV outflow tract during rest 
and exercise phases.  
Version 1 21Jul2016   3 
 F. Prelimin ary studies to support feasibility: The enormous and rapi[INVESTIGATOR_328071] a need to better understand the pathogenesis and treatment options for this morbid disease. 
Recent research from our group has shown that RV dysfunction is present in a third of patients with 
HFpEF and the presence of pulmonary vascular disease and pulmonary hypertension (PH) is very high 
(related to both pulmonary venous hypertension as well as pulmonary vascular disease) ( (12)) ((5)). 
Both of these have been associated with adverse outcomes and exercise intolerance but no therapy is 
currently available directly targeted at the pulmonary vasculature in HFpEF ( (9)).  
We recently  demonstrated significant improvements in pulmonary vascular function with 
dobut amine (a β [ADDRESS_405211]) administered acutely in HFpEF ( 11). As an intravenous therapy, this is not 
suitable for chronic outpatient use. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_328072] β [ADDRESS_405212] also shown improved resolution of pulmonary edema with albuterol ( 13), 
(14,15). In the proposed randomized, placebo- controlled trial, we seek to evaluate whether the 
commonly used inhaled bronchodilator albuterol, administered through a high- efficiency nebulizer 
device, improves pulmonary vascular function in patients with HFpEF-PH as compared to placebo. This 
has the potential to lead to a simple cost effective intervention to improve symptoms in HFpEF-PH , and 
potentially be tested in other WHO PH groups. 
           In the absence of frank signs of congestive heart failure, patients with early HFpEF can only be 
reliably diagnosed by [CONTACT_328087], which is routinely performed at Mayo Clinic 
as part of the evaluation of patients with unexplained dyspnea. The presence of elevated pulmonary 
capi[INVESTIGATOR_328073] (PCWP) at rest (>15 mmHg) or with exercise (>25 mmHg); and elevated 
mean pulmonary artery pressures at rest (>25 mm Hg) and with exercise (>40 mmHg) has been used 
to invasively diagnose HFpEF with exercise pulmonary hypertension with a high degree of validity and 
reliability (16). Just as exercise stress unmasks abnormalities in LV diastolic function in early stage 
HFpEF, we have very recently  shown that exercise stress reveals early abnormalities in PA vascular 
function as compared to controls without HF that are not apparent  from resting data alone.( 10)   
Using objective diagnoses of HFpEF and exercise induced PH , we seek to evaluate the 
hemodynamic changes with exercise in pulmonary vascular resistance, peak cardiac output and 
subjective dyspnea before and after inhaled albuterol therapy for pulmonary vasodilation.  
 
G. Study design:  This study will be performed in a randomized, double blind placebo- controlled 
fashion using inhaled albuterol or inhaled saline (prepared by [CONTACT_15446]) administered 
through a novel high -efficiency nebulizer in a 1:[ADDRESS_405213] previously utilized and 
reported ( 17). Rest and exercise measurements will be repeated after receiving inhaled albuterol or 
control therapy.  
 
Patients referred to the cardiac catheterization laboratory for invasive exercise stress testing will be prospectively recruited.  Standard right heart catheterization using high fidelity micromanometers (Millar 
Instruments) will be performed at rest and during supi[INVESTIGATOR_328074] ( MedGraphics ) as is our current practice.  The protocol is rest -20 Watts exercise x 5 minutes , 
and then  graded workload increases in 10- 20W increments (3 minute stages) to exhaustion.  
Hemodynamic , arterial and mixed venous blood gas and expi[INVESTIGATOR_328075], during 
each exercise stage and at peak  exercise.   Venous blood samples will be obtained at rest and at peak 
exercise.   Perceived symptoms of dyspnea and fatigue will be quantified using the Borg dyspnea and 
effort scores at each stage of exercise.  Limited echocardiography will be performed by a cardiologist 
skilled in imaging (MO) focusse d on measures of RV morphology and function.   
 
After the initial exercise study and hemodynamics have returned to baseline, study drug (normal saline 
placebo or albuterol 2. 5 mg ) will be in haled through a high efficiency nebulizer  over [ADDRESS_405214] majority (>85%) 
of the elevation in cardiac filling pressures  and reduction in venous oxygen content  in people with 
HFpEF occurs at the low 20 Watt workload ( 16), so repeating exercise hemodynamic assessment at 
this load should be sufficient to detect any clinically meaningful treatment effect  from albuterol .   
Blood tests:  No additional blood tests will be collected beyond those needed for clinical use in the right 
heart catheterization.  
Data collected:  This will be a randomized double -blind trial .  A web data base will be created (Redcap) 
using dual data entry from  the paper case report forms . All hemodynamic data will be assessed at end 
expi[INVESTIGATOR_328076].  Data will be supplied 
for analysis as an SAS data base.  The specific hemodynamic and expi[INVESTIGATOR_328077] A ppendix  I.  
Primary Endpoint :  The primary endpoint will be the PVR at 20 Watts exercise after study drug relative 
to the PVR at 20 Watts exercise in the initial ass essment  prior to study drug. 
Secondary Endpoints:  Secondary endpoints will be changes in resting P VR after study drug as well 
as rest and exercise changes in PA compliance, right atrial pressure, pulmonary artery pressure, PCWP, cardiac output, RV systolic and diastolic function, PA input impedance VO
2, Ve/VCO 2 slope and 
Borg effort/dyspnea scores.   
We will also perform a prespecified tertiary analysis of Beta blocker + vs Beta blocker - subjects enrolled 
to see if there is any difference in treatment effec t. 
Inclusion Criteria : HFpEF is defined by [CONTACT_328088], normal left 
ventricular ejection fraction (≥50%), and elevated LV filling pressures at cardiac catheterization (defined as resting PCWP>15 mmHg and/or PCWP≥25 mmHg during exercise).  
Exclusion Criteria:  Prior albuterol therapy (within previous 48 hours ), current long acting inhaled beta 
agonist use, significant hypokalemia (<3meq/L), other “non- HFpEF” specific causes of heart failure 
such as significant  valvular disease (>moderate left -sided regurgitation,  >mild stenosis), high output 
heart failure, severe pulmonary disease, unstable coronary disease, constrictive pericarditis, or 
infiltrative, restrictive, or hypertrophic cardiomyopathies.  Patients who are pregnant or lactating will also 
be excluded.  
We wi ll include patients on chronic beta blocker  (BB) therapy in the study for the following reasons (1) 
they are commonly prescribed in HFpEF, so to restrict to BB naive patients will limit our ability to 
generalize the findings, (2) the requirement would limi t the pool of patients who might be eligible for the 
study, (3) chronically, BBs restore beta -adrenergic responsiveness in heart failure, so they are unlikely 
to significantly attenuate albuterol’s effect in the heart and pulmonary vasculature  
Study drug preparation and considerations:  Medical grade albuterol  nebulization solution will be 
obtained by [CONTACT_328089] a dose of 2.5 mg for nebulization 
(current FDA approved dose for bronchodilation).  Placebo (normal saline) will also be prepared by 
[CONTACT_328090] -based rate.  The randomization scheme will be 
generated by [CONTACT_328091], Ryan Lennon and entered into a computer program .   
H. Statistical analysis and power consi derations:  
We will enroll 30 patients (15 in each arm) over a [ADDRESS_405215] deviation of 0.5 WU in 
exercise PVR based upon our prior data, this sample size will provide 98% power (alpha=0.05) to 
detect a drop in exercise pulmonary vascular resistance of this magnitude or greater  with albuterol as 
compared to inhaled placebo.  
 
The effect of albuterol relative to placebo on primary and secondary endpoints will be evaluated by 
[CONTACT_144406] (ANCOVA) taking into account rest/exercise values prior to study drug and following albuterol or placebo.  
Version 1 21Jul2016   5 
 Consenting subjects who do not meet the diagnostic criteria for HFpEF at catheterization (resting 
PCW P>15 mmHg and/or PCWP≥25 mmHg during exercise) will be considered screen failures and will 
not receive study drug. Given that we currently perform > [ADDRESS_405216] successfully completed similar acute hemodynamic studies over this 
time frame, we plan to reach the target of 30 enrolled HFpEF patients within 12 months. 
 
I.  Human studies issues:   
Informed consent will be obtained from each participant prior to coming to the catheterization labor atory. 
Albuterol is currently FDA approved at the proposed study drug dose of 2.[ADDRESS_405217] effects  (18-20). Patients with a normal EF and HFpEF are in 
general less acutely ill than these previously studied patients and are commonly  treated with these 
agents in the presence of coexisting lung disease (which is very common in HFpEF).  
Side effects of albuterol are minimal and related to benign palpi[INVESTIGATOR_814], tremors and anxiety. At higher 
doses of 10- [ADDRESS_405218] 
effects. (21,22) With direct pulmonary delivery , systemic side effects from albuterol are expected to be 
much less likely than would be observed with parenteral  use of these IV act ive β -agonists . 
 
Patients will be monitored in the recovery area typi[INVESTIGATOR_328078]. Patients will be monitored using continuous telemetry, heart rate and 
oximetry  monitoring. Blood pressure will be monitored as per standard of care. This will allow post 
procedure observation in a monitored setting to ensure no side effects occur during peak drug 
concentration.  
J. Budget  
 
This study will be done in patients already undergoing cardiac catheterization and exercise hemodynamic study.  There will be no additional cost to the patient.  The only research charges will be 
for albuterol/placebo and for preparation and storage in research pharmacy , and for two additional 
arterial blood gases obtained during the subsequent rest and exercise phases after study drug.  
    
K. References:  
1. Fang JC, DeMarco T, Givertz MM, et al. World Health Organization Pulmonary Hypertension 
group 2: pulmonary hypertension due to left heart disease in the adult --a summary statement 
from the Pulmonary Hypertension Council of the International Society for Heart and Lung Transplantation. J Heart Lung Transplant 2012;31:913- 33. 
2. Borlaug BA, Paulus WJ. Heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: pathophysiology, diagnosis, and treatment. Eur Heart J 2011;32:670- 9. 
3. Kjaergaard J, Akkan D, Iversen KK, et al. Prognostic importance of pulmonary hypertension in 
patients with heart failure. Am J Cardiol 2007;99:1146- 50. 
4. Lam CS, Borlaug BA, Kane GC, Enders FT, Rodeheffer RJ, Redfield MM. Age- associated 
increases in pulmonary artery systolic pressure in the general population. Circulation 
2009;119:2663 -70. 
5. Lam CS, Roger VL, Rodeheffer RJ, Borlaug BA, Enders FT, Redfield MM. Pulmonary hypertension in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a community -based study. J Am 
Coll Cardiol 2009;53:1119- 26. 
Version 1 21Jul2016   6 
 6. Leung CC, Moondra V, Catherwood E, Andrus BW. Prevalence and risk factors of pulmonary 
hypertension in patients with elevated pulmonary venous pressure and preserved ejection 
fraction. Am J Cardiol 2010;106:[ADDRESS_405219] 
pathophy siologies on response to therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol 2012;59:442 -51. 
8. Guazzi M, Borlaug BA. Pulmonary hypertension due to left heart disease. Circulation 
2012;126:975 -90. 
9. Melenovsky V, Hwang SJ, Lin G, Redfield MM, Borlaug BA. Right heart dysfunction in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Eur Heart J 2014;35:3452- 62. 
10. Borlaug BA, Kane GC, Melenovsky V, Olson TP. Abnormal right ventricular -pulmonary artery 
coupling with exercise in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Eur Heart J. 2016.  
11. Andersen MJ, Hwang SJ, Kane GC, et al. Enhanced pulmonary vasodilator reserve and 
abnormal right ventricular: pulmonary artery coupling in heart failure with preserved ejection 
fraction. Circ Heart Fail 2015;8:542 -50. 
12. Mohammed SF, Hussain I, AbouEzzeddine OF, et al. Right ventricular function in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a community -based study. Circulation 2014;130:2310 -20. 
13. Matthay MA, Folkesson HG, Clerici C. Lung epi[INVESTIGATOR_328079]. Physiol Rev 2002;82:569- 600. 
14. Frank JA, Wang Y, Osorio O, Matthay MA. Beta- adrenergic agonist therapy accelerates the 
resolution of hydrostatic pulmonary edema in sheep and rats. J Appl Physiol (1985) 
2000;89:[ADDRESS_405220] 2008;133:845 -52. 
16. Borlaug BA, Nishimura RA, Sorajja P, Lam CS, Redfield MM. Exercise hemodynamics enhance diagnosis of early heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Circ Heart Fail 2010;3:588- 95. 
17. Borlaug BA, Koepp KE, Melenovsky V. Sodium Nitrite Improves Exercise Hemodynamics and Ventricular Performance in Heart Failure With Preserved Ejection Fraction. J Am Coll Cardiol 2015;66:1672 -82. 
18. Slutsky R. Hemodynamic effects of inhaled terbutaline in congestive heart failure patients without lung disease: beneficial cardiotonic and vasodilator beta- agonist properties evaluated by 
[CONTACT_328092]. Am Heart J 1981;101:556 -60. 
19. Uren NG, Davies SW, Jordan SL, Lipkin DP. Inhaled bronchodilators increase maximum oxygen consumption in chronic left ventricular failure. Eur Heart J 1993;14:744- 50. 
20. Khorfan FM, Smith P, Watt S, Barber KR. Effects of nebulized bronchodilator therapy on heart rate and arrhythmias in critically ill adult patients. Chest 2011;140:1466 -72. 
21. Andersen MJ, Hwang SJ, Kane GC, et al. Enhanced pulmonary vasodilator reserve and abnormal right ventricular: pulmonary artery coupling in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Circ Heart Fail. 2015;8:542 -50. 
22. Prasad M, Geske JB, Sorajja P, et al. Hemodynamic changes in systolic and diastolic function during isoproterenol challenge predicts symptomatic response to myectomy in hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy with labile obstruction. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2016.  
 
 
      
Version 1 21Jul2016   7 
  
       Appendix I: Data Obtained at baseline rest, baseline exercise, post study drug rest, and post 
study drug exercise stages 
 
Heart rate  
Systemic blood pressure (systolic, diastolic mean)  
Right atrial pressure  
Pulmonary arterial pressure (systolic, diastolic, mean)  
Pulm onary capi[INVESTIGATOR_47469] (mean, V wave)  
Cardiac output (direct Fick method)  
Stroke volume  
LV and RV stroke work index  
Transpulmonary gradient  
Pulmonary and Systemic Vascular resistances  
Oxygen consumption  
Carbon dioxide production  
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_13521] y exchange ratio  
Minute ventilation, tidal volume, respi[INVESTIGATOR_328080] (Ve/VCO2 slope)  
Borg perceived effort (6 -20 scale) and dyspnea (0 -10) scores  
Arterial blood gas and saturation to determine O 2 content  
Mixed venous blood gas an d saturation to determine O 2 content  
Echo derived RV lateral annular tissue Doppler velocity during systole (s’)  
Echo derived RV lateral annular tissue Doppler velocity during diastole (e’)  
Echo derived RV outflow tract pulse wave Doppler profile  
 
   