[ADDRESS_274298] Summary  
This University of Wisconsin Center for Tobacco Research and Intervention (UW -CTRI) study is designed 
to assess whether completely electronic, HIPAA -compliant, EHR -based, closed -loop referrals fo r tobacco 
cessation (eReferral) from primary care clinics to a state telephone tobacco quitline can increase the 
number/percentage of adult tobacco users receiving evidence -based tobacco dependence treatment 
when compared to paper -based faxed (Fax to Quit) .   We will also address the rate that referred 
smokers quit, whether they were referred via eReferral or Fax to Quit.   
 
9/19/[ADDRESS_274299] greater flexibility in deciding which clinic staff roles/members should offer SmokefreeTXT eReferral.  We are proposing this change because clinic leaders and staff have indicated that having staff who cond uct vital sign assessment and place patients in clinic rooms be 
the primary conduit of SmokefreeTXT eReferral would be better for clinic workflow. This change affects 
one skip pattern in the post -SmokefreeTXT eRefrral clinic staff survey, but does not affe ct the content, 
risks, or benefits associated  with that survey.  Finally, we seek permission to expand beyond primary care 
to specialty care clinics, at the request of specialty care clinics eager to implement SmokefreeTXT 
eReferral.  These administrative c hanges will not affect study risks and may help to extend the reach of 
SmokefreeTXT by [CONTACT_227713]- based treatment to help them stop 
smoking.  
 2/28/[ADDRESS_274300] to include a pi[INVESTIGATOR_227692], a text- messaging service for smokers trying to quit 
sponsored by [CONTACT_227714] , without fees.  Like 
the telephone tobacco quitline, SmokefreeTXT is an evidence -based smoking cessation support service 
that can be used to extend treatment provided by [CONTACT_227715].  We believe it is important to evaluate eReferral to this text- based service as a potential complement or alternative to 
the quitline telephone counseling service.  Fewer than 50% of those referred to the quitline accept counseling services and scheduling live calls is a challenge.  SmokefreeTXT is an aut omated program that 
pushes out quitting coaching and support messages multiple times per day that users can access 
whenever they check their phones.  In addition, SmokefreeTXT offers on -demand support regarding 
urges to smoke, smoking slips (i.e., cigarett es smoked during the quit attempt), and negative moods, in 
real- time. Although the quitline is also available for additional support, this is typi[INVESTIGATOR_227693]. As such, we expect that SmokefreeTXT may have a higher  rate of 
3 
 engagement that Quitline services and believe it is important to evaluate SmokefreeTXT independent of 
Quitline referral.  
 
As in the initial protocol, we seek to evaluate the extent to which electronic, HIPAA -compliant, EHR -
based, closed -loop refe rral for tobacco cessation support (in this case, via text messages rather than live 
phone calls) from primary care clinics can increase the number/percentag e of adult tobacco users 
receiving  evidence -based tobacco dependence treatment.  In this amendment , we seek to use  up to 
three clinics in the Gundersen healthcare system as eReferral sites in which to evaluate eRe ferral to 
SmokefreeTXT alone (without concomitant eReferral to the quitline). We  seek to evaluate the eReferral 
to SmokefreeTXT by [CONTACT_66567] u ptake rates relative to a baseline period  in 1-3 clinics  (rather than 
relative to clinics randomized to a control condition) and by [CONTACT_227716]-reported abstinence rates using deidentified data obtained from the SmokefreeTXT vendor  six weeks 
after referral.   
We would also like to note that the name [CONTACT_227750] -to-quit referral to the Quitline has changed due to a merger.  The 
system formerly known as Wheaton Franciscan is now called Ascension Wisconsin.  This change has 
been noted throughout this document.  
 Finally, we would like to add two  survey items to the post- eReferral survey completed by [CONTACT_227717] (see Appendix A) to assess how healthcare providers are 
introducing the eReferral to patients. We have found considerable heterogeneity across providers and clinics in response to eReferral and we want to assess whether there is similar heterogeneit y in the ways 
providers report introducing the Quitline and link this to rates of eReferral and Quitline service engagement across clinics (not specific providers) in our analyses of Quitline referral methods  
Research Protocol  
Closed -Loop Telephone Tobacco Quitline eReferral  
 
ABBREVIATIONS  
QL Quitline  
WTQL  Wisconsin Tobacco Quit Line  
EHR Electronic Health Record  
F2Q Paper Fax to Quit Referral to the Quitline  
eReferral  EHR-based  electronic referral to the Quitline  
UW-CTRI  University of Wisconsin Center for Tobacco Research and Intervention  
GHS  Gunders en Health System  
AW Ascension Wisconsin  Healthcare  
Epic Epic Systems Corporation  
Optum  Formerly Alere Wellbeing/Wisconsin Tobacco Quit Line Vendor  
MA Medical Assistant  
BPA Best Practice Advisory  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
CDS Clinical Decision Support  
CY Calendar Year  
 
Specific Aims:  
 
4 
 This UW -CTRI study is designed to assess whether completely electronic, EHR -based, closed -loop 
referrals for tobacco cessation (eReferral) from primary care  clinics to a state telephone tobacco quitline 
can increase the number/percentage of adult tobacco users receiving evidence -based tobacco 
dependence treatment when compared to paper -based, manual fax referrals.   
 
2/28/2017 Amendment: The specific aim  of this extension of the protocol is to evaluate the extent to 
which electronic, closed -loop eReferral to SmokefreeTXT in up to 3 primary care clinics engages patients 
who smoke in the program, retains these individuals in the 6 -week duration of the program, a nd helps 
them to quit smoking as assessed via self -report at the end of the 6 -week program.   
 
Primary Aim 1:   To evaluate the rates of referral of tobacco users visiting primary care clinics to the 
WTQL, comparing those who were referred via an EHR -based electronic referral system vs. those 
referred via a manual paper fax referral system.  Analyses will address the change in referrals from pre - 
to post -intervention and the trajectory of referral post -intervention per clinic.  
 Primary Aim 2:  To evaluate the  rates of quality referrals of tobacco users visiting primary care clinics to 
the WTQL, comparing those who were referred via an EHR -based electronic referral system vs. those 
referred via a manual paper fax referral system (quality referrals are defined as ones that result in individuals who enroll in and receive WTQL counseling and/or medication treatment services).  Analyses will address the change in referrals from pre - to post -intervention per clinic.    
 
2/28/2017 Amendment: The primary aim  of the SmokefreeTXT eReferral project is to examine uptake 
(initial enrollment), retention (continuing engagement through the end of the 6 -week  program), and 
effectiveness (in terms of abstinence 6 -weeks after the target stop -smoking date ) of eReferral to  
SmokefreeTXT among primary care patients referred by [CONTACT_227718].  
 Secondary Aim 1:  To examine variation in referral rates across clinics to test the hypothesis that the 
eReferral system will result in greater consistency  in referral in addition to higher rates of referral.  
Nonquantitative methods will be used to understand the sources of variation.    
 Secondary Aim 2: To evaluate smoking abstinence  rates of tobacco users who were referred to and 
accepted services from th e WTQL, comparing those who were referred via an EHR -based referral system 
vs. those referred via a manual paper fax referral system.  Analyses will address [ADDRESS_274301] per clinic 
rates.  
 
Secondary Aim 3: To assess c linician and staff satisfaction with the eReferral and paper F2Q systems.  
 
2/28/2017 Amendment: A secondary aim  of the  SmokefreeTXT eReferral project is to gather 
information about the process o f implementing eReferral to SmokefreeTXT in primary care clinics, 
particularly regarding clinic staff implementation of and satisfaction with the SmokefreeTXT eReferral 
system.  
  
Background:  
 The move from the current system of paper -based fax referrals ( F2Q) to telephone tobacco quitlines  to 
fully electronic EHR -based referrals (eReferrals)  is progressing at a very slow rate –  especially when 
[ADDRESS_274302] (EHR) tools such as  ePrescribing .   This 
research  is designed to compare the functionality and effectiveness of electronic versus paper -based 
faxed referrals of outpatients to a telephone tobacco quitline.  
 
The Paper  Fax-to-Quit  Tobacco Quitline Referral System  
A paper Fax -to-Quit (F2Q) program for the  Wisconsin Tobacco Quit Line  (WTQL ) was developed in 2003 
by [CONTACT_77504] -CTRI as a mechanism to provide evidence -based tobacco cessation treatment  to clinic and 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_20889]. This system was developed in response to health system requests to more efficiently 
link their patients to the WTQL  (see Figure 1 for F2Q workflow description) .  Once a healthcare system 
request s implementation of a F 2Q program , UW-CTRI Outreach staff travel to the clinic or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_227694] (e.g., clinic -specific F2Q referral form  – 
Figure 2 ).  Utilizing F2Q is relatively simple but requires  a number of steps.  First, staff have  to query 
patients reg arding their tobacco use status.  Staff then describe WTQL services (tobacco cessation 
counseling and nicotine replacement therapy) to the identified tobacco user and ask if the patient is  
interested in receiving such services.  If the patient agrees  and p rovide s written permission, staff then 
manually complete a paper F 2Q form that includes  contact [CONTACT_227719].  The form i s then manually faxed by a clinic staff person to the WTQL ; the WTQL then  
attempts to co ntact the patient within 48 hours and deliver WTQL treatment services.  Depending on 
the clinic, different staff members assume responsibility for these different tasks.  Finally, the WTQL 
faxe s back to the referring clinic/ provider (not to the patient’s c hart) a form describing the outcome of 
the referral, including whether their patient was reached, if s/he agreed to receive services, and which services were provided.  Clinics are encouraged to enter such QL treatment information into the 
patient’s EHR (v ia scanning or manually), but few clinics report doing so.  Since 2003, approximately 
1,000 healthcare settings (clinics, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600]) in Wisconsin have implemented a F2Q  program, with 221 
active (referred at least one patient to the WTQL) in 2014  (many clinics that implement F2Q don’t 
continue to use it, in part due to the cumbersome operational requirements).   In 2014, these 221 active 
sites referred a total of 2,42 0 patients to the WTQL, averaging 11 referrals per clinic per year (WTQL 
data). Of the patients fax referred, 41% enrolled in WTQL services . 
 
2/28/2017 Amendment : No such fax -to-quit referral system currently exists for SmokefreeTXT, although 
information about the service is provided via handouts or after- visit summaries in some clinic s.  Indeed, 
there is no systematic referral mechanism to SmokefreeTXT in the clinics under study or those that might disseminate eReferral to SmokefreeTXT, should it be found to be effective. As such, there is a need for pi[INVESTIGATOR_227695] a referral process for SmokefreeTXT. In 
light of the challenges and low enrollment rates observed with a paper- based process in the fax -to-quit 
program for referral to the Quitline, we are electing to use EHR technology to implement an e Referral 
process for SmokefreeTXT.  
 
The eReferral Quitline Referral System  
In an effort to take advantage of the recent wide  scale implementation of electronic health record (EHR) 
technology in healthcare settings in  Wisconsin and nationwide, UW -CTRI, in collaboration with Epic 
Systems Corporation (Epic), health  systems, and the Wisconsin Tobacco Quitline vendor ( Optum ) 
developed a new electronic quitline referral system  (eReferral)  (see Figure 3 for eReferral workflow 
description) . This new system is desig ned to more efficiently and effectively refer patients who smoke 
and visit a healthcare facility to the WTQL . Specifically , during every  patient visit , the EHR already 
prompts the clinic Medical Assistant (MA) or Roomer (the clinic staff person who typi[INVESTIGATOR_227696], e.g., current medications, vital signs, allergies)  to inquire about tobacco use as p art of 
[ADDRESS_274303] E HR workflow –  a near- universal  process as a result of the Federal meaningful use of EHRs 
incentive program and other regulatory requirements. The MA’s documentation of tobacco use 
activates a “Best Practice Advisory” (“BPA” -  an Epic EHR -tool to guide evidence -based clinical 
interventions) that electronically prompts the clinician to offer tobacco quitline services (see Figure s 3 
and 4 ).  
 
The BPA gives the clinician the choice of selecting a WTQL referral order or documenting t hat the patient 
declined a referral to the WTQL.  If the patient indicates an interest in receiving WTQL services, the 
clinician “accepts” the BPA  which takes him/her to the eReferral order , which is automatically populated 
with the patient’s name [CONTACT_227751], and presents options for the clinician to indicate 
optimal times  for the  WTQL to call the  patient .  The eReferral is then sent  to Optum , the WTQL vendor  
(Figure 4), in real- time when the provider clicks “Place Order. ”   The exchange of patient information in 
both directions (closed -loop) between the healthcare system and the WTQL is done via Health Level 7  
version 2 (HL7v2) standard messaging. The data sent to the WTQL will be in a general outgoing order 
message (ORM  in HL7v2 ), and the W TQL will return an unsolicited observation message (ORU in HL7v2 ) 
and a pharmacy encoded order (RDE  in HL7v2 ). 
 
Once the WTQL receives an eReferral, they attempt to  contact [CONTACT_227720] .  Once the WTQL completes 
treatment or exhausts the five attempts to reach the patient, the  quitline electronically send s the WTQL  
treatment data back to the patient’ s EHR, which automatically populates the patient’s EHR in two places 
– data on patient contact, counseling provided, and quit date are saved as a “referral outcome note” 
(Figure 5), while provision of over -the-counter nicotine replacement medication (inclu ding the 
medication start -and end-dates based on the quit date) is documented in the patient’s medication list 
(Figure 5). 
 2/28/2017 Amendment: The workflow for eReferral to SmokefreeTXT will mimic that of eReferral to the 
Quitline almost exactly. Medical Assistants or Roomers will be responsible for assessing smoking status 
and recording this in the EHR, in accordance with current clinic practices and standards of care. As w ith 
the Quitline eReferral, documentation of current smoking status for a patient will activate a BPA that will alert the clinic staff  to the smoking status of the patient and will prompt the clinic staff person  to 
offer referral to SmokefreeTXT to the patient.  Clinic staff will record in the BPA whether the patient 
accepted referral or declined the service.  If the patient accepts, that clinic staff member will also need to 
record a target stop smoking day in the next 30 days . If the patient accepts the service,  a SmokefreeTXT 
eReferral order will be populated and queued for clinician review and confirmation.  SmokefreeTXT eReferral orders placed by [CONTACT_227721], the vendor that implements 
SmokefreeTXT, in real -time,  using Health Level 7 Version 2 general outgoing order message (ORM  in 
HL7v2) .  Six weeks after the target stop -smoking date, ICF International will send an unsolicited results  
message (ORU in HLv2) that will go to the patient’s providers EHR inbo x and the patient’s record.  
Because SmokefreeTXT does not provide medications to users, it will not be necessary to update the patient’s medication list as it was for eReferral to the Quitline.  Clinic  staff will be instructed to offer 
other tobacco de pendence treatments in accordance with best practices, as they see fit. This means that 
clinic staff may refer some patients to the Quitline (via fax, handout, or both), prescribe stop -smoking 
medications, refer patients to an in -clinic or in -system specialist, and/or provide brief counseling. This is 
in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_227697], which is to evaluate eReferral to external resources as treatment extenders rather than treatment substitutes.  
 
Methods:  
7 
  
Methods Overview: Following UW Institutional Review Board ( IRB) approval, t he study will take place in 
primary care clinics ( general internal medicine/family practice ) that are part of Ascension Wisconsin  
Healthcare  (AW) and Gunders en Health System (GHS).  Each is an integrated h ealthca re delivery s ystem  
located  in southeastern  Wisconsin (AW), and western Wisconsin,  northeastern Iowa and southeastern 
Minnesota  (GHS) respectively.   AW includes approximately 5 0 primary care clinics with over one  million 
outpatient visits annually.  GHS inc ludes 27 primary care clinics with over one million outpatient visits 
annually.  Currently, some  of these primary care clinics offer paper F2Q  referrals to the WTQL for 
patients who use tobacco  and want to quit . The target population for the study will comprise  adult (18 
and older) patients who use tobacco , want to quit,  and seek primary care clinical services during the 
study period.  In consultation with each  system , about [ADDRESS_274304] the new eReferral software. The remaining clinics, about 12 
clinics from each  system, will be randomized to the two study conditions (see below).  
 
2/28/2017 Amendment: Following IRB approval of this amendment, the study will take place in u p to 3 
clinics in the Gundersen Health System.  As in the existing protocol, the target population will be adult 
(age 18 and older) patients served at these clinics during the study period who smo ke combustible 
cigarettes and are willing to set a target stop -smoking date in the period required by [CONTACT_227722] 
(in this case, the quit date must be within 30 days).   There will be no control clinics and no 
randomization of clinics to condition in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_16080].  
 
I. Methods for Evaluating the eReferral Mechanism  
 
The study will include three phases  (see Table 1):   
 
1) The Preparation Phase ( 3 months) :  24 clinics (12 clinics/system)  are to participate in the 
randomized clinic al trial. Clinics will meet inclusion criteria (see below) , and generate baseline 
rates of manual paper fax referral of adult tobacco users  to the WTQL . These will be calculated 
for the prior 6 -12 months, and the 24 clinics that will participate in the clinical trial will be 
randomized  to two different WTQL referral mechanisms  (twelve to use the manual F2Q 
mechanism , and twelve to transition to the eReferral mechanism ).  Also during this phase, the 
eReferral procedures and technology  will be tested in one clinic within each system   for one to 
three months . The technology will be adapted as needed.   These pi[INVESTIGATOR_227698].   
 
2) The Study Implementation Phase  (12 months):  Staff in all 2 4 clinics will receive a baseline 30 
minute in -person training, regarding either the paper o r electronic referral to the WTQL  (based 
on their randomization) .  While some  of the clinics randomized to the paper referral system will 
have already received training  on this referral mechanism at some time in t he past ( when the 
system was implemented  in that clinic  or refreshed ), we will provide a refresher training on F2Q 
referral for all clinics  in this condition  consisting of about the same amount of time as used in  
the eReferral training .  An UW-CTRI Outreach Specialist will lead all trainings and a member of 
the research team will also be present.  All Medical Assistants, Nurses, Clinician Providers (physician s, nurse practitioner s, and physician assistants ), and Clinic Managers  will be asked  to 
attend the training. For any staff member who miss es the initial training, a second training will 
be scheduled  and data collected on the proportion of all staff who attended either of the 
trainings .   
 
[ADDRESS_274305] will provide additio nal support to all 24 participating clinics  to 
encourage referrals to the WTQL  modeled on typi[INVESTIGATOR_227699] .   
Specifically, this periodic support  will include:  1) a  one-week post- intervention  launch , 
telephone or email check -in by [CONTACT_77504] -CTRI staff with both the Clinic Manager and the Physician 
Leader  of each clinic , focusing on  early  challenges and problem solving as well as emphasizing 
the importance of systematically identifying tobacco users and referring (either via F2 Q or 
eReferral) all appropriate patients to the tobacco quitline (“quality contacts”), 2)  Monthly 
performance feedback  will be shared with all staff and will include rates of F2Q  or eReferrals 
from each clinic as well as data on the quality of the referral - the proportion of referrals that 
result in tobacco users who engage in quitline counseling (“quality contacts”).   Specific 
performance feedback on the number of referrals and the  number who accepted service will be 
provided for the clinic as a whole.  Finally, 3) c linic staff will be provided with e -mail and 
telephone access to UW -CTRI staff who will be available to respond to questions or concerns 
about the F2Q  or eReferral program .   
 
At about one  month  after the launch of the intervention, all clinics will receive a refresher 
training (about 20 min) based on the ir randomized  condition (F2Q  vs. eRe ferral) .  Attempts will 
be made to pi[INVESTIGATOR_74723] -back all trainings onto existing staff meetings . In total, rates of referral to the 
WTQL from all [ADDRESS_274306] we 
will compare the number and quality of quitline referrals between the six clinics randomized to 
the F2Q system and the six randomized to the e -Referral mechanism for receipt of WTQL 
treatment services.   
 2/28/2017 Amendment: This pi[INVESTIGATOR_227700] 
1-3 clinics (depending on clinic size, patient flow, and smoking prevalence in the clinics) over [ADDRESS_274307] , as needed.  
  
1) The Evaluation Phase  (6 months): D ata will be analyzed, findings will be shared with the health 
system, and at least one manuscript describing the findings will be prepared  and submitted for 
publication .  2/28/2017 Amendment: In the 2 -4 month Evaluation Phase for t he Smoke freeTXT 
eReferral pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], data will be analyzed and results disseminated to the healthcare system, ICF 
International, and a peer -reviewed academic journal.  
 
 
9 
  
 
 
Table 1. Study Timetable  
Preparation ( 3 months)  Implementation ( 12 months)  Evaluation ( 6 months)  
Clinic Selection  
Baseline Data Collection  (a 12 month  
look -back ) 
Clinic Randomization  Staff Training in All Clinics  at 
baseline and one month . 
Data collection and mont hly 
Performance Feedback in all 24 
Clinics (both Paper F2Q and 
eReferral Clinics)  Data Analysis  
Manuscript preparation  
Health  system Feedback  
and Dissemination  
 Table 1A. 2/28/2017
 Amendment Pi[INVESTIGATOR_227701] ( 2-4 months)  Implementation ( 6-9 months)  Evaluation ( 2-4 months)  
Clinic Selection  
Baseline staff survey  Staff Training in 1-3 Clinics  at 
baseline and one month.  
Data collection and monthly 
Performance Feedback in all clinics  Data Analysis  
Manuscript preparation  
Health system Feedback  
and Dissemination  
 
Clinic Eligibility Requirements : The following specific inclusion criteria will be used to establish clinic 
eligibility : the presence of discrete primary care clinical services within the clinic (defined as general 
internal medicine or family medicine clinical services); at least three primary care clinician providers in 
the clinic (physicians or nurse practitio ners/physician assistants who see patients independently of a 
physician); a total primary care clinical volume of at least 60  patients each week ; an existing EHR 
requirement for staff to document tobacco use status including smoking status on all adult pat ients 
visiting the clinic at every visit; a capacity to enumerate patient visit information including adult patients/month and adult tobacco users/month by [CONTACT_227723]; a willingness to participate in 
the proposed research; a lead physician  or a clinic manager o n site who agree s to serve as a clinic 
champi[INVESTIGATOR_227702]; and,  a willingness to accept random assignment to either of the two 
experimental conditions.     
 2/28/[ADDRESS_274308] be able to share information about the flow of adult tobacco using patients (i.e., a denominator for analyses of eReferral rates) seen in the clinic in each of the [ADDRESS_274309] agree to participate in this quality assurance evaluation activity. 
Clinics will not be required to agree to randomization, as that is not part of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].   
 Clinic Selection:  Once WF, GHS, and UW -CTRI identify eligible  clinics based on inclusion criteria from the  
potential clinics in the  each system, UW -CTRI staff (Study PI [CONTACT_17827] [Fiore] and one other staff 
person) will meet with both the physician leader and clinic manager.  During this brief meeting, inclusion 
criteria will be confirmed and the study will be described in detail including the two randomization arms  
and the approximate date of initiation of the intervention .  These will continue until [ADDRESS_274310] been identified and agree to participate.     
 
10 
 2/28/2017 Amendment: As in the existing protocol, Study PI [INVESTIGATOR_227703] 1 -3 clinics mee ting the eligibility criteria 
specified above. Inclusion criteria in terms of provider numbers and patient flow will be confirmed and 
the study timeline, training and assessment activities, and eReferral workflow will be discussed in detail.    
 Baseline D ata Collection:   Prior to initiating the Intervention Phase of the study, an EHR -based look -back 
process will be used to collect 12 months of baseline data from the selected clinics that had previously 
used F2Q.  These 12 months of clinic ascertainment baseline data will include : information on adult 
patients and adult tobacco users  seen in the clinic;  rates of quitline referrals via existing F2Q program s; 
and, rates of quitline engagement for those fax -referred for services ( the rate of “ quality referrals” ).  
Clinic staff will not be informed that baseline data will be collected prior to the start of the intervention 
in an effort to minimize changes in clinician WTQL referral behavior prior to the intervention.  
 
2/28/[ADDRESS_274311] this to be 
near zero in clinics and because there is no clearly identified field in which such a referral would be recorded.  
 Clinic Randomization: Once each of th e 2 sets of 12  clinics are identified and agree to participate, they  
will be stratified within each  health system and randomized into the two study conditions using Urn 
randomization
1 (NOTE: one clinic from each system will serve as an  eReferral pi[INVESTIGATOR_227704]) .  In this methodology, the project MATCH randomization beta program will be 
used to equate the two clinic groups with respect to t hree  factors: approximate n umber of primary care 
providers, approxim ate smoking  prevalence  among st the adult patients seen during the one -year  
baseline period , and approximate rate of F2Q referral for all tobacco users  seen during the baseline 
period.  Each of the 24  identified clinics will be randomized into one of the following two intervention 
conditions: a) six per health system to continue with the existing F2Q WTQL r eferral system (Fax to Quit)  
and b) s ix per health system to transition to an EHR -based WTQL r eferral system (eReferral)  
 2/28/20 17 Amendment. The 1 -3 clin ics for pi[INVESTIGATOR_227705]; all will receive access to the EHR eReferral tools for 6 -9 months during the study.  
 
Implementation Phase :  The following activities (with associated key outcomes) will take place over the 
twelve months of the Imple mentation Phase in eac h of the two study conditions (Table 2 ):   
Table 2. Intervention Activities and Outcomes  
Intervention  Activities  Key Outcomes  
Fax Referral – Fax to Quit  
Condition  
(12 clinics)  
 eReferral  Condition  
(12 clinics)  
 
NOTE:  apart from their different referral mechanisms, 
the intervention training,  On site Baseline training 
(30 minutes) for all 
clinical staff describing 
the Wisconsin Tobacco 
Quitline  (WTQL)  and its 
services, which tobacco 
users are appropriate 
for a WTQL  referral, and 
workflow for use of that 
clinic’s condition - 
 
 Monthly total of adult 
patient visit s to the 
clinic as well as number 
and proportion of those 
adults who report on 
that clinic visit that they 
are current tobacco 
users  
11 
 feedback, and other activities 
will be identical for the two 
intervention conditions  specific WTQL referral 
mechan ism (either F2Q 
or eReferral)  
 One week post-
intervention launch 
meeting with clinic 
manager and physician 
champi[INVESTIGATOR_227706]  
 Monthly aggregate 
reports sent to clinic 
contact [CONTACT_227724]; and 
number of patients 
referred who engaged 
in WTQL services  
 Referral r efresher 
trainings at one month   
 Percentage and n umber 
of patients who smoked 
referred to the WTQL  
 
 Number of referred 
patients who engage in 
tobacco telephone 
quitline services  
 
 Baseline and [ADDRESS_274312] -intervention s taff 
satisfaction regarding 
the WTQL referral  
 
 [ADDRESS_274313] -quitline 
registration date  quit 
rate 
 Table 2A. 2/28/2017  Amendment. Intervention Activities and Outcomes  
Intervention  Activities  Key Outcomes  
eReferral Condition  
(1-3 clinics)  
 NOTE:  providers in all clinics will be encouraged to continue 
to address tobacco use with all 
patients in accordance with best 
practices. The study 
intervention will be to turn on an EHR eReferral tool to conne ct adult patients who 
smoke and who want to quit in the next 30 days  to a fee -free 
text- message support program, 
SmokefreeTXT   On site Baseline training 
(30 minutes) for all 
clinical staff describing 
SmokefreeTXT services, 
which tobacco users are 
appropriat e for a 
SmokefreeTXT referral, 
and eReferral workflow  
 One week post-
intervention launch 
meeting  or call with 
clinic manager and 
physician champi[INVESTIGATOR_227707]  
 Monthly aggregate 
reports sent to clinic 
contact [CONTACT_227725]; and number of 
patients referred who 
engaged in  Monthly total of adult 
patient visits to the 
clinic as well as number 
and propo rtion of those 
adults who report on 
that clinic visit that they 
are current tobacco 
users   
 Percentage and n umber 
of patients who smoked  
and had text -capable 
phones  referred to 
SmokefreeTXT  
 Number of referred 
patients who enroll in 
SmokefreeTXT  
 Baseline and  6-[ADDRESS_274314] -intervention staff 
satisfaction regarding 
SmokefreeTXT eR eferral  
 [ADDRESS_274315] -target quit  
date quit rate  
12 
 SmokefreeTXT services  
 eReferral refresher 
trainings at one month  
 
Baseline Training Activities: The following information will be conve yed to all staff during the 30 minute 
baseline training.  Apart from details regarding use of the F2Q  vs the eReferral WTQL referral process , all 
training activities will be identical for the two intervention conditions:  
• Providing an overview of the tobacco telephone cessation services – the WTQL  
• Demonstrating how the F2Q or eReferral WTQL referral mechanism can be integrated 
into clinic workflow  
• Emphasizing that the WTQL is a supplement to, and not a substitute for, their clinical 
tobacco cessation intervention  
• Providing a step -by-step approach to using F 2Q or eReferral with patients  including the 
use of the necessary technology and EHR documentation  
• Providing instructions on how to obtain patient  informed consent for either F2Q or 
eReferra l 
• Describing which adult patients will be good candidates for a referral for WTQL services  
(i.e., “a quality referral”)  
• Offering resource materials and hand -outs  to promote the WTQL  
• For the clinic manager only, a telephone number and e -mail address to contact [CONTACT_227726] o f F2Q or eReferral at 
their site.   
 
2/28/2017 Amendment. As in the existing protocol for Quitline referral, SmokefreeTXT pre -launch 
training will provide an overview of the SmokefreeTXT program  as a treatment extender (not substitute)  
and will review the SmokefreeTXT eReferral workflow  and provide step -by-step guidance in the 
eReferral process, including how to assess readiness to quit and obtain patient consent.  At the training, 
the clinic manager and identified clinic champi[INVESTIGATOR_2394] (if d ifferent from the clinic manager) will be given a 
study number and e -mail address for support and assistance regarding SmokefreeTXT eReferral.  
 
Additional Training provided at Baseline Training for Clinic Managers  including Implementation 
Manual :  As part of the [ADDRESS_274316] implemented this WTQL referral option ( “Fax to Quit Manual: A Step -by-Step Guid e for 
Healthcare Organizations” ).  That existing F2Q manual will be adapted for the eReferral condition clinics .  
The manual is designed to be a self- guided implementation tool for health system s for refer ring patients 
who use tobacco to the WTQL.  The manual includes all required forms including for the F2Q condition a 
specific F2Q enrollment form personalized to the clinic that  must be faxed to the quitline in order to link 
an interested patient to the W TQL (Figure 2) for the F2Q sites .  For the eReferral condition, there will be 
an e ssentially identical EHR –based form for WTQL referrals.   Also i ncluded in the manual is a “ Fax to 
Quit Flow Chart ” (Figure 1 ).  All 24 clinic sites (fax and EHR-based  referral clinics ) will be urged to follow 
this flow chart (title will be adapted for eReferral condition) as they integrate tobacco quitline referral 
into the regular workflow of patie nt care.  Effective use of the WTQL referral program s (both F2Q and 
eReferral) will be guided via this flowchart and requires two key components:  a) a few simple systems -
level changes in clinic operations to ensure that the tobacco quitline  option is cons istently offered to 
13 
 tobacco users , and, b) a commitment by [CONTACT_227727] .    
 
2/28/[ADDRESS_274317] the nature of the SmokefreeTXT 
program and the specific workflow for eReferral to this texting service.  
 
In terms of the specific flow chart steps (Figure 1), the foundation of the program  is a clinic -wide system 
to assess tobacco use status as a regular part of the vital signs ascertainment, typi[INVESTIGATOR_227708] (MA) or other clinic staff who “rooms” the patient (the person who brings the patient fro m the waiting room to the examination room).  Once the patient is brought to 
the examination room, the MA typi[INVESTIGATOR_227709] (blood pressure, pulse, temperature, and respi[INVESTIGATOR_697]) .  With the advent of the Federal Meaningfu l Use EHR Incentive 
Program, nearly all EHR vendors, and healthcare systems also collect and document tobacco use  status  
on each patient . At this point, workflow processes diverge based on whether the clinic was randomized 
to the F2Q or the eReferral condi tion.  
 2/28/[ADDRESS_274318], foundational step is for “ Roomers” who assess vital signs to assess and 
record smoking status in the EHR . Only clinics in which this is already standard protocol will be eligible 
for this pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. As such, this step in the workflow will reflect current practice rather than a change in the clinics to be studied.  
 Tobacco User Referral in F2Q condition: If a patient is identified as a current tobacco user, the MA will 
leave  a clinic-specific (to allow for ascertainment of clinic -specific referral rates) F2Q  form (Figure 2) in 
the exam room  to prompt the clinician to address the topic.  Importantly, o nce t obacco use status is 
documented, the clinician will be asked to address tobacco dependence only with clinic patients who 
use tobacco  - about 17% (based upon the current smoking prevalence rate among adults in Wisconsin ). 
The F2Q protocol then requires the clinician to advise each tobacco user to quit and assess the patient’s 
willingness to quit within the next [ADDRESS_274319] or brochure  and moti vational counseling 
to consider quitting in the future .  If the patient expresses a willingness to try to quit over the next 30 
days, the clinician recommends a prescription for an FDA -approved cessation medication and offers 
telephone counseling through t he W TQL.  If the tobacco user is willing to accept counseling from the 
quitline s/he is asked to sign the simple F2Q form at the end of the clinic visit, consenting to the referral 
and the exchange of information, providing two telephone numbers and best t imes to call.   The form is 
then passed to the MA (part of the visit closure workflow procedures) who then faxes the form to the 
WTQL .  The WTQL then make s at least five attempts to proactively contact [CONTACT_227728] .  If a successful contact [CONTACT_227729], evidence- based counseling and over -the-counter nicotine replacement medication is  then 
provided to the patient (via the telephone and via a mailing with additional self- help q uitting materials).  
Finally, the WTQL faxes back to the clinician the outcome of the telephone contact.   
 The F2Q program is designed to be of minimal burden to the clinic and staff, requiring about 30 seconds 
of time by [CONTACT_227730],  and about two to three minutes of clinician time for the 
approximately 17% of adult patients who use tobacco .  Our experience in Wisconsin has demonstrated 
that clinics are willing to adopt the program because it is viewed as a modest  time commitment and a 
free, value -added service for  their patients.   
14 
  
The F 2Q form (Figure 2) is an essential document for the successful use of F2Q .  This form provides key 
information on both the patient and the clinician so that the quitline can proac tively contact [CONTACT_227731].  This WTQL 
feedback for each referred patient is faxed back to the patient’s clinic.  As shown on Figure 2, F2Q is 
intended for use only wit h tobacco users who indicate they want to make a quit attempt within the next 
30 days.  This criterion is an effort to refer “quality contacts”  - tobacco users interested in quitline 
counseling.   
 In addition to patient -specific information (primary and s econdary telephone number, language 
preference, type of tobacco used, best time of the day to call, and consent to receive a call from the quitline and share follow -up information with clinician), the F2Q  form includes specific contact 
[CONTACT_176543]’s clinician.  The purpose of this contact [CONTACT_227732], and which service options 
the quitline provided to the tobacco user ( self- help  materials, over the counter nicotine replacement 
therapy , referral to a local cessation program, enrollment in the quitline counseling, readiness to quit,  
and quit date ).  Finally, F2Q  forms are personalized to each clinic and  to each clinician so the source of 
each referral can be adequately t racked and assigned to the appropriate source of the referral.   
 
2/28/2017 Amendment.  There is no fax- to-quit enrollment mechanism for SmokefreeTXT.  
 
Tobacco User Referral in eReferral Condition: The EHR -based, fully electron ic bi-directional referral 
(eReferral) condition involves all of the procedures and resources used in the F2Q  condition above.  In 
addition, the following workflow will be followed for the eReferral clinic site (Figure 3).  Once the MA has 
identified a patient as a tobacco user, t he EHR will be programmed to prompt the WTQL eReferral Best 
Practice Advisory (BPA) . A BPA is an EHR -based functionality that pro mpts clinical interventions and 
provides clinical decision support (C DS) once certain clinical conditions have been met (in this instance, 
upon a patient being identified as a current tobacco user, the BPA prompt appears, driving the clinical 
staff to click on it and consider  the recommended clinical activities prior to the  completion of that clinic 
visit).  In this instance, the eReferral manual will inform clinic staff of a workflow modification requiring 
that, in response to a WTQL eReferral BPA, t he MD, NP, or PA should assess the patient’s  willingness to 
quit, and for t hose willing, should discuss potential cessation medications, and offer the patient a 
referral to the WTQL for more in -depth support/counseling.  If the patient is interested in support from 
the WTQL , the clinician records in the EHR the patient’s verbal c onsent for the referral and exchange of 
information  (Yes/No box) , selects the best time for the quitline to call the patient (drop -down menu) .  
Upon completion of these minimal EHR actions , the clinician then plac es “the order ”, an electronic 
request to th e WTQL to contact [CONTACT_227733].  This order is electronically 
transmit ted to the WTQL and includes  patient demographic information so that the quitline can contact 
[CONTACT_102].   As with F2Q, t he quitline will make five attem pts to contact [CONTACT_102].  Once the WTQL 
completes treatment or exhausts the call attempts, they electronically send the eReferral service data 
back to the patient’s EHR, which automatically populates the patient’s EHR in two places – data on 
patient contact, counseling provided, and quit date are saved as a “referral outcome note” (Figure 5 ), 
while provision of over -the counter nicotine repl acement medication mailed to the patient (including 
the medication start and end dates based on the quit date) is documented in patient’s EHR as part of the 
patient’s medication list (Figure 5 ). 
 
2/28/2017 Amendment. As with eReferral to the telephone Quitline, eReferral to SmokefreeTXT will be 
a fully electronic, “closed -loop” referral in which the outcome of the referral is automatically fed back 
15 
 into the patient’s EHR 6 weeks after the target stop -smoking date. When a “ Roomer” documents that a 
patient is  currently a smoker, this will cue a Best Practice Advisory (BPA) to appear for clinic staff during 
the encounter . This BPA will guide clinic staff in the offer of SmokefreeTXT and allow them to document 
the patient response (accepta nce or decline). If a patient consents to setting a quit day in the next [ADDRESS_274320] an 
order for the text- capable phone to receive SmokefreeTXT messages. Smok efreeTXT will send terms of 
use (including a notice that text messaging fee rates may apply) and privacy practice information to the 
identified phone upon receipt of the eReferral. Patients have the option to stop receiving SmokefreeTXT 
messages at any tim e by [CONTACT_227734] “STOP” to SmokefreeTXT.  Text messages may use patient cell -phone 
service plan minutes. Patients will be advised of this by [CONTACT_227735].  Patient records in the EHR will be automatically update with the result of the eReferral 6 weeks after the target stop -
smoking date (set at enrollment). This may be up to [ADDRESS_274321]- referral (as the target stop -smoking 
date could be set up to 30 days  after eReferral) and will indicate whether the patient stayed enrolled, 
dropped out ( by [CONTACT_227734] “STOP”), and reported any smoking in the past [ADDRESS_274322] in the EHR.  
 
II. Methods to address Secondary Aim 3: To assess clinician and staff satisfaction with the 
eReferral and paper F2Q systems.  
 
In addition to our systematic testing of the impact of eReferral relative to F2Q in terms of rates of smokers to the WTQL  as well as  cessation rates  of those enrolling in WTQL services , we will conduct 
brief pre - and post -electronic questionnaire survey s of all clinic staff regarding their experience with the 
two methods of referring patients who smoke to the WTQL.  The pre- survey will b e sent electronically to 
all staff members during the three -month  Preparation Phase  and the post -survey will be sent at six 
months post -initiation of the study in each clinic.  Staff to be surveyed include the Medical Assistants, 
nurses, clinic manager,  and provider staff (physicians, nur se practitioners, and physician  assistants). The 
surveys will be designated by [CONTACT_227736].  The survey will be designed 
to target constructs (both “facilitators of” and “obstacles to” ad option of EHR and workflow 
enhancements) that are implicated by [CONTACT_227737]:  
• Task/job training  and understanding 
• Personal attitudes about smoking  
• Appropriateness of activity for role  
• Perceived importance to  patient and to clinic  
• Self-efficacy for task  
• Feeling of team membership  
Finally, open -ended items on the survey will help ensure that information is gathered on unanticipated 
or unusual issues that affect referring patients to the Wisconsin Tobacco Quit L ine.  These surveys are 
similar to those used extensively in our earlier research on smoking intervention in clinic settings.  They were designed to meet high standards with regards to item writing and psychometrics (e.g., Devellis, 2012).  The survey to be used for this pre - and post -survey is provided as Appendix A.   
 2/28/[ADDRESS_274323] no such history with SmokefreeTXT or other text-
message -suppor t programs for smoking cessation.  
 
9/19/2019.  The items in the survey have not been changed, but items that previously only applied to 
clinicians now apply to rooming staff who will make the SmokefreeTXT referral offer to patients.  
 
Dependent Variables fo r Intervention Phase: Acquisition & Appraisal:  The tobacco quitline vendor 
(Optum ) will derive summary data on an ongoing basis from both the F 2Q and the EHR -based referrals 
with patient specific identifiers removed and provide such summary data to study s taff. These summary 
data forms will allow us to compute the following monthly outcomes linked to clinic:  (1) number of referrals to the quitline, (2) number of successful WTQL contacts with patients, and (3) number of 
quality WTQL contacts  with the patien t (where the patient enrolls in and receives tobacco quitline 
services).  This quitline information will supplement information provided by [CONTACT_3652]’s EHR system 
(both F2Q and eReferral clinics have identical Epic EHR systems) That is, the number of quitline referrals 
can be divided by [CONTACT_227738]/month to compute a clinic smoker referral rate. Thus, 
these outcomes will address how many patient  tobacco users  are referred  to the quitline each month 
(via the fax or EHR -based referral mechanism), the number of these referred patients whom the quitline 
successfully contacts/month, and the number of these patients who enroll in a quitline coun seling 
program/month (quality contacts). We can also determine the proportion of quality contacts by [CONTACT_227739].  These measures will also be computed on a per 
month basis by  [CONTACT_227740] o utcomes as contacts/month, quality contacts/month, and 
referrals/month.   
 
2/28/2017 Amendment. For evaluation of eReferral to SmokefreeTXT, dependent variables will parallel 
those in the existing protocol for Quitline eReferral.  The SmokefreeTXT vendor (I CF International) will 
send summary data regarding the number of eReferrals received and the number of patients engaged 
by [CONTACT_227741].  These summary data will indicate how many eReferrals 
were received, how many were succes sfully enrolled in the program (i.e., who had a working number), 
how many of those enrolled dropped out by [CONTACT_227742], and, finally, how many texted responses indicating no smoking vs. any smoking in the last [ADDRESS_274324] -target -quit date. 
Aggregate EHR data will be pulled  from the health system  at the end of the study to ensure that the 
number of eReferrals received by [CONTACT_227743], as recorded in the EHR. These EHR reports will also indicate the total number of patients seen, the total 
number of visits completed, the total number of patients who smoke seen, and the total number of 
visits completed by [CONTACT_227744],  as 
well. This will be used to determine the rates of referral, engagement, and retention in SmokefreeTXT.  
 UW-CTRI will evaluate the principal dependent measures on the basis of rate  of tobacco users referred 
to the WTQL/ month, showing changes from the ba seline to the post- intervention periods on the basis of 
percentage of tobacco user referral or contact [CONTACT_41900]/ tobacco user  flow at each clinic.  The public health 
importance of this research will be seen if the EHR -based program results in rate s of referrals and 
contacts (and quality  referrals and  contacts)  that are higher, more uniform, and more sustained across 
time, than are generated by [CONTACT_941] F2Q method .  It is possible that changes in contact [CONTACT_227745] -intervention  period may reflect correlated secular changes or simply the 
[ADDRESS_274325] the two conditions.  
 
For both the F2Q  and eReferral systems, data acquisition to establish WTQL referral rates will be derived 
from  monthly  reports to UW -CTRI from the WTQL.  Referral rates are based on a denominator reflecting 
the number of adult tobacco users  seen in the study clinics per month during the study  time periods; 
this will be  obtained for both referral systems by [CONTACT_227746].   Such data will be 
available for both the baseline and post -intervention periods.  Thus, the method and presumably the 
reliability of the data acquisition process will be equivalent across the two study arms.  
 In order to obtain data for the secondary analysis of smoking abstinence among referred participants, 
the study will use standard WTQL follow -up evaluation procedures.  The standard procedure of the 
WTQL is to obtain  consent to conduct follow  up as part of each registration process.  The tobacco 
quitline routinely con ducts follow up evaluations  of quitline users for QI and self- evaluation purposes 
four months post registration .   Per the study team’s request, aggr egat e follow -up data  of four -month 7-
day point -prevalence self-reported smoking status, quitting intentions, and other tobacco and tobacco 
cessation medication use on up to fifty patients completing the follow- up per clinic will be provide d to 
study staff .  Cessation rates will be  projected  separately by [CONTACT_227747], those referred  for quitline services, and those  who enrol l in WTQL following referral f or both the 
paper faxed -based and EHR -based referral systems .  Only pa tients who register for and agree to be 
followed up by [CONTACT_227748].   
 
2/28/[ADDRESS_274326] to the existing protocol evaluating eReferral to the Quitline, there will be no 
comparison condition in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Analyses will focus on the rate of uptake (eReferrals), drop out during the [ADDRESS_274327] practice in the SmokefreeTXT program , along with assessment of 
smoking status, reset quit dates, craving, mood, and slips throughout the program. As such, there are not additional assessments proposed for the research study; all are standard parts of the S mokefreeTXT 
program.  Data shared for eReferral evaluation purposes will be deidentified and/or aggregated.  
 
Hypotheses & Analytic Plan for Intervention Phase :  Specific quantitative hypotheses to be tested are-  
 
o The fax referral training  and the EHR -based referral training and  intervention  will both 
increase tobacco user  quitline referrals and contacts, and quality referrals and contacts, 
during the post -intervention period relative to the baseline period.  This pattern will be seen  
when  examining monthly  and aggregate  /clinic data.  
o The EHR -based referral intervention will be more effective than the fax referral intervention 
in increasing tobacco user  quitline referrals and contacts, and quality referrals and contacts, 
in the post -intervention period relative to the baseline period.  This superiority will be seen 
in /clinic data.   Thus, while both interventions will increase contacts relative to baseline, the 
EHR-based referral will be especially effective in this regard.  
 
18 
 Note that this s econd hypothesis implies the presence of an interaction between intervention condition 
and the two experimental periods (baseline and post -intervention).  
 
o The EHR -based referral intervention process will increase smoking cessation outcomes  more 
than does  the fax referral mechanisms  during the post -intervention phase .  This will be seen 
when examining quit rate /clinic data.  
 
 
The analysis  of the primary outcome  is designed to show differences in the rate at which patients are 
referred to the Wisconsin Tobacc o Quitline  by [CONTACT_941]  12 control (F2Q) versus the  12 experimental (EHR 
referral)  clinics  during the post -intervention period .  We will use a mixed  effects logistic regression 
model via Generalized Estimating Equations (via SAS PROC  GENMOD; for a population based model) 
with coding for the baseline and post -intervention phases, and with  coding for each  post -intervention  
monthly time point with the models centered at the [ADDRESS_274328] -intervention mark. Based on data 
from the healthcar e system s, we anticipate that on average, each clinic will see about 120 
smokers/month, and based upon the urn randomization procedure we expect similar smoker flow rates across the two experimental conditions .  The binary dependent variable will be  measur ed at the smoker 
level,  i.e., whether or not a  smoker seen at a clinic is referred to the quitline, and  aggregated to the 
clinic level to constitute clinic  referral rate .  Thus, while clinic is the unit of analysis, our sample is the 
smoker, each one being  one Level 1 unit.  Experimental condition will be coded with a single dummy 
variable.  The baseline WTQL referral rate data for each clinic  will serve as  a covariate ( only one 
covariate  will be used to preserve degrees of freedom) .   We will specif y a logit link  function and  assume 
a first -order autoregressive structure  (to address dependence across measurement occasions).  We will 
test the main effects  of experimental conditions .  Further , we have an a priori plan to test for post -
intervention change o ver time within each experimental condition  and will test for interaction between  
experimental condition and measurement occasion.  Similar analyses will be used for the quality referral 
outcome.  
 In a subsequent model  we will analyze cessation  rates of tobacco patients  identified as smokers during a 
clinic visit .  Abstinence will be measured at the smoker level and aggregated to the clinic level by [CONTACT_227749] a clinic quit rate.  We anticipate that there will be  no overlap  in rates of 
abstainers /clinic ( abstainers  from a clinic /smokers presenting to clinics within the relevant time period ) 
for the two experimental conditions, permitting use of a non -parametric analysis of outcome (e.g., 
Mann -Whitney U).    
 2/28/[ADDRESS_274329] -launch.   In addition, we will document 
implementation challenges and solutions  to inform future evaluation or dissemination efforts . 
 
Power Analyses for Intervention Phase :   Power was calculated for a two -group cluster -randomized 
design with clinic as the unit of randomization (n=6  clinics per group  for each health system ) with  a 
conservative estimate of approximately  90 smokers  seen in each clinic per month .  The dependent 
variable for the power analysis is the proportion of smokers  referred/ month.  We based our estimates of 
[ADDRESS_274330] (Adsit et al., 2014) which found a rate of 14% for an eReferral system versus 0.3% for a paper fax 
referral system4.  To achieve a more conservative power analysis, we calculated power to detect a 
smaller difference between the groups.  More specifically, we estimated power to detect a group 
difference on proportion  referred  per month with values of 2% for the Fax to Quit group versus 7% for 
the eReferral group. As shown in Table 3, the groups are not expected to differ at baseline  (mean of 1 % 
referrals per month  for each group ).  As such, the power analysis was based on a test of the difference 
between groups for the post -intervention proportion of referrals per month  (2 vs 7%). The following 
power analysis therefore should be conservative sin ce it does not take advantage of baseline  referral 
rate to index change  and its projected effect size is considerably less than might be expected based on 
prior research .   For purposes of power analysis, we assumed that the standard deviation  for the mean  
proportion  of referrals per month will be 2.5 %; we also set alpha at . [ADDRESS_274331]. The power 
analysis was computed via an online program, GLIMMPSE5, that permits power estimation for cluster -
randomized designs. Results of the power analysis s howed that there is >9 0% power to detect a mean 
difference of 1 versus 7% of smokers  referred  per month.  The demonstration of this effect within two 
health systems will allow even greater confidence in these primary outcomes.  
 Table 3. Predicted  Mean Rate s of Quitline Contacts/ Clinic/ Month as Proportions of Smokers Seen , 
Two Arms Across Baseline and Intervention Phases  
Intervention Arm  Baseline  Intervention  
Fax Referral (Fax to Quit)  1% 2% 
EHR-based Referral (eReferral)  1% 7% 
 2/28/[ADDRESS_274332] psychometric indices such as item means, 
variance/standard deviation, and range.  We will not subject items to factor analyse s or determine 
coefficient alpha since the items were not designed to index latent dimensions.  However, 
reliability /generalizability  analyses will be conducted to determine if level of endorsement varies with 
type of staff member (this will be done across  clinics, within each experimental condition ).  In formal 
analyses, w e will us e GEE (see above)  to perform item -specific analyses  since respondents will be nested 
within clinics.  Thus, clinic will be treated as a Level [ADDRESS_274333] -intervention 
endorsement levels as a function o f experimental condition.   In a subanalysis we will separately analyze 
data from the MA’s, the only staff group large enough to permit dedicated analysis.   These analyses will 
be repeated for the baseline data.   Open ended items will be nonquantitatively synthesized and 
common or significant themes will be extracted and used to guide interpretation of the survey data
6. 
 2/28/2017 Amendment. As in the existing quit line eReferral protocol, staff survey analyses will focus on 
item means, variance/standard de viation, and range prior to and six months after the SmokefreeTXT 
eReferral launch. Given that only [ADDRESS_274334] in the existing protocol and the SmokefreeTXT  pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268].  
 
20 
  
 
  
21 
 Figure 1. Manual Fax to Quit: Clinic, Patient, and Data Workflow  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 

22 
 Figure 2. Fax to Quit Consent Form Used in Clinics 
 
 
 
    

23 
 Figure 3 . eReferral to Wisconsin Tobacco Quit Line: Clinic, Patient, and Data Work Flow  
 
 
 

24 
 2/28/17 Amendment  Workflow : Electronic Health Record (EHR) -based Referral 
(eReferral) to the SmokefreeTXT with Result Feedback to Referring Clinician via 
Patient EHR  
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
   
  
  SmokefreeTXT number posted on After Visit 
Summary (given to every patient 
summarizing that primary care visit)  YES NO 
eReferral Order sent to SmokefreeTXT with patient demographics and number to call  
SmokefreeTXT receives eReferral Order  
Patient receives welcome text with 
instructions on seeking support and on how 
to opt out of texting program  
Patient opts out of SmokefreeTXT  
SmokefreeTXT assesses any smoking in the 
last [ADDRESS_274335] Practice Advisory (BPA) triggers.  Clinic staff 
member : 
• Asks tobacco user if willing to quit within 30 days  
• Uses BPA to deliver intervention  
• Confirms patient’s consent for SmokefreeTXT 
and best mobile number  
• Places the eReferral order  Patient visits primary 
care clinic  Prompted by [CONTACT_14578], Medical 
Assistant /Roomer  asks patient if she/he uses 
 
YES NO No additional  
activities  
SmokefreeTXT  is a treatment extender  that provides ongoing, tailored text -
message coaching and support to patients who want to quit using tobacco.  
All services are FREE  and available 24/7 .   
Clinician prescribes a full course of an FDA- approved tobacco cessation medication(s).  Data on SmokefreeTXT outcome (engaged, 
opted out, quit at 6 -weeks) sent to patient’s 
EHR and referring provider’s EHR inbox [ADDRESS_274336] quit date  NO YES 

25 
 Figure 4. Screen Shots of the eReferral of Tobacco Users to Wisconsin Tobacco Quit Line – 
Roomer and Clinician Responsibilities  
 
 
 

26 
  
  
Figure 5. Screen Shots Depi[INVESTIGATOR_227710]’s EHR – Counseling Notes and Medication List  
 
 
 2/28/[ADDRESS_274337] the order and will review and accept it with other visit-related orders. When the clinician accepts the order, this will trigger secure communication with SmokefreeTXT. Communication will involve the mobile number,  clinic, patient 
identifer (medical record number), name , zip code and city, and age of participants (all of these fields 
are required for tailoring of text messages and/or for feedback to the EHR to work). All communications will take place via HIPAA -compliant means.    

27 
  
 
References  
 
1. Stout RL, Witrz PW, Carbonari FJP, Del Boca FK. Ensuring balanced distribution of prognostic factors in treatment outcome research. J Stud Alcohol. 1994(Suppl 12):70 -75. 
2. Hintz JL. P ASS 2000: Power and sample size for Windows NCSS. Kaysville, UT; 2000.  
3. Devellis,  (2012).  Scale development: Theory and applications.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage  
4. Robert T. Adsit, Bradley M. Fox, Thanos Tsiolis, Carolyn Ogland, Michelle Simerson, Linda M. 
Vind, Sean M. Bell, Amy D. Skora, Timothy B. Baker, Michael C. Fiore. Using the electronic 
health record to connect primary care patients to evidence -based telephonic tobacco 
quitline services: a closed -loop demonstration project. Translational Behavioral Medicine , 
2014; 4:324 -332. PMCID:PMC4167898.  
5. Kreidler, S.M., Muller, K.E., Grunwald, G.K., Ringham, B.M., Coker- Dukowitz, Z.T., Sakhadeo, 
U.R. et al, GLIMMPSE: online power computation for linear models with and without a baseline covariate. J Stat Softw. 2013;54:1– 26.
  
6. Morgan DL. Qualitative content analysis: a guide to paths not taken. Qual Health Res. 1993;3(1):112- 21. 
 
 
      
28 
  
Appendix A  
 
Clinical Staff Survey: Wisconsin Tobacco Quit Line eReferral Study  
 
I. Addressing tobacco use with patients is a very important use of my time.  
II. Very few patients will stop using tobacco even with treatment.  
III. My clinic supports me in my attempts to address my patients’ tobacco use.  
IV. I have enough time to address my patients’ tobacco use well.  
V. I know what to do to address my patients’ tobacco use well.  
VI. I feel that I am part of a good healthcare team that is working well together.  
VII. Patients seem to welcome my efforts to address their tobacco use with them.  
VIII. The steps I need to take to address my patients’ tobacco use are efficien t and well designed.  
IX. The EHR helps me address my patients’ tobacco use.  
X. I often get feedback on whether my patients got tobacco treatment if they wanted it.  
XI. The Wisconsin Tobacco Quit  Line is an effective aid to my patients who want to quit.  
XII. I understand how to refer my patients to the Wisconsin Tobacco Quit  Line 
XIII. The method to refer patients to the Wisconsin Tobacco Quit  Line is easy  
XIV. The method to refer patients to the Wisconsin Tobacco Quit Li ne is effective  
XV. I regularly receive feedback regarding the outc ome of the patients I refer to the Wisconsin 
Tobacco Quit  Line 
 
Response format for above items 1 = Strongly disagree; 2 = Disagree;  3 = Mildly disagree; 4 = Feel 
neutral;  5 = Mildly agree; 6 = Agree; 7 = Strongly agree  
 
XVI. Your smoking status: 1 = never smoked  regularly; 2 = ex -smoker; 3 = smoker  
XVII. Your clinical role : 1=Medical Assistant; 2=nurse or clinic manager; 3=provider staff (physician, 
nurse prac titioner, physician assistant)  
XVIII. FOR PROVIDER STAFF (CLINIC ROLE=3 ONLY) AT POST -EREFERRAL PERIOD AT EREFER RAL CLINICS 
ONLY: How often do you read the script provided in the EHR when assessing patient willingness 
to accept eReferral to the Quitline 1=Never, 2=Rarely, 3=Sometimes, 4=Often, 5=Always  
 
XIX. Open field questions  
a. Are there barriers that keep you from addressing your patients’ tobacco use well?  If so, 
what are these?  
b. What could your clinic do to help you address your patients’ tobacco use more effectively or more efficiently?  
c. AT POST EREFERRAL SURVEY ONLY: What do you typi[INVESTIGATOR_227711]?  
 
Appendix B 
 
Clinical Staff Survey: Smokefree TXT eReferral Study  
 
I. Addressing tobacco use with patients is a very important use of my time.  
29 
 II. Very few patients will stop using tobacco even with treatment.  
III. My clinic supports me in my attem pts to address my patients’ tobacco use.  
IV. I have enough time to address my patients’ tobacco use well.  
V. I know what to do to address my patients’ tobacco use well.  
VI. I feel that I am part of a good healthcare team that is working well together.  
VII. Patients seem t o welcome my efforts to address their tobacco use with them.  
VIII. The steps I need to take to address my patients’ tobacco use are efficient and well designed.  
IX. The EHR helps me address my patients’ tobacco use.  
X. I often get feedback on whether my patients got tobacco treatment if they wanted it.  
XI. I am familiar with text -to-quit programs such as SmokefreeTXT.  
XII. I have referred my patients to a text- to-quit program like SmokefreeTXT.  
XIII. I believe mobile interventions like texting programs can help my patients stop usin g tobacco.  
QUESTIONS [ADDRESS_274338] PERIOD 
ONLY  
XIV. The SmokefreeTXT text- message program  is an effective aid to my patients who want to quit.  
XV. I understand how to refer my patients to SmokefreeTXT  
XVI. The method  to refer patients to SmokefreeTXT is easy  
XVII. The method to refer patients to SmokefreeTXT is effective  
XVIII. I regularly receive feedback regarding the outcome of the patients I refer to SmokefreeTXT  
 
Response format for above items 1 = Strongly disagree; 2 = Disagree;  3 = Mildly disagree; 4 = Feel neutral;  5 = Mildly agree; 6 = Agree; 7 = Strongly agree  
 
XIX. Your smoking status: 1 = never smoked  regularly; 2 = ex -smoker; 3 = smoker  
XX. Your clinical role: 1=Medical Assistant; 2=nurse or clinic manager; 3=provider staff (physician, nurse practitioner, physician assistant)  
XXI. AT POST -REFERRAL ONLY: How often do you read the script provided in the EHR when assessing 
patient willingness to accept eReferral to SmokefreeTXT  1=Never, 2=Rarely, 3=Sometimes, 4=Often, 5=Always  
XXII. Open field questions  
a. Are there barriers that keep you from addressing your patients’ tobacco use well?  If so, what are these?  
b. What could your clinic do to help you address your patients’ tobacco use more effectively or more efficiently?  
c. AT POST -REFERRAL ONLY: What do you typi[INVESTIGATOR_227712]?  
 
 