[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document date: 12/16/2023  (Date of latest IRB ac?on: Yearly Con?nuing Review) 
 
Zach Lerner, PhD 
Associate [CONTACT_3348] of Mechanical Engineering 
Northern Arizona University 
  
Project Narrative  for Prospective Research  
Version 2020 -12 
1) Investigator  
 
Zachary Lerner, Ph.D. 
 
2) Protocol Title   
 
Evaluating wearable assistance on gait biomechanics 
 
3) Objectives  
 
The overarching goal of this study  is to improve mobility in individuals with movement disorders 
through advances in wearable assistance (i.e. powered orthos es). This goal will be accomplished 
by [CONTACT_831537].  The first aim is to quantify how the magnitude of 
powered plantar-flexor assistance affects the energetics and m echanics of walking at self-selected 
(over -ground) and set (treadmill) speeds, and stair ascent in cer ebral palsy ( CP). The second aim is 
to evaluate how training frequency and patient characteristics aff ect clinical and biomechanical 
gait outcomes across repeated over-ground walking sessions  with powered ankle assistance in CP.  
 
 
4) Background 
 
Neurological deficits, such as those caused by [CONTACT_84639], sp inal cord injury, and cerebral palsy, often 
lead to reduced walking ability and pathological gait patterns that limit quality of life [1-3]. 
Achieving and maintaining independent mobility for the esti mated 17 million individuals with 
walking disabilities in the US is an essential rehabilitation challenge [4]. Currently, standard- of-care 
treatments are not fully effective in restoring gait function.  Physical therapy, treadmill-based gait 
training, and intensive muscle strengthening programs have demonstrated variable and 
inadequate success for gait rehabilitation [5-7]. Research suggests that the type and dosage of 
standard therapy programs are insufficient for large sustainabl e gains [8].  
 
Wearable assistive devices (i.e. powered orthoses) offer  a promising new means to improve gait 
rehabilitation outcomes and meet the increasing demand for the rapy from our aging population 
[9]. By [CONTACT_831538]-ex tremity joints, powered orthoses 
can augment weak or deficient muscles to improve walking c apacity. Importantly, powered 
orthoses offer the ability to increase the dosage of gait ther apy by [CONTACT_831539].  
 
The PI ([CONTACT_395182]) and his colleagues at the National Institute s of Health (NIH) led an exploratory 
clinical study that sought to evaluate the potential for a powere d knee orthosis to treat walking 
deficits in children and adolescents (ages 5- 19) caused by [CONTACT_831540]. The results from the 6-
visit 12-week study were very promising  with the participants exhibiting significantly improved gai t 
function with the aid of a powered knee orthosis [10, 11] . The success of this previous investigation 
provides the rationale for continued research that will lead to the effe ctive implementation of 
wearable assistive devices for use as a long -term rehabilitation strategy at home and in the 
Project Narrative  for Prospective Research  
Version [ADDRESS_1154123] be addre ssed , including:  
 
1) Improving walking performance : Pathological gait patterns drastically increase the metabolic 
requirements for locomotion [18], leading to a barrier to physical activity and downward spi[INVESTIGATOR_831517] a deterioration of walking ability with age, ulti mately leading to a loss of 
ambulation in a large portion of the affected population [19]. This study seeks to meet the 
need to evaluate the use of wearable assistive devices for i mproving mobility in individuals 
with movement disorders.   
5) Lay Summary (approximately 400 words ) 
 
Many individuals with physical disabilities exhibit abnormal walking patterns that limit quality of 
life and lead to long-term health consequences. Reduced ph ysical activity from gait dysfunction 
can lead to a downward spi[INVESTIGATOR_831518] a deterioration of walking ability with age, ultimately 
leading to a loss of ambulation in a large portion of the affe cted population. 
 
The goal of this research protocol is to improve mobility  in these individuals with gait disorders 
through advances in wearable assistive devices . We seek to improve independent walking ability 
and increase daily physical activity for individuals with ce rebral palsy. To meet this goal, our 
proposal aims to evaluate the novel use of powered ankle ass istance from a wearable exoskeleton 
to improve walking economy across varied terrain.  
 
The knowledge gained from this protocol will enhance ou r ability to optimize the prescription of 
powered orthoses for rehabilitation of pediatric and adult gait disorde rs. Further, this proposal 
was designed to lay the foundation for our future, long-ter m research objectives, which is to 
conduct longitudinal studies (12-36 months) to implement as sistive-device interventions to treat 
neuromuscular gait disorders at home and in the community.  
 
6) Setting of the Human Research 
 
The proposed research will take place at NAU’s Flagstaff and Phoenix Biomedical Campuses. At the 
Flagstaff location, the research will be conducted at or aroun d the new state- of-the-art human 
performance lab, a 2700 sq. ft. interdisciplinary facility located in the Learning Resource Center 
(Building 61) . At the Phoenix Biomedical campus, the research will be conducted at or around the 
motion capture facility in NAU’s Phoenix Physical Therapy Department.  
 
7) Resources available to conduct the Human Research  
 
NAU's Disability Resources office will assist in participan t recruitment. Investigators on this 
protocol in NAU’s department of physical therapy (e.g. [CONTACT_831551]) will assist [CONTACT_395182] in th e 
consenting and evaluation of participants with disabilities. Inv estigators in physical therapy (e.g. 
[CONTACT_831552]) will also assist in patient monitoring d uring the study visits. Graduate students 
in [CONTACT_395182]’s Biomechatronics Lab will provide techni cal assistance and conduct data analysis. All 
persons assisting with this study will be undergo CITI hum an subjects and CPR training.  
Project Narrative  for Prospective Research  
Version [ADDRESS_1154124]. Lerner’s faculty start-up package. 
 
8) Study Population  
a) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
 
Subject p opulation  will include : 
• 10 individuals with a neurologically-based walking disorder due to cerebral 
palsy. We will recruit 11 individuals anticipating a 10% withdrawal rate to 
obtain the target sample size. 
 
Inclusion criteria:  
• Age between 5 and 3 5 years old, inclusive. 
• An individual with a diagnosis of a neurologically-based wal king disorder due 
to cerebral palsy. 
• Must be able to understand and follow simple directions base d on parent 
report and clinical observation during the history and physi cal examination. 
• Able  to provide verbal assent, if appropriate. If the participant i s non-verbal, 
parental interpretation of gesticulation for assent will be us ed.  
• The ability to read and understand English. 
• Able to walk at least 30 feet with or without a walking aid (GMFC S Level I-III for 
individuals with cerebral palsy)  
• Able to safely fit into a device configuration and tolerate ass istance without knee 
hyperextension while walking 
 
Exclusion criteria : 
• Any neurological, musculoskeletal or cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_831519], health condition ( 
including pregnancy), or diagnosis other than cerebral pals y that would affect the 
ability to walk as directed for short periods of time.   
• Participant or parent report that the perspective participant’s phy sician has 
recommended that they not engage in moderate intensity walking exercise. 
 
Note: No exclusions will be made on the basis of race, ge nder or ethnic background and 
efforts will be made to recruit underrepresented minoriti es.  
b) Vulnerable populations  
The Human Subjects research includes children and adults w ith neurological disorders. 
Several safeguards are included in our protocol to protect their rights and welfare. A 
Project Narrative  for Prospective Research  
Version [ADDRESS_1154125] or trained safety advocate will be  present during all walking 
trials; the primary purpose of this individual is to ensur e participant safety and to be 
the participant advocate . Walking trials will be immediately stopped upon request of  
the participant or therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]. Children will be supervised at all times during the test 
procedures.  
 
A participant’s risk for falling during the walking trails wi ll be assessed by a physical 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541] ; participants who are at risk of falls will be protected by a gai t belt or safety 
harness. Note: the risk of falling from the potential partici pants as a result of their 
motor deficits does not represent an elevation of risk bey ond those during their daily 
lives.  
 
[CONTACT_395182]  has over [ADDRESS_1154126] relevant (and recent) experience  includ es a clinical study evaluating powered 
assistance for children with cerebral palsy at the National Insti tutes of Health. This 
study was conducted with 7 individuals ages 5-19, and incl uded 6 study visits; the study 
results were overwhelmingly positive.  
 
9) COVID -[ADDRESS_1154127]: 
a) We will minimize face to face contact [CONTACT_831541], when applicable and 
any possible screen ing/history questionnaires over the phone. We will also off er the option 
for participants to complete walking exercises (without the o rthosis) at home.  
b) The research team will follow CDC guidelines, includin g wearing face coverings and gloves, 
when recommended.  
c) We will offer face coverings and gloves to visitors (participants and/or th eir families). 
d) We will increase our rigorous sanitation procedure to inc lude wipi[INVESTIGATOR_831520].  
 
 
10) Recruitment Methods and Consenting Process  
a) Recruitment Process:   
 
Participants  with gait disorders:  We will contact [CONTACT_831542]’s Disability Resources office by [CONTACT_831543], spi[INVESTIGATOR_1828], 
Parkinson’s disease and cerebral palsy. We will ask them to display our recruitment flyer. We 
will also provide them with our email/phone recruitment script,  that they may use if they 
choose to contact [CONTACT_831544]. 
Additionally, we will contact [CONTACT_831545], bio medical researchers, physicians or 
physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_831521]. If they 
Project Narrative  for Prospective Research  
Version [ADDRESS_1154128] for more information. A copy of this flyer  is included in the appendix 1 . The 
information on the flyer will also be made available on our  laboratory’s website.  A link to the 
website has been provided in the recruitment appendix for  IRB reference, but the website 
will not be made available to the public until IRB approval has been obtained. We may also 
display the flyer throughout hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], physician offices,  rehabilitation settings, in the 
community (i.e., schools, churches, local support groups), or posted in print and online 
newsletters and newspapers after permission for posting is  obtained. 
 
Timeline: Recruitment will be staggered so that less than [ADDRESS_1154129] throug hout the duration of the protocol.  
Pre-screening:  Inclusion/exclusion criteria will be reviewed with eac h prospective participant 
(or the parent/guardian in the case of a child) using the pre-screening email or phone scripts 
(a copy can be found in the appendix 1 ). Data will not be recorded during the pre- screening 
process; therefore, pre-screening data cannot and will not be used in the research for either 
successful enrollees or for screen failures.  
b) Informed Consent :  
 
The consent process will take place in person  or over the phone in a private , soundproof  room  
by a member of the research team. Consent will be obtained before any study procedures are 
done. If eligibility criteria are met, the participant, legall y authorized individual (LAR) , or a 
legal  guardian in the case of minors will be verbally taken throu gh and be provided a n 
electronic (if phone consenting) or hard copy of the  consent form and assent form (for minors) 
to review. For the case of a subject being represented by  a LAR, both the subject and the LAR 
will be present while the consent process. If the subjec t indicates a willingness to participate via 
verbal or gesticulated assent, the LAR will sign the consen t form on their behalf. Any questions 
will be answered. The consent form wi ll be provided in English . Once consent and assent 
are obtained in writing and prior to undergoing any research as sessments, all enrolled patients 
will have their relevant medical history recorded and phy sical examination completed (“history 
and physical”, Appendix 2 ). The medical history may be recorded over the phone as we ll if the 
participant or guardian is willing to share that information ove r the phone. The physical will be 
performed by a licensed physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_831522] a 
seizure disorder, other current medications, presence of  any communicable diseases and allergy 
history will be documented. Each participant will be scree ned for any cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_696], 
neurological or musculoskeletal contraindications to short e xercise bouts of walking or moving 
lower limbs.  
Minor assent will be obtained after parental consent has been p rovided.  The minor assent 
process is detailed in Appendix A, Children.  
 
11) Procedures involved in the Human Research 
 
Project Narrative  for Prospective Research  
Version 2020 -12 
Overview:  Participants with gait deficits will be asked to complete up to  18 visits (they may agree 
to fewer visits or withdraw at any point). We may terminate a su bject’s participation if they no 
longer meet  eligibility requirements or if there are safety concerns  that cannot be addressed. The 
experimental conditions allocated during each visit (define d below) will be customized for each 
participant using the “Visit Allocation” table provided in the  consent form and will depend on their 
specific neurological deficit and walking ability .  
 
Powered Orthosis:  Wearable assistance will be provided from powered orthos es that are tailored 
to the specific gait deficits of each participant ( e.g. Fig. 4). The devices provide a small amount of 
motorized assistance that is intended to 
augment existing muscle activity to elicit 
function changes at the ankle joints . This and 
other similar investigational devices  have been 
classified by [CONTACT_2165] 
(FDA) as a nonsignificant risk because they do 
not meet the definition of a significant risk 
under 812.3(m) of the investigational device 
exceptions regulation (21 CFR 812) (letter from 
FDA outlining exemption from [CONTACT_395182]’s 
prior work at NIH , Appendix 3). This 
information has been provided to assist the 
IRB in its determination for this study.  Several 
safety precautions will be implemented to 
ensure patient safety, including mechanical 
“stops” to prevent hyperextension of joints, an 
emergency stop button that shuts off power to the device, and embedded  software mechanisms 
that shut off power if the user were to fall .  
 
Unpowered Orthosis:  Wearable assistance will be provided from passive orthose s that are tailored 
to the specific gait deficits of each participant (e.g., ankle -foot orthosis or AFO). These devices are 
considered less risk than that of powered orthoses. 
 
Experimental conditions: Several powered orthosis conditions will be tested durin g several modes 
of walking throughout the course of the study. Trials will  take place over-ground and/or on a 
treadmill. Balance trials will take place on a treadmill. Partici pants with gait deficits will walk for 
up to 40 minutes . Frequent breaks will be provided between trials and condi tions to avoid fatigue ; 
a maximum of [ADDRESS_1154130] ace between breaks .  
 
1) Level walking over ground  
2) Level walking on a treadmill 
3) Walking at a mild  incline /decline (0°-15°) on the treadmill   
4) “Walking” on a stepmill machine 
5) Walking on stairs 
6) Balance on a treadmill 
7) All terrain walking over ground  Figure 1. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_831523] a  powered orthosis , designed and 
implemented by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Lerner  and the Biomechatronics Lab at NAU.  

Project Narrative  for Prospective Research  
Version 2020 -12 
8) Mobility analysis 
 
 
Orthosis Conditions: 
1) Walking without assistance : We will obtain the normal/representative walking pattern of each 
participant. This condition will be used to compare the ef fectiveness of the assistive conditions. 
2) Walking  with powered orthosis assistance : We will provide on/off assistance during walking , 
depending on the individual’s specific gait deficits.  
3) Walking with adaptable powered orthosis assistance : We will provide assistance that changes 
magnitude based on measures of gait performance .  
4) Walking with passive (unpowered) orthosis assistance.   
 
In Laboratory Mobility analysis: 
To assess mobility, participants will undergo the followin g tests, with or without a powered 
orthosis, under direct supervision by a research team mem ber, who will be available to spot 
for safety (heart rate and metabolic cost may be collected): 
1) Timed up and go: participants will walk as quickly as possi ble in a safe and controller manner 
to a cone [ADDRESS_1154131], turn around, walk back to the chair and  sit down; 3 – 6 trials will be 
collected. 
2) [ADDRESS_1154132]: participants will walk as quickly as possi ble in a safe and controlled manner 
for [ADDRESS_1154133] walking endurance; 1 – 3 trials will b e collected. 
3) Stair test: participants will climb 1 – 4 flights of stairs (w ith hand rails for support) as quickly as 
possible in a safe and controlled manner ; 1 – 4 trials will be collected. 
 
All terrain walking over ground : 
Participants will be monitored and accompanied at all times by [CONTACT_831546] i n 
controlled environments . Trials will include ambulation with and without wearable assis tance. On-
campus locations will include the Engineering, Business , and Learning resource Center buildings, 
the north and south quads, and campus walkways and urban trails.  
 
Data Collection: Experimental data collection will include motion capture (mo vement and force 
gait analysis), measurement of muscle activity (electromyograp hy, EMG ), and measurement of 
oxygen consumption/c02 production (metabolic rate) .  
 
Physical activity questionnaire : The Physical Activity Questionnaire for Older Children (PAQ- C) and 
Adolescents (PAQ- A), two questionnaires that have been validated for children and  young adults, 
may be given to participants with the help of a parent/guardian if necessary. 
 
Description  of visits for Participants :  
Pre-visit phone call : Optional phone call prior to first in-person visit (but after consent) to 
collect relevant medical history and physical activity questio nnaire. 
 
Visit 1: Participants will undergo c onsent  (if not done over the phone) , 
history/physical/activity questionnaire , and orthotic device fitting . Following device fitting, 
Project Narrative  for Prospective Research  
Version 2020 -12 
the participants will undergo baseline gait and mobility analys is, and then practice walking 
with powered assistance. The expected duration is 3-4 hours.   
 
Visits 2  through (up to a maximum of) 17 : On each visit, participants will complete two to 
four of the experimental powered orthosis conditions and one to six of the experimental 
conditions, depending on their customized experimental pl an and walking ability . The 
expected durations are 2- 3 hours.  
 
Final visit: On the final visit (maximum number of visits = 18) particip ants will complete a 
follow -up gait and mobility analysis, and evaluation of the experimental c onditions. The 
expected duration is 2 – 3 hours.  
 
Timeline: The participants will be asked to complete 1-4 visits per w eek for 3- 12 weeks. To 
quantify how high frequency gait training affects walking pe rformance, participants will 
complete four 20 -30 minute ankle exoskeleton assisted walking sessions in  one week . To 
quantify how high frequency gait training affects walking pe rformance, participants will 
complete two 20-30 minute ankle exoskeleton assisted walkin g sessions each week for two 
weeks.  To accommodate illness, travel, and scheduling conflicts,  the maximum time that a 
participant can be enrolled in the study is 16 weeks.   
 
12) Cost to subjects   
 
The only cost to the participants is a time commitment for whi ch remuneration will be provided. 
There will be a maximum number of seventeen visits for volunteers with neuromuscular deficits, 
and a maximum number of four visits for healthy volunteers. Each visit will be a maximum  of 4 
hours. Any parking costs will be paid for up front, or reimbur sed. 
 
13) Risks to subjects 
 
a. Gait Analysis:  There is a slight risk of falls during ambulatory activitie s performed during this 
protocol, but this risk is not greater than during normal daily life. This risk will be minimized by 
[CONTACT_405990] a licensed physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_831524]. If the subject appears 
unstable, a safety harness will be used to arrest any falls that may occur. Therefore, the risk 
should be no greater than that of normal daily activities. The safety harness will always be used 
during the incline/decline treadmill walking, stepmill w alking, and stair ascent/decent walking.  
b. Walking with wearable Assistance:  The powered and unpowered wearable assistive devices 
have been evaluated by [CONTACT_831547]-significant risks to human subjects (A ppendix 3). There 
is a mild risk of falling when subjects are walking with motorized assistance; subjects may feel 
a slight perturbation from the orthotic device. The device is not designed or able to over- power 
the user. Safety measures are integrated within the control alg orithms used to control the 
wearable device such that it automatically deactivates during gait disturbances . During 
laboratory testing, a physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_831525]. If the subject appears unstable, a safety harness will be 
used to arrest any falls that may occur. Additionally , a therapi[INVESTIGATOR_831526] 2020 -12 
emergency switch so the wearable assistance can be immediatel y deactivated , if needed . For 
any home/community testing, the participant and parent/guardian ( if applicable) will complete 
extensive training on operation and use of the device. 
There is a small risk of pressure by [CONTACT_831548]. A physical 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_831527], and 
continuously monitor subject tolerance and inquire about pr esence of pain, pressure or other 
complaints to detect any discomfort during testing. If the sub ject experiences anything beyond 
minimal discomfort (extra inertia and resistance against moveme nt), we will stop the testing 
and readjust the device as needed until the problem is res olved. Redness or any other skin 
problem due to the brace will be inspected at the end of e very visit.  
c. Balance with/without Assistance: There is a small risk of falling during the balance test, b ut 
no greater than that of during the walking test. A safety harness  will be used to arrest any falls 
that may occur. A physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_831528] “spot” them.  
 
d. Muscle Activity Measurement (EMG): There is minimal risk associated with EMG recording. 
Small, matchbox sized boxes will be place on various leg muscles to measure when they are 
active using an electromyography (EMG) device that measures th e electrical activity that can 
be recorded during muscle contractions. 
e. Metabolic Testing: There  is minimal risk associated with heart-rate monitoring or open -circuit 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_831529].  A facemask covering the nose and mouth that is connected to a 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_831530]/exhalation.  
14) Potential benefits to subjects  and/or society  
 
Benefits to Subjects:  Walking remains prohibitively challenging for the target po pulation . Properly 
implemented wearable assistance has a strong potential to improv e their ambulatory ability and 
balance . These studies will determine if wearable assistance is a vi able treatment strategy for each 
of our participants, which can be used to guide future treatm ent and therapy.  
 
Benefits to Society:  Achieving and maintaining independent mobility for the esti mated [ADDRESS_1154134] the potential to improve gait rehabilitation outcome s and meet the increasing 
demand for therapy from our aging population. Our finding s will provide generalizable knowledge 
about the optimal assistance for a range of neurological walkin g disorders. Additionally, our 
objectives will advance knowledge regarding muscle and b rain activation patterns during assisted 
locomotion, which can advance their use for clinical and re search applications.   
 
15) Provisions to protect the privacy of subjects  and the confidentiality of data  
 
a) Protection of subject privacy:   
Only IRB approved methods and documents will b e used for subject recruitment and consent.  
 
Project Narrative  for Prospective Research  
Version 2020 -12 
b) Protection of data confidentiality:   
Samples and data will be stored using codes that [CONTACT_395182] will assign. Only [CONTACT_395182] will 
have the code, which will be recorded in a secure passw ord protected document that will be 
destroyed [ADDRESS_1154135] copi[INVESTIGATOR_831531] e on NAU’s campus. Only study 
investigators will have access to the data. Digital pi[INVESTIGATOR_831532]. Participants can choose 
to sign an Authorization for Recording, Filming, and/or Pho tographing of Patients (included in 
the consent form) to give permission to use these videos  for publications and public 
presentations of this work, with or without obscuring iden tifying features. After the 
recommended 5 year minimum time frame, all identifying information wil l be destroyed by 
[CONTACT_831549].  
16) Subject compensation  
 
Subjects will receive monetary compensation for their parti cipation in the study. All participants 
will be compensated $ 30 per hour  for lab visits; payment will be made to the parents/legal 
guardians of minor participants . The minimum compensation for each visit is $30, should the 
participant or investigator choose to stop the study within the first hour, and the maximum is $ 120. 
For those with gait deficits who complete all visits, the maxi mum possible compensation would be 
$[ADDRESS_1154136] 4 hours . Impaired 
participants will be provided $[ADDRESS_1154137], with a maximum of $60 per visit. Impaired participants may be 
reimbursed up to $120/night of hotel or Airbnb accommod ations if an overnight stay is necessary 
for participation.  
 
All p articipants can elect on the timing (payment at the end of the stud y or after each visit) and 
method of compensation, either a check in the mail or an Amazo n gift card. 
 
17) Monitoring the data  for subject safety  
 
A therapi[INVESTIGATOR_831533]’s lower- limbs  under the orthoses for skin 
irritation and redness. Any  discomfort following the removal of the orthoses will b e addressed 
and monitored via phone or email for 24 -48 hours.   
 
18) Withdrawal of subjects  
 
Subje cts or their parents, if applicable, may withdraw from the pr otocol at any time. There is no 
elevated risk for withdrawal. If a participant withdraws from thi s research project before it is 
complete, results obtained prior to the subject’s withdrawal from the study will be maintained and 
their privacy will be preserved.  
 
Refusal to participate will involve no penalty or loss of ben efits to which the subject is otherwise 
entitled. 
Project Narrative  for Prospective Research  
Version [ADDRESS_1154138]'s participation may be stopped by [CONTACT_093] i f the investigator assesses that the 
participant is at a safety risk or if they are non-compliant with the research protocol; termination 
will involve no penalty or loss of benefits to which the  subject is otherwise entitled. 
There is no  consequences of a subject's decision to withdraw from th e research . Orderly 
withdrawal will occur by [CONTACT_831550].  
 
 
19) Sharing of results with subjects   
 
The adult subjects or the parents of child participants may reques t a report of the individual’s 
motion analysis results. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_831534] g on the study’s full results will also be 
provided, when available, upon request.  
 
20) Future use and long- term storage of data or specimens  
 
De-identifiable motion and gait data may be kept for future resear ch. Following publication of our 
findings, these de-identifiable data will be made available u pon request. [CONTACT_395182] will hold and 
maintain the repository. 
 
21) Information management  
 
[CONTACT_395182] is responsible for data management.  
 
References: 
 
1. Rosenbaum, P., et al., A report: the definition and classification of cerebral pa lsy April 2006.  Dev 
Med Child Neurol Suppl, 2007. 109(suppl 109): p. 8 -14. 
2. Gresham, G.E., et al., Residual disability in survivors of stroke --the Framingham study.  N Engl J 
Med, 1975. 293(19): p. [ADDRESS_1154139] inj ury. Archives of 
physical medicine and rehabilitation, 1989. 70(12): p. 811 -818.  
4. Summary Health Statistics: National Health Interview Survey.  Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, 2014. 
5. Damiano, D.L., et al., Can strength training predictably improve gait kinematics? A pi[INVESTIGATOR_831535]-extremity alignment in cerebral 
palsy.  Phys Ther, 2010. 90(2): p. 269 -79. 
6. Nadeau, S.E., et al., Effects of task-specific and impairment-based training compar ed with usual 
care on functional walking ability after inpatient stroke r ehabilitation LEAPS Trial.  
Neurorehabilitation and neural repair, 2013. 27(4): p. [ADDRESS_1154140] Narrative  for Prospective Research  
Version 2020 -12 
7. Damiano, D.L., K.E. Alter, and H. Chambers, New Clinical and Research Trends in Lower Extremity 
Management for Ambulatory Children with Cerebral Palsy.  Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation 
Clinics of North America, 2009. 20(3): p. 469 -491.  
8. Dobkin, B.H. and P.W. Duncan, Should body weight -supported treadmill training and robotic-
assistive steppers for locomotor training trot back to the star ting gate?  Neurorehabil Neural 
Repair, 2012. 26(4): p. 308 -17. 
9. Krebs, H.I. and N. Hogan, Robotic therapy: the tippi[INVESTIGATOR_11300].  Am J Phys Med Rehabil, 2012. 91([ADDRESS_1154141] 3): p. S290 -7. 
10. Lerner, Z.F., D.L. Damiano, and T.C. Bulea. A robotic exoskeleton to treat crouch gait from 
cerebral palsy: Initial kinematic and neuromuscular evaluati on. in Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Society (EMBC), [ADDRESS_1154142] en with Cerebral 
Palsy: Design and Initial Application.  IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation 
Engineering, 2016.  
12. Banala, S.K., et al., Robot assisted gait training with active leg exoskeleton (AL EX). IEEE Trans 
Neural Syst Rehabil Eng, 2009. 17(1): p. 2 -8. 
13. Marchal-Crespo, L. and D.J. Reinkensmeyer, Review of control strategies for robotic movement 
training after neurologic injury.  J Neuroeng Rehabil, 2009. 6: p. 20.  
14. Donati, A.R.C., et al., Long -Term Training with a Brain-Machine Interface-Based Gait Pr otocol 
Induces Partial Neurological Recovery in Paraplegic Patients . Scientific Reports, 2016. 6: p. [ZIP_CODE].  
15. Plautz, E.J., G.W. Milliken, and R.J. Nudo, Effects of repetitive motor training on movement 
representations in adult squirrel monkeys: role of use versus learning.  Neurobiol Learn Mem, 
2000. 74(1): p. 27 -55. 
16. Krishnan, C., et al., A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_831536]-Aided Leg Motor Training to Facilitate 
Active Participation.  PLoS ONE, 2013. 8(10): p. e77370.  
17. Huang, H., S.L. Wolf, and J. He, Recent developments in biofeedback for neuromotor 
rehabilitation.  Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, 2006. 3(1): p. 11.  
18. Rose, J., et al., Energy expenditure index of walking for normal childre n and for children with 
cerebral palsy.  Dev Med Child Neurol, 1990. 32(4): p. 333 -40. 
19. Bottos, M. and C.G. Msc, Ambulatory capacity in cerebral palsy: prognostic criteria an d 
consequences for intervention.  Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 2003. 45(11): p. 786 -
790.  
20. Bortole, M., et al., The H2 robotic exoskeleton for gait rehabilitation after str oke: early findings 
from a clinical study.  Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, 2015. 12(1): p. [ADDRESS_1154143] i njury.  Am J Phys Med Rehabil, 2012. 
91(11): p. 911 -21. 
 
Sta$s$cal Analysis Plan (SAP) 
 
Protocol Overview  
Following the informed consent process, al l par?cipants completed a high frequency gait 
training protocol followed by a washout period and a low f requency gait training protocol. For 
each gait training protocol, par?cipants completed a shod (sh oes only)  pre and post 
interven?on assessment that included walking for at least [ADDRESS_1154144], cadence, step length, and muscle ac?vity. 
 
For the high frequency gait training por?on, par?cipants co mpleted four 20-30 minute ankle 
exoskeleton assisted walking sessions in one week. Fo r the low frequency gait training por?on, 
par?cipants completed two 20-30 minute ankle exoskeleton  assisted walking sessions each 
week for two weeks. During the walking sessions, plantar  ﬂexor exoskeleton assistance was 
ini?ally set to 0.35 Nm/kg and adjusted as need to preve nt knee hyper extension. A small 
amount of dorsiﬂexor assistance was provided to address d rop foot (1-2 Nm), as needed. 
 
Outcome Measures 
Our primary outcome measures are the metabolic energy re quired to walk and walking speed. 
Our secondary outcome measures are stride length, cadence , and muscle ac?vity variance ra?o. 
 
Sta$s$cal Analyses 
 
• We calculated the percent change in each outcome measure pre and post  each ankle 
exoskeleton assisted gait training frequency (high frequ ency and low frequency) for each 
par?cipant .  
• We computed the group mean and standard devia?on for each  outcome measure.  
• We then calculated the diﬀerence in the percent changes b etween the two frequencies .  
• We then tested whether these data were normally distributed using the Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_2152]- Wilk 
normality test. We found that all data were normally distrib uted.  
• We used paired two-tailed Student’s t-tests to compare the outcome  measures between 
high frequency and low frequency gait training .  