TITLE PAGE 
 
PROTOCOL NUMBER: UP -16-[ZIP_CODE]  
 TITLE: Examining Health Effects of Daylight Exposure on Dementia Patients in Los Angeles 
Assisted Living Facilities  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR(S):  Kyle Konis , Ph.D  
Assistant Professor of Architecture  
USC School of Architecture, WAH 204  
University of Southern [LOCATION_004]  
Los Angeles, CA [ZIP_CODE]- 0291  
[EMAIL_4573]  
     
CO-INVESTIGATOR(S):   Wendy J. Mack, Ph.D  
Professor of Biostatistics and Gerontology 
Dept. of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine  
University of S outhern [LOCATION_004]  
[ADDRESS_284067]., SSB 202Y, Los Angeles, CA [ZIP_CODE] 
[EMAIL_058]  
 
Edward L. Schneider, M.D.  
Dean Emeritus and Professor of Gerontology  
Leonard Davis School of Gerontology  
and 
Professor of Biological Sciences  
Dornsife  College of Letters, Arts and Sciences  
and  
Professor of Medicine  
Keck School of Medicine  
University of Southern [LOCATION_004]  
Los Angeles, CA [ZIP_CODE]- 0191  
[EMAIL_4574]  
 
SPONSOR:  University of Southern [LOCATION_004]   
  
  
PARTICIPANTS/LOCATONS:  
 
Alhambra Demen tia Care  [ADDRESS_284068]. Costa Mesa, CA [ZIP_CODE]  
Los Angeles Dementia Care  
(Beverly Place)  [ADDRESS_284069] Los Angeles, CA  
[ZIP_CODE]  
Redondo Beach Dementia Care  
(Beach Cities)  [ADDRESS_284070]. Tustin, CA [ZIP_CODE]  
 
 
AMENDMENTS/REVISIONS:  The original protocol was amended to change the scale used to 
assess depression from the Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS) to the Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia (CSDD).  (Approved 10/10/2016).  
   
1.0 BACKGROUND INFORMATION 
The Alzheimer's Association (2004) estimates that c linically significant depression occurs in 
about 20 to 40 percent of people with Alzheimer disease. The percentage increases to 70 to 80 
percent for Alzheimer residents in assisted care facilities. Treatment of depression in Alzheimer 
disease can improve s ense of well -being, quality of life, and individual function, even in the 
presence of ongoing decline in memory and thinking. In institutionalized settings, lack of sufficient exposure to bright light is considered one of the primary contributors to disrup tion of 
the circadian system, with cascading effects of sleep disruption, agitated behavior, depression, and cognitive decline (Day et al., 2000). Exposure to bright light (2500 -  10,000 lux) typi[INVESTIGATOR_235043], has been shown through a large body of research to be an effective non-pharmaceutical treatment option for depression (Golden, et al., 2005). Light therapy has also 
been shown to be an effective treatment for sleep disturbances (Dowling, et al., 2005) and for ameliorating behavior al problems (Cohen- Mansfield, 2001) for people with Alzheimer disease. 
However, reliable and well -designed studies examining the efficacy of light therapy in treating 
depression among people with Alzheimer disease are extremely limited (Forbes et al., 2009). 
Moreover, the conventional approach to administering the bright light stimulus, through boxes 
containing arrays of fluorescent light fixtures, is problematic for people with Alzheimer disease 
due to reported side effects of headache, eye strain, nausea,  and agitation (Labbate 1994; 
Terman, 1999). We hypothesize that exposure to sufficient daylight indoors can serve as an effective non -drug treatment option for people with Alzheimer disease and depression, with the 
potential to lead to fewer adverse effects than noted with light box treatments. Aside from the intervention, the residents and staff participating in this study will not experience any changes to 
their normal routine and duties. Staff supervised socialization can, but does not necessarily 
inclu de interaction with other residents in the facility or engagement in "free time" activities such 
as watching TV. We are aware that any changes outside of the intervention, either with staff specified roles or residents could potentially interfere with the results of the study.  
 2.[ADDRESS_284071] the hypothesis that an intervention increasing exposure to daylight  
will reduce depression and negative behaviors and increase cognitive function among Alzheimer  
patients in Los Angeles dementia care facilities.  
 
3.0 STUDY DESIGN  
The research will be conducted as a 12- week field study in eight Silverado dementia care  
facilities in Los Angeles and Orange County. Silverado is an assisted living service provider that  
delivers care for those with Alzheimer, dementia and other memory -impairing diseases. Data  
collection will occur twice during the study: baseline measures at the beginning of the study and 
outcome measures at the end of the study.  
 4.[ADDRESS_284072] staff to increase daylight exposure to  
Alzheimer residents by [CONTACT_235050] (8:00 -  10:00 AM)  
where vertical daylight illuminance at eye level exceeds [ADDRESS_284073] of two hours of daylight exposure administered 
beginning at 8:00 AM in the morning each day (7 days / week) over the 12- week  
study.  
 
4.2 Control Group  
Patients  at the other two facilities will receive usual care. During the period from 8:00 AM to  
10:00 AM each day, the control group of Alzheimer residents will be taken to a similar sized 
area indoors without daylight exposure for socialization under typi[INVESTIGATOR_235044].  
 
4.3 Outcome Measures  
The following outcome measures will be taken:  
1. Patient outcomes will be completed at baseline and 12 -weeks. For each of our major 
outcomes, we will use instruments that are well- validated for use i n testing effects of 
short - to long- term interventions in AD:  
a. Depression: Cornell Scale for Depression in Dementia (CSDD)  
b. Neuropsychiatric Inventory Nursing Home Version (NPI -NH) 
2. Trial conduct/methods outcomes:  
a. Facility and staff support and participation:  facilitators and obstacles.  
b. Fidelity of light and control intervention: facilitators and obstacles.  
c. Data collection fidelity: patient outcomes and light measures.  
d. Estimates of subject recruitment, consent, and attrition rates: facilitators and obstacles.  
e. Estimates (and confidence intervals) for study/trial planning: intervention effect size, variance of outcome measures, within -facility correlation in outcome 
measures, within -patient correlation in outcome measures (repeated measures).  
 
4.4 Lighting Measur es 
Physical lighting measurements will be recorded continuously at 1- minute intervals throughout  
the study using research grade photometric sensors and data logging equipment to establish 24-  
hour patterns of light / dark exposure.  Additionally, in -situ me asurements will be taken using a 
spectrometer to assess the spectral power distribution of light exposure at seated eye level.  
 5.0 SELECTION AND EXCLUSION OF SUBJECTS  
5.1 Inclusion criteria for enrollment  
The trial inclusion criteria is an AD diagnosis a nd no physical co- morbidities that preclude  
participation in the daily group intervention. Based on current facility records, we estimate the  
intervention and control groups will include approximately 160 Alzheimer disease participants 
total (20 patients p er facility). Demographic information obtained during the study preparation 
phase (mean age, gender, type of dementia by [CONTACT_637], depression level, length of time in facility, date of onset of dementia, ethnicity) will be obtained to show that the facilities are 
comparable.  
 5.2 Exclusion criteria for enrollment  
Outcome measurements will be confined to those who meet the trial inclusion criteria (AD  
diagnosis, no physical co- morbidities that preclude participation in the daily group intervention).  
 
6.0 STATISTICS  
All analyses will include factors for facility and intervention (nested within facility). Baseline analyses will include descriptors of the study sample (age, gender, ethnicity, onset of 
Alzheimer's disease) as well as initial levels of the outcome measures (depression, cognition, 
behavior) and will utilize analysis of variance for continuous data and chi -square methods for 
categorical data to compare the intervention groups. If the intervention groups are found to differ on baseline levels of the outcome variables or other variables related to outcome, these variables 
will be included as adjusting covariates in the comparisons of 12- week outcomes. 12-week 
outcomes will be compared between intervention groups with analysis of variance (2- level factor 
for intervention, 8- level factor for facility, with intervention nested within facility). For planning 
of larger trials, the following estimates will be made (a long with 95% confidence intervals) for 
each patient outcome: intervention effect size (mean group difference in outcome), variance in 
outcome (across patients, across facilities), within -facility correlation in outcomes (correlations 
in outcomes amongst patients within a facility), within -patient correlation in outcomes (repeated 
measures, baseline and 12- weeks ). 
 6.[ADDRESS_284074] sizes on intervention outcomes. Rather, the planned sample of 80 subjects per  
intervention group was selected in terms of pi[INVESTIGATOR_235045]. The planned sample is  
considered more than sufficiently adequate to address pi[INVESTIGATOR_235046] 
(of study recruitment and conduct, delivery of intervention, data collection) and estimates of 
trial- related parameters, along with 95% confidence intervals (mean intervention effect size, 
variance in outcome measures in the study population, within- facility correla tion in outcome 
measures, within -patient correlation in outcome measures). As pi[INVESTIGATOR_235047]-estimate intervention effect sizes and under -estimate measures of variance, it is crucial that 
confidence intervals (precision of the estimat es) are also calculated and available for planning of 
larger studies.  
 7.0 ASSESSMENT OF SAFETY  
The proposed study does not include any drug or device treatment and presents minimal (if any) risk to participants.  
 8.[ADDRESS_284075] to remain in the intervention spaces if they do not want to while 
participating in the study.  The informed consent form indicates to the Legally Authorized 
Representative (LAR) that he/she may withdraw his/her  consent at any time and discontinue the 
participation of his/her  family member without penalty.  
 9.[ADDRESS_284076] fulfilled the training mandated by [CONTACT_235051].  Participant privacy and data confidentiality  will 
be addressed via the following methods:  
 Research pr ocedures will be conducted in person in a private setting.  
 Data will be captured and reviewed in a private setting.  
 Only authorized research study personnel will be present during research related  
activities.  
 The collection of information about participant s is limited to the amount necessary  
to achieve aims of the research.  
 Participants will not be approached in a setting or location that may constitute an  
invasion of privacy or could potentially stigmatize them.  
 
10. DATA HANDLING AND RECORD KEEPI[INVESTIGATOR_235048] b e coded and the key codes kept separately and securely.  Research data will be 
protected against inappropriate use or disclosure via the following methods:  
 Locked office  
 Restricted access to authorized study personnel  
 Secure computer/laptop  
 Individual ID plus password protection  
 Security software (firewall, antivirus, anti -intrusion) is installed and regularly  
 updated in all servers, workstations, laptops, and other devices used in the study  
 Restrictions on copying study related materials  
 
11.[ADDRESS_284077] EM, Mastick J, Luxenberg JS, Burr RL, and Van Someren EJW, (2005).  
Effect of morning bright light treatment for rest- activity disruption in institutionalized patients 
with severe Alzheimer's disease. Int Psychogeriatr. 2005 June; 17(2): 221- 236. 
 
Day K., Carreon D., Stump D. (2000). The Therapeutic Design of Environments for People With  
Dementia A Review of the Empi[INVESTIGATOR_235049]. The Gerontologist (2000) 40 (4): 397- 416. 
Golden RN, Gaynes BN, Ekstrom RD, Hamer RM, Jacobsen FM, Suppes T, Wisner KL, 
Nemeroff CB. (2005).  
 The Efficacy of Light Therapy in the Treatment of Mood Disorders: A Review and 
Meta -Analysis of the Evidence. Am J Psychiatry 2005; 162:656- 662. 
 Cohen- Mansfield, J. (2001). Nonpharmacologic Interventions for Ina ppropriate Behaviors in  
Dementia, A Review, Summary, and Critique Am J Geriatr Psychiatry 9:4, Fall 2001.  
 
Forbes D, Morgan DG, Bangma J, Peacock S, Adamson J. (2009). Light Therapy for Managing 
Sleep, Behaviour, and Mood Disturbances in Dementia (Review).  Copyright 2009 The Cochrane  
Collaboration. Published by [CONTACT_91018] & Sons, Ltd.  
 
Labbate LA, Lafer B, Thibault A, Sachs GS. (1994). Side effects induced by [CONTACT_235052]. J Clin Psychiatry 1994; 55:189- 191. 
  Terman M, Terman JS (1999). Bright light therapy: side effects and benefits across the symptom  
spectrum. J Clin Psychiatry 1999; 60:799, 808.  
 