 
PROTOCOL TITLE:  Will Patients Perceive a Vapocoolant Spray to be Effective in Reducing 
Pain and Increasing Satisfaction with Insertion at an Intravenous Site?  
PRINCIPLE INVESTIGATOR:  
[CONTACT_482837] , MD  
Aultman Health Foundation - Interventional Radiology  
(330) 363 -2842  
[EMAIL_9290]  
SUB -INVESTIGATORS:  
Jennifer Miller, BSN, RN, PCCN   Laura Wagner, ASR, RT (R)(N), CNMT  
Aultman H ealth Foundation - Radiology  Aultman Health Foundation - Nuclear Medicine  
(330) 363 -4874     (330) 363 -6204  
[EMAIL_9291]    [EMAIL_9292]  
VERSIO N NUMBER: 3 
VERSION DATE: February 2, 2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Vapocoolant Spray Used Prior to IV Cannulation  
Version: February 2, 2017  TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1.0 INTRODUCTION ……………………………………………………………………… …… [ADDRESS_620291]  
 1.2 Relevant  Literature and Data  Rationale  
2.0 STUDY OBJECTIVES ………………………………………………………………… …… [ADDRESS_620292] SELECTION ……………………………………………………………… ……. [ADDRESS_620293] ENROLLMENT …………………………………………………………… …… 5 
5.0 STUDY DESIGN AND PROCEDURES ……………………………………………… …… 5 
 5.1 Design/ Study Type  
 5.2 Selection of Instruments  
 5.3 Description of Intervention …………………………………………………………… …..[ADDRESS_620294] Handling and Storage  
  5.3.3 Intervention Administration  
 5.4 Data Collection ……………………………………………………………………… ……. 7 
6.0 STUDY ADMINISTRATION ………………………………………………………… ……. 8 
 6.1 Description of Study Process  
 6.2 Data Quality and Confidentiality  
 6.3 Regulatory and Ethical Consideration .................................................................................9  
  6.3.1 Risk Assessment  
  6.3.2 Potential Benefits of Study Participation ……………………………… …… 10 
  6.3.3 Informed Consent/Assent and HIPPA Authorization  
7.0 SAFETY MAN AGEMENT …………………………………………………………… …...10 
7.1 Adverse Events and Collection/Reporting  
 7.2 Data Safety Monitoring Plan  
8.0 STATISTICAL CONSIDERATIONS ………………………………………………......... 10 
9.0 OUTCOMES AND SIGNIFICANCE …………………………………………… ……….. 11 
10.0 REFERENC ES………………………………………………………………………… …...12 
 
3 
Vapocoolant Spray Used Prior to IV Cannulation  
Version: February 2, 2017  11.0 APPENDIC ES………………………………………………………………………… …… [ADDRESS_620295]  
The primary purpose of this study is to determine if by [CONTACT_14659] a vapocoolant 
(cold spray) to Nuclear Medicine outpatients prior to having an intravenous 
catheter (IV) inserted will increase patient satisfaction of IV insertion as well as 
determine if pain of insertion is decreased. Furthermore, this study will examine 
the patients’ willingness to use a vapocoolant spray with future IV insert ions and 
potentially reduce anxiety when an IV insertion is required.  
 1.2  Relevant Literature and Data Rationale  
Patients requiring intravenous (IV) access are faced with the necessity of an 
invasive and uncomfortable procedure. Approximately 25 mill ion people in the 
[LOCATION_002] and 90% of all hospi[INVESTIGATOR_482819]. 
(Levitt, F.C. & Ziemba -Davis, M., 2013).  
 Pain management during medical care, in addition to being recognized as a basic 
human right, impacts a patient’s s atisfaction. (Hogan, M., Smart, S., Shah, V., & 
Taddio, A., 2014). The Joint Commission standards endorsed by [CONTACT_482826]. The 
standard of care for managing pain associated with invasive  procedures is to 
anticipate and ameliorate pain to the greatest degree possible. (Levitt et al., 2013).  
Research studies have been conducted to determine the least painful method of 
anesthetizing a peripheral IV site in addition to studying patient’s per ception of 
the anesthetizing agent. One study found that the use of 1% lidocaine 
intradermally before insertion of IV catheter was the most effective technique in 
reducing IV catheter insertion discomfort (Winfield, C., Knicely, C., Jensen, C., 
Taylor, S.,  Thomas, K., Burns, S., & Quatrara, B., 2013) however this particular 
method requires a physician order for lidocaine injection, can become costly and 
subjects the patient to an additional needle stick.  The advantage of utilizing a 
vapocoolant spray has b een researched and found to likely reduce pain during 
intravenous cannulation and are not likely to make cannulation more difficult nor 
cause serious adverse events. (Griffith, R., Jordon, V., Herd, D., Reed, P., & 
Dalziel, S., 2016).  
This study is necess ary to further support the use of a vapocoolant spray as a tool 
in managing pain or the perception of pain prior to IV cannulation insertion.  
2.0 STUDY OBJECTIVES  
 2.1 Primary Objective  
The Nuclear Medicine department at Aultman Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_482820] t he issue 
surrounding pain and satisfaction associated with the invasive procedure of 
starting an intravenous catheter (IV) for the in jection of radiopharmaceutical  
 
4 
Vapocoolant Spray Used Prior to IV Cannulation  
Version: February 2, 2017  and/or medications needed to complete nuclear images and provide for viable 
scans. The prima ry purpose of this stud y is to determine if by [CONTACT_2931]  a 
vapocoolant ( cold spray) at the IV insertion site  on Nuclear Medicine outpatients 
will increase the satisfaction with IV insertion as well as determine if pain of 
insertion is decreased. Furthermore , this study will examine the patients’ 
perception in using a vapocoolant sp ray as a way to improve upon the traditional 
method of starting IV’s that do not offer pain management prior to their insertion.  
A sterile water  mist will be used as the comparator  spray to add validity to the 
standard of care arm.  
Research Question s: 
For the purpose of this study, the following questions will be addressed:  
1. Will patients perceive a vapocoolant spray to be  more  effective in 
reducing pain prior to IV cannulation insertion  over saline spray ? 
2. Will the use of a vapocoolant spray increase satisfaction with insertion at 
an intravenous site  over that of a sterile water spray ? 
2.2 Secondary Objective  
The broader implication to this study is to bring awareness to both car egivers and 
patients alike that there are options for pain management when IV insertions are 
needed and/or required. Furthermore, vapocoolant sprays are  already being 
utilized for pain management in accessing port -a-cath sites in our Radiology 
department t herefore this study could use the same spray as is indicated for its use 
in accessing IV insertion sites.  
3.[ADDRESS_620296] at Aultman Heart Center . 
 3.2 Exclusion Criteria  
  Patients will be excluded from this study for the following reasons:  
  1) If this is the first time the patient has ever had an intravenous catheter (IV).  
  2) Any patient under the age of 18 and/ or any patient over the age of 85.  
  3). Those who are or may be pregnant.  
  4) Any woma n who is breastfeeding.  
  5) Any patient who has taken any narcotic, sedative , and/or as needed anti -anxiety       
                         medication within the last 8  hours of the intravenous catheter insertion.  
6). Any persons who are non -English speaking.  
7). Any persons who are decisionally impaired.  
 
5 
Vapocoolant Spray Used Prior to IV Cannulation  
Version: February 2, 2017  8). Any persons who are illiterate.  
9). Any patient who has had a known hypersensitivity  and/or allergy  to Ethyl     
     Chloride.  
10). Any persons who have  been diagnosed  with Raynaud’s Syndrome and/or    
      Carpal Tunnel Syndrome.  
4.[ADDRESS_620297] check in at the front 
desk for his/her scheduled exam. The patient will need to fill out the necessary 
documents required  by [CONTACT_482827] e stress test 
imaging. In addition to the patient will be given  a letter to make them aware that a 
research study is being conducted within the department.  (See Attachment 1 -Explanation 
of Research Study). This let ter is only intended to inform the patient that a research study 
is being conducted this is not intended to be used for the consent process. When it is time 
for the patient’s exam the researcher will take the patient back to the injection room 
where an exp lanation for the exam and need for IV access will be explained .  
The researcher of the study will have information from the patient’s health record that 
will indicate a patient’ s age and gender. The researcher will automatically exclude any 
persons who do not meet the age requirement  in addition to asking the patient if this is 
the first time they have ever had an intravenous catheter placed.  Also at this  time the 
researcher will determine if the patient is able to speak and read English as well as 
determin e if the patient is decisionally aw are. The  patient will be asked additional 
questions to determine the patient’s inclusion /exclusion s to participate in the research 
study. (See Attachment 2 - Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria C hecklist). If the patient does not  
meet the criteria set fort h for the study the patient will be told that they do not qualify at 
that time and that their nuclear exam will continue as ordered without the use of the 
research interventional spray being used in the study and they will get an  IV using the 
method currently in practice. If a patient is eligible to participate in the study the 
researcher will  make the patient aware of their eligibility and again explain the use of a 
vapocoolant spray  vs. a placebo spray  prior to IV insertion.  The researcher will explain to 
the patient why the study is being conducted and allow the patient adequate time to 
decide on whether to participate in the study. If the patient chooses to participate in the 
study they will be asked to read and sign /date the H RRB approved research consent form.  
(See Attachment 3 - Consent Form ). Subjects will be given ample time to consider 
participation and have all of their questions addressed.  
5.0 STUDY DESIGN AND PROCEDURES  
 5.1  Design/Study Type  
This is a single blind  interventional study with a post design  using a convenience 
sample of patients undergoing a Nuclear Medicine Stress Test at Aultman Heart 
Center .  
 
6 
Vapocoolant Spray Used Prior to IV Cannulation  
Version: February 2, 2017   5.2 Selection of Instruments   
A questionnaire will be filled out by [CONTACT_482828] . (See Attachment 4 - Patient Questionnaire 
and Researcher Documentation Form ). The patient will be provided with a visual 
diagram of a 0 -10 pai n scale and a 1 -5 satisfaction Likert S cale. (See Attachment 
5- Visual Pain and Satisfaction Scale ). 
 5.[ADDRESS_620298] chosen for this is known as  Nature’s Tears Eye mist and is 
manufactured by [CONTACT_44313] -Logic Aqua Research  Technologies International 
Inc. This product was used as a placebo in a simila r study. (Mace, S .E., 
2016). This product is marketed to be used for the eyes and face  but for 
the purpose  of this study we will use it off  label for its preservative  and 
chemical free, non -allergenic, sterile properties. “With Nature’s Tears 
EyeMist, the assembly process begins with a plastic, aluminized barrier 
bag which is attached to a plastic applicator nozzle. The rigid aluminum 
canister, with bag and nozzle in place, is then pressurized with nitrogen, 
an inert chemical that comprises 80% of the air we breathe. Nitrogen has a 
greater capacity to pressurize than oxygen or air, retards f reezing, and 
microbes cannot live in nitrogen. The unit is then sealed with a rubber 
gasket. In the extremely unlikely event that the gasket fails, the unit would 
depressurize and simply not work. As long as the seal is intact, the 
contents remain clean an d sterile. ” (Bio Logic Aqua Research 
Tech nologies International Inc, 2010 .) The product has a four -year shelf 
life. (Bio Logic Aqua Research Technologies International Inc. 2010 .) The  
experimental group will receive a spray that is manufactured by [CONTACT_482829] P/N  
[ADDRESS_620299] spray is 
indicated for temporary control of pain associat ed with injections, starting 
IV’s and venipuncture , minor surgery and minor sports injuries. 
(Gebauer’s Ethyl Chloride Spray, 2016).  
The Nature’s Tears Eye mist and Ethyl C hloride sprays used will be 
unidentifiable by [CONTACT_482830]. The Radiol ogy department at 
Aultman hospi[INVESTIGATOR_482821] s needed in this 
study. The Gebauer Company  indicates that each spray can may be used 
up to 50 times therefore for the purpose of this study it is estimated that 2 
cans will be ne eded.  The Bio -Logic Aqua Research Technologies 
 
7 
Vapocoolant Spray Used Prior to IV Cannulation  
Version: February 2, 2017  corporate office has agreed to send 2 cans of their Nature’s Tears Eye mist 
at no charge.   
5.3.[ADDRESS_620300] Handling and Storage  
The manufacturer of Nature’s Tears Eye Mist  MDS report  (see 
Attachment 7) indicate s that the can  should be stored at room temperature 
and should not be stored at temperature’s greater than  50ºC (120ºF).  
(Biologic Aqua Technologies, 2013). For the purpose of this  study the 
Nature's Tear Mist spray will be refrigerated to "mimic " a col d spray. 
There are no documented contraindications that refrigeration would affect 
the sterility or application of the spray. The refrigerator is located in the 
Nuclear Medicine department's "Hot Lab"  that is monitored by 
[CONTACT_482831] a locke d room.  The Gebauer Company's 
Safety Data Sheet (SDS) (see Attachment 6) indicates that the ethyl 
chloride spray should be stored in cool, dry well ventilated area. Protect 
against physical damage. Do not su bject to temperatures above 120°F 
(50°C). Do not store near high frequency ultrasound equipment or non -
explosion proof electrical equipment. (Gebau er Company, 2013.)  This 
product will be stored in a locked cabinet located in the Nuclear Medicine 
Department's scan room which is temperature controlled at 72°F.  
5.3.[ADDRESS_620301] an IV site; the 
patient’s skin will be cleansed prior to the i ntervention spray bein g applied 
per hospi[INVESTIGATOR_23155].  The researcher will then spray the intervention spray 
made by [CONTACT_482832]’s  
recommendations which is to spray the Ethyl Chloride aerosol can for 4 to 
10 seconds from a distance of 3 to 9 inches (8 -23 cm).  Do not spray longer 
than [ADDRESS_620302] turns white; do not frost the skin. With skin,  taut, quickly introduce 
the needle because the numbing effect of ethyl chloride only last s for a 
few seconds to a minute.  (Gebauer’s Ethyl Chloride Spray, 2016).  
Reapplication of the spray to the area when it has been too long or is no 
longer “numb” is also indicated by [CONTACT_482833]. For the 
control group the patient’s s kin will be prepared per hospi[INVESTIGATOR_482822]'s Tears Eye Mist t o the area for 4 -10 
seconds prior to IV access.  
5.4 Data Collection  
The questionnaire (See Attachment 4 - Patient Questionnaire and Researcher 
Documentation Form ) will include the following questions  prior to the use of the 
intervention : 
 
8 
Vapocoolant Spray Used Prior to IV Cannulation  
Version: February 2, 2017  1.) Using the visual analog scale provided how would you rate your pain the last 
time you  remember having  an IV inserted?  
2.) Using  a 0-[ADDRESS_620303] time you 
remember having an IV inserted?  
3.) Do you think it is important to control the pain of starting an IV?   
Once the IV has been placed the researcher will ask the patient the follow ing 
questions:  
1.) Using the same 0 -10 pain scale how would you rate this IV insertion?  
2.) Using the same 1 -5 satisfaction scale how satisfied were you with this IV 
insertion?  
3.) Would you choose to have a spray used again if you needed to have an IV 
inserted  in the future ? 
 The researcher will document the patient responses as well as the angiocat heter 
size, angiocath eter location, numbers of IV start attempts , the time that the 
intervention was applied  and what interventional spray was used . (See 
Attachment 4 - Patient Ques tionnaire and Researcher Documentation Form ). This 
information will be coded and will be used to analyze study results post 
intervention.  The presence of adverse events will be monitored and documented 
for [ADDRESS_620304] exam is performed. The anticipated time it will take to gather 
the patient’s information, conduct the recruitment and consent portion of the study 
is approximately 30 minutes per patient. This study will use a convenience sample 
of patients over a 4 -month period. The target goal  is 30 patients;  however,  
researchers may recruit up to [ADDRESS_620305] additional attempts by [CONTACT_482834], 
their study will automatically be excluded.  
 6.2 Data Quality and Confidentiality  
 
9 
Vapocoolant Spray Used Prior to IV Cannulation  
Version: February 2, [ADDRESS_620306]. Mitryan Kar will be responsible for the following:  
1). Explaining the study to potential participants along with conducting the 
consent process with the patient.  
2). Asking related questions to consented participants regardin g the research 
information obtained during the conduction of this study.  
3). The medical review of p atient health information determine eligibility.  
4). Administration of the vapocoolant spray and placebo spray prior to IV access.  
5). Performing IV access on study participants  
6). Identifying any adverse reaction to the intervention being used.  All adverse 
events will be reported to and managed by [CONTACT_189451].  
These responsibilities performed only by [CONTACT_192171] I nvestigators  will ensure  that 
there will be no threat to the validity of the study being performed and its study 
results.  Data for this study will be kept only as long as the study is being 
conducted and analyzed for results. Once this information has been obtained all 
records will be dis carded in accordance with hospi[INVESTIGATOR_482823] . Within the consenting process the patient will be made aware that 
their information will be kept confidential and that the patient has the right to end 
their participation in the study a t any point.  
 6.[ADDRESS_620307] been tested and studied for any ad verse 
reactions. Sterile water can will be cooled  in a refrigerator to “mimic” a 
cooling sensation when applied to the patient’s skin. The only foreseeable 
risk would be the perceived “cold” by [CONTACT_102]. Because the sterile 
water is sterile there is no risk to contamination of the skin after the 
resea rcher has applied the aseptic technique for accessing an intravenous 
catheter. The Gebauer Company , the manufacturer of the interventional 
vapocoolant ethyl chloride spray has indicated that it is extremely rare to 
have an adverse reaction to the ethyl chl oride however c utaneous 
sensitization may occur . Freezing can occasionally alter skin 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_371].  A study has been published in the Journal of Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_482824] “Effects of vapocoolant spray on skin sterility p rior to 
intravenous cannulation”  which concluded that vapocoolant spray does not 
recontaminate  the skin after disinfection, and should pose no increased 
risk of infection when used as an anesthetic  agent prior to intravenous 
cannulation. (Evans, J.G., Taylor, D.M., Hurren, F., Ward, P., Yeoh, M., 
& Howden, B.P., 2015).  
 
10 
Vapocoolant Spray Used Prior to IV Cannulation  
Version: February 2, [ADDRESS_620308] precautions when using the ethyl chloride 
spray specifically stated as: Do not spray in eyes. Inhalation of ethyl 
chloride should be avoided as it may produce narcotic and general 
anesthetic effects , and may produce deep anesthesia or fatal coma with 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_227486]. Ethyl chloride is flammable and should never 
be used in the presence of an open flame or electrical cautery equipment. 
When used to produce local freezing of tissues, adjac ent skin areas should 
be protected by [CONTACT_482835]. The thawing process may be 
painful, and freezing may lower local resistance to infection and delay 
healing. (Gabauer’s Ethyl Chloride Spray, 2016).  
The sub investigators for the study will monitor the patient for any 
potential reaction to the ethyl chloride spray. The most common reaction 
being temporary skin color changes at the spray site. Furthermore, the sub 
investigators  will monitor for the very rare but severe allergic reactions 
that could occur including rash; hives; itching; difficulty breathing; 
tightness in the chest; swelling of t he mouth, face, lips, or tongue ; 
decreased urination; symptoms of liver problems (eg, dark urine; loss of 
appetite; pale stools; stomach pain; unusual nausea or tiredness; yellowing 
of the skin or eyes).  (Gebauer’s Ethyl Chloride Spray, 2016).  (See 
Attachment 6 - The Gebauer Company’s Safety Data Sheet (SDS).  
  6.3.[ADDRESS_620309] udy Participation  
The benefit to the patient who receives the intervention prior to IV 
cannulation can result in the possible reduction in pain during the IV 
access and/or the perception thereof.  Knowledge gained from this research 
may help guide treatment  guidelines in the future.  
  6.3.3  Informed Consent/Assent and HIPPA Authorization  
In order to protect human rights this study will be conducted in full 
conformance with principles of “Declaration of Helsinki” and good 
clinical practice. This study will co mply with all protocols set forth for 
research at Aultman Health Foundation under the guidance of the HRRB.  
7.0 SAFETY MANAGEMENT  
 7.1 Adverse Events and Collection/Reporting  
The patients in this study will remain in the department for at least [ADDRESS_620310] interventional spray  specifically 
the use of the ethyl chloride spray to ensure no reaction has  and/or will occur  as it 
relates to the use of ethyl chloride . In the case that an ad verse reaction would 
occur the Principle I nvestigator of the study [CONTACT_482837] would be contact[CONTACT_482836].  
 7.[ADDRESS_620311]. All 
Investigators will be trained on reporting and oversight of regulatory 
 
11 
Vapocoolant Spray Used Prior to IV Cannulation  
Version: February 2, [ADDRESS_620312] three (3) patients and every [ADDRESS_620313] up to 80 participants . 
Statistical assistance will be sought to assure accurate data input and complete data 
results.  
 
9.0 OUTCOMES AND SIGNIFICANCE  
The intention of this study is to measure whether the use of a vapocool ant spray as an 
intervention increase s the patient’s sat isfaction of IV insertion and decrease the patient’s 
pain and/or perception thereof. This interventional study aims to show that the use of a 
vapocoolant spray prior to IV cannulation insertion will not only yield positive feedback 
from patients undergoing  Nuclear Medicine scans but that such an intervention could 
change the traditional methods used for starting IV’s  in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_482825]. 
Furthermore, this study  can be used to compare the use of a vapocoolant spray versus 
current practice which is not u sing a vapocoolant spray on IV insertions. This comparison 
will lead to awareness in pain management for IV insertions as well as determine if such 
a spray is cost effective and necessary.  
 
  
 
12 
Vapocoolant Spray Used Prior to IV Cannulation  
Version: February 2, 2017  10.0  REFERENCES  
1. Levitt, [LOCATION_009]sca C., MSN, RN -BC, Ziemba -David, Mary (2013). An exploratory study 
of patient preferences for pain management during intravenous insertion: Maybe we 
should sweat the small stuff.  Journal of PeriAnesthesia Nursing 28 (4) , 223 -232. 
2. Bio Log ic Aqua Research Techn ologies International Inc. (2010 ). Nature’s Tears Eye 
Mist. Retrieved  on February 2, 2017  from 
http://www.naturestears.com//pdf/NaturesTearsBrochure2010.pdf . 
3.  Bio Logic Aqua Research Technologies International Inc.  (2013, January 1). Nature's 
Tears Eye Mist . [Material Safety Data Sheet]. Retrieved from 
http://www.naturestears.com/MSDS/MSDS -BLARTI -[LOCATION_003] -NT-2014.pdf  
4. Gebauer Company (2016). Ethyl Chloride . Retrieved from 
http://cdn2.hubspot.net/hubfs/150313/docs/Ethyl_Chloride/Application/EC_English_IFU
.pdf. 
5. Gabauer Company. (2013, April 23). Ethyl Ch loride . [Safety Data Sheet]. Retrieved from 
http://cdn2.hubspot.net/hubfs/150313/docs/Ethyl_Chloride/Safety_Sheets/EC_English_S
DS.pdf  
6. Griffith, RJ., Herd, V., Herd, D., Reed, PW., & Dalziel, SR., (2016). Vapocoolants (cold 
spray) for pain treatment duri ng intravenous cannulation. The Cochrane Collaboration, 4, 
1-20. 
7. Hogan, Mary -Ellen., BSCPHM, PHARMD, MSC, Smart, Sarah, BSC, MSC, Shah, 
Vibhuti., MD, MSC & Taddio, Anna., BSCPHM, MSC, PHD (2014). A systematic 
review of vapocoolants for reducing pain fro m venipuncture and venous cannulation in 
children and adults. The Journal of Emergency Medicine 47, (6) , [ADDRESS_620314], P., Yeoh, M., & Howden, B.P. (2015). 
Effects of vapocoolant spray on skin sterility prior to i ntravenous cannulation. Journal of 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_113626], 90 (4),  333-337. 
9. Mace, S.E. (2016). Prospective, randomized, double -blind controlled trial comparing 
vapocoolant spray vs placebo spray in adults undergoing venipuncture, American Journal 
of Emergency Medicine, 34, 798-804. 
10. Winfield, C., BSN, RN, CAPA, Knicely, C., BSN, RN, CAPA, Jensen, C., BSN, RN, 
CAPA, Taylor, S., RN, Thomas, K., BSN, RN, Conaway, M., PhD, Burns, S., MSN, RN, 
RRT, ACNP, CCRN, FCCM, FAANP, FAAN, & Qu atrara, B., DNP, RN, ACNS -BC 
(2013). What is the least pa inful me thod of anesthetizing a peripheral IV site?  Journal of  
PeriAnesthesia Nursing, 28, (4),  217-222. 
  
 
13 
Vapocoolant Spray Used Prior to IV Cannulation  
Version: February 2, 2017  11.0 APPENDICES  
 11.1 Attachment 1 -Explanation of Research Study  
 11.2 Attachment 2 - Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria Checklist  
 11.3 Attachment 3 - Consent Form  
 11.4 Attachment 4 - Patient Questionnaire and Researcher Documentation Form  
 11.5 Attachment 5 - Visual Pain and Satisfaction Scale  
 11.6 Attachment 6 - The Gebauer Company’s Safety Data  Sheet (SDS).  
 11.7 Attachment 7 - Bio Logic Aqua Research Technologies International Inc. Monitor  
        Safety Data Sheet (MSDS).  
 
 