Page 1 of 17   
  
     
Protocol Title : Oregon HIV/Hepatitis and Opi[INVESTIGATOR_367165] (OR -HOPE) Study: Tele -HCV Treatment Trial  
 
  
 
 Principal Investigator:   P. Todd Korthuis, MD  
    OHSU  
    (503) 494- 8044  
 ClinicalTrials.gov ID:   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
   
Protocol Revision Date:  October 13, 2022  
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
    
 
 
Page 2 of 17   
  
 Oregon HIV/Hepatitis and Opi[INVESTIGATOR_367166] (OR -
HOPE) Study: Tele-HCV Treatment Trial  
 
Principal Investigator:    P. Todd Korthuis, MD  
      OHSU  
      (503) 494- 8044  
  
ClinicalTrials.gov ID:   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]   
   
  Protocol Revision Date:   10/13/[ADDRESS_458797] -treatment (SVR12).  
 
 Background  
 
Untreated drug use is associated with increased hepatitis C (HCV) risk. People living in rural areas – with 
limited access to prevention and treatment resources – may be particularly susceptible to unchecked 
HCV transmission. A recent analysis identified six rural county characteristics associated with acute HCV 
infection rates - mainly due to injection drug use - including drug- overdose deaths, prescription opi[INVESTIGATOR_367167], per capi[INVESTIGATOR_367168], white non- Hispanic race/ethnicity, unemployment, and limited buprenorphine 
prescribing capacity.  
 
 HCV  transmission is primarily driven by [CONTACT_129787]. As a result, HCV is endemic among 
people who used drugs (PW UD). Guidelines state that HCV treatment should be prioritized among 
patients with substance use disorders, yet only a small percentage (<10%) of PWUD access treatment.  
The advent of newer highly effective, direct -acting anti -HCV treatments provides an opportunity to limit 
or even eradicate HCV. However, realizing treatment benefits depends on whether PWUD can be identified, tested, and linked to care, and many PWUD in rural communities struggle to engage with 
traditional health settings  and testing mechanisms. In particular, venipuncture based diagnostics can be 
traumatizing and challenging for people with current or past injection drug use. Several studies held 
outside of the [LOCATION_002]  have suggested improved test acceptance with dried blood spot (DBS) 
versus traditional venipuncture by [CONTACT_367180]. These tests have not yet been validated for use in the [LOCATION_002] with comm ercial 
laboratories. For this purpose, we will implement  the study in t wo phases. Phase 1; validating the DBS 
testing measures, Phase 2; implementing telemedicine hepatitis C treatment after DBS diagnosis. 
Continuing to phase [ADDRESS_458798] share d experiences drug use and recovery  to develop rapport and link patients to care. Peer 
support specialists can facilitate HCV testing and linkage to telehealth HCV treatment for people who use drugs.  
Page 3 of 17   
   
Study Design Non-blinded, randomized controlled trial . In-depth qualitative interviews assess 
attitudes and barriers to treatment.   
 
The study will be implemented in two phases; Phase 2 is not contingent on Phase 1.  
 
 Study Population 
a) Number of Subjects  
In Phase 1, potential participants will be pulled from a convenience sample at a Portland clinic providing 
care for the urban area. An initial target sample of 100 Hepatitis C positive participants will be enrolled 
for DBS validation. Power will be reassessed based on feedback from receiver operating curve model 
and additional participants enrolled up to a total of 100 Hepatitis C Positive participants, if necessary. A total of 500 potential participants can be screened expecting 1 in every 4 participants will be pos itive 
HCV.  
 
In Phase 2, r ural peer care coordinators (PCCs) and research assistants recruit up to [ADDRESS_458799] community outreach (e.g. 
community barbeques, parks, homeless shelters, food pantries, etc.). Participants are encouraged to refer others for study screening.  
 
A subset of up to 40  study participants will complete in- depth qualitative interviews regarding their 
experiences of hepatitis C treatment.  
 
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
 
Phase 1: Initial DBS Validation Aim  
Participants are eligible for inclusion if they:  
1) present in person to Central City Concern (CCC) health services for other critical needs  
2) elect to screen for hepatitis C, HIV, and hepatitis B while waiting for other health service 
completion  
3) are age 18 years or greater  
 
Participants are excluded if they:  
1) inability to perform consent, DBS testing, or incentive distribution without increasing participant 
social exposure or personal protective equipment utilization  
actively receiving HCV treatment  
 
Phase 2: TeleHepC Aim  
Participants are eligible for inclusion if they:  
1) live in the study area  
2) have injected drugs or report recreational opi[INVESTIGATOR_367169] 90 days  
3) are age 18 or greater  
4) have chronic active, untreated hepatitis C (defined as positive HCV RNA)  
5) are seeking treatment for hepatitis C infection.  
6) are able to communicate in English (this is due to the fact that less than 5% of the population i n 
which we are targeting will be non- English speaking; see “Non- English Speaking Subject s” for 
additional information).  
7) are enrolled in health insurance  
Page 4 of 17   
 Participants are excluded if they:  
1) Have decompensated cirrhosis , defined as Child- Turcotte -Pugh (CTP)  score of 7 or greater, 
or CTP B cirrhosis. CTP scoring is a composite of laboratory metrics (bilirubin, albumin, 
PT/INR) and clinical findings, including:  
a. increased abdominal or lower extremity swelling  
b. confusion consistent with hepatic encephalopathy  
2) Are pregnant or breastfeeding  
 
b) Vulnerable Populations  
Children:   Children will not be included in the study; subjects age 18 and greater are eligible for inclusion.   
 
Prisoners:  This study is likely to enroll  persons involved in the crimin al jus tice system  related to 
substance use. The study w ill not recru it pe rsons incarcer ated/detained in a corre ctional facility or 
currently considered “prisoners” by [CONTACT_367181] , but w ill not ex clude pa rolees or probationers. 
Those participants who become incarcerated during the course of their involvement with this study will continue to be followed to ensure safety and data integrity. If necessary, specific documents for 
incarcerated participants will be developed and approved by [CONTACT_269621]. Appropriate progress notes 
will be written to ensure complete documentation of any interaction with an incarcerated participant, specifically mentioning confidentiality procedures.   
The project has been granted a federal Cert ificate of Co nfidentiality. An OHRP Prisoner Research 
Certification Letter will be filed through the OHSU IRB and distributed to the sites. Local sites will be 
covered by [CONTACT_367182]’s Certificate of Confidentiality and the OHRP Prisoner Certification to enable study follow up visits for  participant who may become incarcerated.    
 c) Non-English Speaking Subjects  
Oregon opi[INVESTIGATOR_367170]/Latino population has been relatively spared from this epi[INVESTIGATOR_901]. Hispanic/Latino patients accounted for 3.7% of opi[INVESTIGATOR_367171] 2015, and nearly 
all speak English. We consequently anticipate a very small fraction  of study participants will be mono -
lingual Spanish speaking. The very small numbers provide insufficient statistical power to assess 
differences by [CONTACT_367183]. We thus believe that collecting Spanish language data is not justified on 
scientific grounds for this study . 
 
Setting 
Participating Sites:  
1 Oregon Health & Science University (OHSU) leads the project, under the direction of [CONTACT_367212]. 
OHSU will participate in data quality assurance during study implementation analysis, train PCCs  
and research assistants ( RAs) in study procedures, conduct analyses, and disseminat e qualitative 
and quantitative results. HIV Alliance and Comagine are deferring to OHSU’s IRB; the Oregon 
Health Authority will be using its own IRB for project review.  
 
[ADDRESS_458800] Step (BAFS) is a community based service organization that provides housing, and 
peer-delivered services designed to support individuals and families. BAFS peer mentors will serve 
as intervention PSSs. BAFS PSSs will recruit and provide linkage to care for PWUD and collect survey data.  BAFS plays an active role in the community and has strong relationships with potential 
participants.  
Page [ADDRESS_458801] in administrative support of tele- HCV treatment 
and advise the study team on implementation, interpretation, and dissemination of study findings.  
 
6. Implementation Locations: The study catchment area includes Douglas, rural Lane, Josephine, 
Coos, Curry, Tillamook, Umatilla, and Clatsop counties.  
 
7. Central City Concern: CCC  is a community -based homelessness services organization located in 
Portland, Oregon. They will participate as the Phase 1 site for DBS validation. CCC hepatitis C 
team staff will perform usual HCV screening and linkage- to-care interventions, consent individuals 
for DBS validation study inclusion, perform DBS testing, and deliver and track incentives.  
 
8.  Oregon Washington Health Network (OWHN) is a community -based network that addresses 
mental and physical health, and houses peer support specialists.  Peer support specialists will recruit participants and facilitate telemedicine appointments.  The OWHN research assistant will consent participants and conduct study assessments.    
 
d) Recruitment Methods 
 Participant Recruitment :  
Phase 1: Central City Concern continues to screen for and treat hepatitis C during the COVID -
19 pandemic providing clients are presenting in-person for other critical health services. 
Individuals are offered HCV screening by [CONTACT_367184]. CCC clients on 
campus who opt -in to screen for hepatitis C will be offered venipuncture screening and 
confirmation labs as per usual clinical practice. After assent to testing, individuals will offer optional participation in DBS validation study.  
 Participants will receive $[ADDRESS_458802] .  
 
Phase 2:  HIV Alliance already supports  syringe exchange and rapid HIV/HCV screening in Douglas, 
Lane, Josephine and Coos Counties. Community -based syringe exchange programs will serve as  initial 
recruitment sites and supplemented with community settings (e.g. parks, homeless shelters, community 
barbeques , etc.) . Research staff will also approach participants of the Oregon HOPE study who have 
previously consented to be contact[CONTACT_367185]. Our 
preliminary data suggest that HCV treatment is highly sought -after by [CONTACT_367186].  
 
This project will use snowball sampling to recruit participants. Research staff will encourage 
participants to use their personal networks to invite individuals who may be interested in partaking in 
the intervention. There will not be incentives provided for referrals or a specific set number of 
participants encouraged to recruit.  
 
Compensation: Participants will receive compensation in the form of cash  if they are located in 
Douglas, Josephine, Coos, Curry or Josephine County . OWHN p articipants will receive compensation 
in the form of Visa gift cards.   
 
In the event a participant becomes incarcerated, with their permission, the study team may give their study compensation to a friend or family member to pass along to them so they may have access to it while incarcerated. If the participant does not give permission, compensation will be given to participant when they are able to receive it.  
Page [ADDRESS_458803] Incentive Amount  
Prescreen/ Rapid Test/ Blood Draw / Dried Blood 
Spot Testing , Full Consent   $20 
Screening  blood draw  $20 
*If necessary* second blood draw for missed 
blood draws  $20 
Return for Results and Baseline Survey  $15 
4 - Week survey  $20 
End of treatment survey   $30 
*12-weeks after end of treatment survey  $20 
*12-weeks after end of treatment blood draw  $40 
36 weeks after end of treatment survey, 
reinfection labs  $30 
Total  $215 
 
Cash Incentives:  
Tracking systems will be handling cash compensation. The RA will document the serial number of each 
bill upon obtaining the cash and again when distributing cash to the participant. Research staff will internally audit and count cash incentive records each week. The Quality Assurance staff member will audit monthly. When carrying cash in the field, only small, pre- counted amounts of cash will be carrier. 
These will be kept in a locked box in a discrete location of the vehicle.   Study participants may choose to seek substance use treatment at residential treatment facilities.  Some residential facilities discourage or prohibit patients from having cash at the facility while in 
treatment. When a study participant is a patient of such a facility and continues to engage in study visits 
and activities, field staff will hold their study incentives in a locked box at the study office, and distribute funds to the participant when they leave residential treatment.  
 
Gift Card Incentives:  
Tracking systems will be handling electronic gift cards. The RA will document the gift card number upon 
distribution. Research staff will internally audit the gift card count.    The electronic gift card tracking 
sheet will be kept in a secure folder on Box  
 
e) Consent  Process 
 
Phase 1:  
Potential participants will be consented by [CONTACT_1744] -approved CCC HCV team staff at the time of usual care. 
Extreme efforts will be made to ensure potential participants are able to maintain social distancing 
precautions before, during, and after the engagement with the HCV team. Consent will be offered at the 
time of testing in a private room one on one with HCV team staff using existing COVID -19 protocol 
screening practices, consisting of N95 mask and face shield for staff and surgical mask for participants. 
All surfaces, pens used for consent, and high touch surfaces will be sterilized as per CCC practices. Staff 
will remind consenting participants that participation is voluntary and that they may withdraw their consent 
at any time. Participants will be assessed for understanding of study procedures.  
 Phase 2:  
 People who use drugs will be consented by [CONTACT_1744] -approved research assistants, Peer Care Coordinators 
or syringe exchange outreach staff employed by [CONTACT_367187].  The consent process will take place in a private area with only the participant and the Peer Care 
Coordinator or syringe exchange outreach staff present. In cases where PWUD are consented in 
Page 7 of 17   
 community- based settings (e.g. parks, etc. ), research staff and peers will make sure they are out of 
hearing distance of others for consent and data collection. Peer care coordinators or syringe exchange 
outreach staff will remind consenting participants that participation is voluntary and that they may 
withdraw their consent at any time. Participants will be assessed for understanding of study procedures.  
 
 
 Procedures  
 Phase 1 Procedures:  
Prescreening Procedures:  
Participants presenting for standard of care HCV, HIV, and HBV screening will consent to Phase 1 of 
the study using a full consent form. This includes consent for:  
• Blood draw  for hepatitis C RNA and hepatitis B core Antibody  
• Dried Blood Spot c ard testing procedure (RA or self- administered)  
• Blood samples to be shipped to an external lab  
  
All labs will be reviewed by [CONTACT_367188], which will not be used for clinical decision making. The serum lab 
specimens collected for DBS validation will only be sent to Molecular Testing Laboratories for the 
purpose of DBS card validation and results will not be relayed to the participant.  
 Chart abstraction will be performed in order to collect basic demographic information.  Past lab test results will also be abstracted in order for comparisons to be performed.    Phase 2 Procedures:  
 
Pre-Screening Procedures: 
 
The HCV rapid test will be optional. If participants self report a positive HCV test previously , they can 
enroll in the study  by [CONTACT_6270] -disclosure of +HCV. If their HCV status is unknown, a rapid test will be 
performed. If a positive rapid test in the past  is reported, an optional rapid test can be completed as part 
of the study. People who test negative have the option to retest  at [ADDRESS_458804] done, a positive result  is an eligibility requirement for the study .  Participants will be 
asked to sign  a full consent form  to indicate consent for rapid HCV testing, Inclusion/Exclusion check -
list, and Locator Form completion —as well as the screening phase, randomization, and treatment arm 
interventions .  Upon consent, establishment of baseline known positivity and treatment experience, 
peers or RAs will perform point of care HCV rapid antibody testing (OraQuick® HCV Rapid Ant ibody 
Test). (See figure 1: Telemedicine Study Flow Diagram ). The HCV Rapid Antibody Test is a finger prick 
that can either be administered by [CONTACT_367189] -administered, depending on participant and/or staff 
preference  If it is decided that a self -administered test will be performed, participant will be given an 
instruction sheet on how to administer the test.  Study staff will be present to answer questions and 
ensure the procedures are correctly followed.  Study staff will assist participant in registering for 
Medicaid Accountable Care Organization (ACO), if  needed and applicable.   
 
Upon positive rapid HepC test, participants will be moved to the screening phase. Those with a 
negative rapid HepC test are not eligible for the study.  
 Peers and/or RAs will assist participants with reactive tests to go to a community laboratory for completion of one of four  screening algorithms based on past treatment experience (see figures 2,  3) 
 
Page 8 of 17   
 Screening Procedures:  
 
Participants with a positive HCV RNA will  be accompanied to the lab for a serum lab draw and 
confirmatory lab draw ordered by [CONTACT_1003]. Due to the health conditions that many participants 
are experiencing (dehydration, collapsed veins, etc.), it is likely that participants will need to return for a second confirmatory lab draw.  Additional compensation will be provided if a second blood dr aw is 
needed.  Research staff review screening survey and lab tests  are entered into Child- Turcot -Pugh 
(CTP) calculator . Only participants with a CTP score of 6 or platelets < 15 0,000mm
3 will be referred for 
study clinician evaluation to confirm treatment eligibility; who will be blinded to treatment allocation until 
eligibility determined . All others will be fully screened by [CONTACT_367190]. Once 
enrollment is confirmed, all participants will complete baseline surveys  and randomization and then 
continue with treatment arm interventions as per Figure 1.  Central City Concern ONLY:  
Participants with reactive antibody tests will also be offered participation in the hepatitis C and hepatitis 
B core antibody dried blood spot validation study, which would include performing a point of care dried 
blood spot test and completing confirmation serum HCV PCR and hepatitis B surface antibody testing. DBS specimens will be collected by [CONTACT_367191]/or RAs and serum for confirmation by [CONTACT_367192]. The DBS card will be shipped to Molecular Testing Laboratories for testing.  
 
Allocation :  
 Participants are randomized using a centralized random number assignment for treatment allocation 
developed at OHSU  and assigned through RedCap .  
 
Intervention Design :  
Central City Concern ONLY:  Phase 1: Once in- house potential participants are identified they will be 
offered participation in the DBS study by [CONTACT_1744] -trained CCC HCV team staff. P articipants will provide a 
phlebotomy -derived blood sample and finger stick capi[INVESTIGATOR_367172] d. These will be 
sent to MTL for DBS validation using standard human biohazard sample laboratory storage and 
shippi[INVESTIGATOR_367173]. Incentives will be dispensed at the time of DBS sample collection or along with critical medications  or services already provided, whichever method 
entails less on campus time for participants.  
 
Phase 2:  
Participants are randomized to peer -facilitated telehealth- HCV treatment intervention versus referral to 
local HCV treatment providers to initiate HCV treatment. After lab s confirm preliminary eligibility, 
randomization will  be generated by [CONTACT_367193] .  Participants with a CTP of [ADDRESS_458805] one 
patient with HCV previously. They are encouraged to participate in the OHSU HCV ECHO tele-
mentoring sessions, but are not study participants.  
 
Study Arm 1: Tele -HCV Treatment Arm P rocedures:  
 Participants allocated to telemedicine intervention arm are  scheduled for treatment assessment by a 
study clinician. F or a majority of participants, this will also be the treatment initiation visit . If additional 
studies are necessary for routine treatment decision making, p eers will assist participants in navigating 
health system barriers and arrangement of second telemedicine visit. The telemedicine study clinician 
will perform a standard of care hepatitis C treatment initiation history and submit a prescription for 
DAAs. Prior authorizations will be completed by [CONTACT_367194].   
  
Page [ADDRESS_458806] will check in with the participant  by [CONTACT_367195] 0, week 4, and end of treatment  to 1) determine general medication tolerance, 2) assess 
quality of adherence and 3) dispense medications by [CONTACT_367196], depending 
on participant’s insurance. Peers will assist participants in keepi[INVESTIGATOR_367174], if not mailed directly to the home. P articipants who report new 
onset of jaundice or other signs of hepatic decompensation during participation will be scheduled for a 
follow up telemedicine visit with a physician by [CONTACT_17033], receive repeat laboratory studies 
if needed, and if necessary,  be referred to local providers for ongoing medical care. If problems or side 
effects arise during treatment, participants will call the research assistant, who will connect them to a 
study clinician.   HCV labs will be repeated at [ADDRESS_458807] -treatment  in community partner labs. Dried Blood Spot 
specimens will be once again collected at this point by [CONTACT_367197]12 survey data collection.   
 Telehealth visits will be performed via the chosen web platform of the participant . This includes but i s 
not limited to: Facebook, Facetime, Skype, Zoom, Webex, WeChat, etc. The treatment initiation visit, pharmacist adherence assessments, and SVR12 lab communication will all be documented in the 
electronic medical record using PHI and no study identifiers.  
 
Study Arm 2: Community Linkage- To Care Arm (Control Condition)  Procedures: 
 
Participants allocated to the community linkage -to-care arm will complete screening, be offered 
enrollment, and undergo informed consent  as in the telemedicine arm. Following study inclusion and 
enrollment, research staff will refer the participant to a local community health clinic to engage in 
hepatitis C care and seek treatment . Peers will assist patients to engage with local primary care and 
health plan resources  and will receive an information sheet on optional clinics to attend and questions 
to ask their provider. TAU participants will be encouraged to take this to their visit.  Research assistants 
will outreach to participants regularly to determine if they have engaged in local health resources and schedule assessment visits. A bidirectional release of information will be requested.  The study clinical 
pharmacist or research assistant will assess adherence medication adherence at week [ADDRESS_458808] study assessments at week 16 
(corresponding to 4- week post -treatment initiation), week 20- 22 (corresponding to end of treatment 
visit), week 32 (corresponding to [ADDRESS_458809] -treatment visit), and week 56 (corresponding to [ADDRESS_458810] -treatment visit) after randomization; the primary study outcome will be assessed at 32 
weeks after randomization. 
  
Participant Assessments:  
 
Phase 1:  
• Blood draw and DBS specimen collection for HCV RNA and Hepatitis B core antibody  
 
Phase 2:  
 
Assessment/Activity  Pre-
Screen  Screen  Baseline 
(Week 0)  4-Week  
after 
treatment 
initiation  End of 
Treatment  12-week 
Post -
Treatment  ***36-Week  
Post 
Treatment 
Completion  As 
Needed  
Pre-Screening Survey  X              
Demographics    X            
Inclusion/Exclusion   X            
Rapid HCV Test  X              
CPT Assessment    X            
Participant Survey          
Medical Care History      X    X X ***X    
Barriers to treatment      X    X x ***x    
Engagement with 
Harm Reduction & 
Substance Use 
Treatment      X X X X 
 ***X   
Substance Use      X X X X  ***X   
Perceived Stigma of 
Drug Use      X X X X  ***X   
HCV Treatment 
History      X    X      
HCV Treatment 
Completion          X      
HCV Treatment 
Adherence        X X      
Treatment 
Satisfaction          X     
Experience with 
Telemedicine          **X     
Experience with Peer 
Support Specialist           **X      
Blood Draw/ Medical 
Procedures                 
HCV RNA    X      X     
Hepatitis B Sag    X           
Hepatitis B SAg    X           
Hepatitis B cAb    X            
Hepatitis A Ab    X           
CMP    X      X     
Page 11 of 17   
 CBC    X      X     
INR/prothrombin   X       
HCV genotype   X       
B-HCG (women<50)    X           
SC Reviews Labs    X      X     
Ultrasound               **X 
Telemedicine Visit      **X          
Medication 
Counseling      **X **X X*      
HCV Genotype and 
Resistance Testing               **X 
Chart Abstraction      X X   
Peer interaction log      X    
HCV treatment 
provider visits      X    
Administrative                 
Written informed 
consent   X       
Locator Form  x  X X X X  X 
Master Enrollment 
Log   X      
Progress Note Check 
List X X X X X X X   
Reportable Events 
Log              X 
Adverse Event               X 
Inventory Form               X 
Visit Compensation 
Log X   X X X X X   
***X: 36 Week Survey only if participant qualifies  
**X: Only Telemedicine Pt.      
*X: Number of weeks of treatment depends on ppt.      
 
 Participants complete brief REDCap surveys regarding symptoms , substance use, and harm reduction 
engagement  at baseline,  [ADDRESS_458811]  end of treatment. 
 
Study Measures : 
The primary outcome is sustained viral response at [ADDRESS_458812] treatment (SVR12). Secondary outcomes include a) HCV treatment initiation, b) HCV Treatment completion (filled final prescription and self-reported > 90%  HCV treatment  pi[INVESTIGATOR_38947]), c) engagement with harm reduction resources, d) 
substance use, e) perceived stigma,  and f) engagement  in addiction treatment resources . Exploratory 
endpoints includ e a) treatment satisfaction with hepatitis C treatment, adapted from the single- item 
Medication Satisfaction Questionnaire, and b) reinfection vs. virologic relapse/failure.  
 
Page 12 of 17   
 Adherence to Phone Visits: Adherence to these phone visits is defined as +/ - [ADDRESS_458813] be documented on 
paper forms. These will then be entered into REDCap by [CONTACT_21118]. The source documents will be kept in 
a locked file cabinet in a secure location.  
 Qualitative interviews will be recorded on an encrypted recorder and stored on a secure, encrypted computer.  
 Survey data will be used  to determine HCV status of participants  with a detectable plasma HCV RNA , 
which were collected on or after SVR12 timepoint  (either 12 weeks after end of treatment for those who 
initiated treatment or 32 weeks after randomization for those who did not initiate treatment) . The 
primary SVR12 outcome will be sustained viral response [ADDRESS_458814] of spontaneous clearance on assumption of treatment failure for participants who did not 
initiate treatment within 6 months . 
 Probable Relapse/Failure: Probable virologic relapse or failure is defined as a detectable plasma HCV 
RNA 12 weeks or more after the end of treatment if  a) participant  denies any injection drug use, or b) 
participant  injecting drugs but notes 100% adherence to recommendations on Safe injection practices, 
including use of clean works (cooker, cotton, rinse) with every injection. 
 
Probable Reinfection: Probable reinfection is  defined as a detectable plasma HCV RNA 12 weeks or 
more after the end of treatment if  a) participant  completes full course of DAA regimen, and b) 
participant  notes injection behavior of substantial risk, including i) Receptive use of injection equipment 
(needles, cotton, cooker) from someone of either unknown HCV serostatus or known positive serostatus on one or more occasion and ii) u se happened between end of treatment and HCV RNA test  
 
Indeterminant Relapse vs Reinfection: Indeterminant virologic relapse vs reinfection  is defined as a 
participant  with a detectable plasma HCV RNA 12 weeks or more after the end of treatment in 
participants  a) not completing DAA regimen, and b) with injection behavior of substantial risk, as noted 
above.  
 
Qualitative Interview Procedures:  
We will conduct qualitative interviews by [CONTACT_97266] a sample of purposively selected study participants. An interview guide will be used, and interviews will last approximately 45 minutes. Up to 35 
interviews will be conducted by [CONTACT_367198] . Participants will be reimbursed $[ADDRESS_458815] focus group guide will assess tele -HCV and HCV treatment barriers and 
facilitators ; peer specialist activities and adaptations ; and advantages and disadvantages of tele- HCV.  
The clinician focus group guide will assess peer -assisted tele-HCV procedures; barriers and facilitators; 
experiences engaging with specialty pharmacies, payers, and peers; and clinical considerations related 
to tele -HCV.  
   
 
Page 13 of 17   
  Data and Specimens 
a) Handling of Data and Specimens  
 
Survey Data: Participants complete brief surveys regarding symptoms and substance use at baseline, 4, end of treatment, [ADDRESS_458816] end of treatment . Survey data 
will be collected from PWUD by [CONTACT_367199], via 2- in-1 laptops or local office PCs or hand-
held devices using REDCap data collection, detailed below (Privacy, Confidentiality, and Data Security).  
 
Biologic Specimen Data:  Biological specimen data will be stored at Peace Health, Mercy Medical, and 
Molecular Testing Labs. Serum samples drawn for DBS validation will be completed at Peace Health and Mercy Medical and shipped to Molecular Testing Labs.  
 Participant Locator Form Data:  We will collect identifying information (name, social security number, 
date of birth, address, phone numbers, employer information, e- mail address, and other contact 
[CONTACT_3031]) to use for follow -up of patient for future studies . The locator form also asks what forms of 
social media are commonly used and where the individual commonly spends most of their time. Participants will be contact[CONTACT_367200] a highly -private account specific to the study.  Index 
after the study is completed. Data will be collected on paper and the original will stored in a locked file cabinet at HIV Alliance for the duration of the study. Data will be abstracted into a spreadsheet in Box, 
maintained behind the OHSU firewall, for future use.  Only HIV Alliance and OHSU will have access to 
this information.  
 
b) Sharing of Results with Subjects  
Results of HCV tests will be shared with the participant.   
 
c) Data and Specimen Banking  
De-identified specimens may be shared with other researchers, including the National Rural Opi[INVESTIGATOR_367175], Molecular Testing Labs, and other National Rural Opi[INVESTIGATOR_367176]. This study does not include genetic research. Participant contact [CONTACT_3031] (including name, date of birth, address, and Social Security Number) will be entered by [CONTACT_367201] a spreadsheet in OHSU BOX and stored behind the OHSU firewall. Participants who 
indicate willingness to be contact[CONTACT_367202]. [CONTACT_367212] will serve as the guardian of this repository.  [CONTACT_367212] will ensure that data is received and released according to OHSU policy and the IRB approved repository protocol.  A repository sharing agreement will be executed each time data is released for research 
purposes.  [CONTACT_367212] will track all releases of data.  Should a participant withdraw their consent, [CONTACT_367212] will indicate this in an additional spreadsheet that will be kept in OHSU BOX, and will ensure that the participant’s data is destroyed.  Participants from OR -HOPE indicate in the informed consent 
form whether or not they agree to future contact [CONTACT_367203].   
 To certify documentation of local IRB approval to the OHSU IRB, a copy of the approval letter from the contributing site will be included in the submission to the repository.  Consent to contact [CONTACT_367204].  To document whether the person from whom the data was obtained signed 
a legally effective consent and authorization, study staff will review the signatures and dat e from the 
original consent form and indicate the date that it was signed in the data collection spreadsheet.    To ensure security and confidentiality during the collection of data, only study staff will be entering data 
into the data collection spreadsheet in OHSU BOX.  Only OHSU’s PI [INVESTIGATOR_367177].  Only [CONTACT_367212] will be able to grant access to the BOX files.  A Certificate of Confidentiality will be obtained to further protect the sensitive information obtained from participants.   
 
Page 14 of 17   
  Data Analysis:  
 
Pre-specified analyses for this study will be intention- to-treat (ITT)  comparisons between telemedicine 
and treatment as usual (local treatment referral) on primary and secondary  outcomes.  Prior to 
conducting these analyses, we will compare baseline covariate distributions  (demographics, etc.)  
between randomized groups using standardized mean differences (SMDs) and bivariate statistical tests (e.g. t- tests, Chi- square tests). If a significant imbalance in any variable is  noted, i.e., a SMD > 0.25 and 
p < .2, we will include that variable as a covariate in future analyses. All primary and secondary 
analyses will utilize generalized linear ( mixed ) models (GLMMs)  with distributions and link fun ctions 
appropriate for the distribution of the outcome variable. Fixed effects  of inte rest in the model s will be 
timepoint  (baseline, [ADDRESS_458817] -treatment), 
randomized group (telemedicine vs. TAU), and their interaction. If more than one timepoint is included 
in the analysis, GLMMs will include person- level random intercepts to account for repeated 
measurements on subjects. Hypotheses will be tested using between- group comparisons at each 
timepoint of interest, or within- group comparisons across timepoints.  
 
Hypothesis 1 : Participants randomized to receive tele- HCV treatment will have superior SVR -12 rates 
compared to those randomized to TAU ( referral for local treatment ).  
 Analytic strategy : We assess the effect of telemedicine versus TAU on SVR at [ADDRESS_458818] -
treatment  completion using  logistic  regression.  Missing HCV viral load data will be considered non-
suppressed in the main ITT  analysis. Sensitivity analyses will include a per -protocol analys is and a 
repeat of the main analysis using multiple imputation of  missing data.  
 
Hypothesis 2: Participants randomized to receive tele- HCV treatment will have superior rates of HCV 
treatment initiation  (filled first prescription)  compared to those randomized to TAU.  
 Analytic strategy : We assess the effect of telemedicine versus TAU on treatment initiation by [ADDRESS_458819]-baseline  using  logistic  regression.  Missing treatment initiation data will be considered non-
initiated  in the main ITT  analysis. Sensitivity analyses will include a per -protocol analysis and a repeat 
of the main analysis using multiple imputation of  missing data.  
 
Hypothesis 3: Participants randomized to receive tele- HCV treatment will have superior rates of HCV 
treatment completion (filled final prescription and  self-reported > 90% HCV treatment pi[INVESTIGATOR_38947])  
compared to those randomized to TAU.  
 Analytic strategy : We assess the effect of telemedicine versus TAU on treatment completion by [ADDRESS_458820] -baseline  using  logistic  regression.  Missing treatment completion data will be considered 
incomplete in the main ITT  analysis. Sensitivity analyses will include a per -protocol analysis and a 
repeat of the main analysis using multiple imputation of  missing data.  
 
Hypothesis 4: Participants randomized to receive tele- HCV treatment will have a higher likelihood of 
engagement with harm reduction resources, lower rates of substance use, lower stigma, and higher 
engagement in addiction treatment resources compared to those randomized to TAU (referral for local treatment).  
 Analytic strategy : We assess the effect of telemedicine versus TAU on these outcomes at all post -
baseline timepoints using  mixed effects  regression models. Missing outcome data will be handled using 
full information maximum likelihood. We will conduct per -protocol analyses as sensitivity analyses.  
 
Qualitative Evaluation . Audio- recorded interviews will be professionally transcribed; transcripts will be 
uploaded into qualitative analysis software (NVivo ). Comagine research staff create a coding scheme, 
conduct coding, and revise in an iterative process that has been successfully implemented by [CONTACT_367205]- methods projects. The qualitative data provides complementary information to 
illuminate and expand quantitative findings, including survey results and measures of treatment 
initiation and completion. 
Page [ADDRESS_458821] numbers and will not contain any part of the 18 HIPAA identifiers. The file linking the 
unique identifier with the patient’s name [CONTACT_192570] a separate password- protected file on a  
secure computer at study sites. Only the study site and overall Study Coordinator, and OHSU PI 
(Todd Korthuis) will have access to the linked file. Survey data will be entered in the secure OH SU 
REDCap system by [CONTACT_49124], and study team members. Site and OHSU study staff w ill have access 
to the de- identified data in REDCap.  No identifiable information wi ll be emailed between 
investigators.  Data  are coded before any transfer.  De -identified data may be shared following data 
lock with the national rural opi[INVESTIGATOR_367178].  
 
Survey data will be collected using OHSU’s instance of REDCap. Access to the database will be limited 
to OHSU IRB -approved study staff that are approved to contact [CONTACT_367206]. REDCap 
is a secure, customizable, web- based application for building and managing databases (see 
https://octri.ohsu.edu/redcap/index.php). REDCap resides on a server housed in ITG's Advanced 
Computing Center (ACC) and is maintained by [CONTACT_367207] (OCTRI) in accordance with all relevant OHSU policies and guidelines. Additionally, AC C employs a second firewall within the OHSU network to attain a high level of security 
and access control. In situations when a secure WiFi connection is not available for REDCap data 
collection, REDCap Mobile App will be used as an offline data collection means until a WiFi 
connection is available to securely transmit data to the main REDCap database. REDCap Mobile App database is encrypted on the mobile device’s hard drive using SQLCipher to prevent someone from breaking into the file in the event of a stolen device. The REDCap Mobile App will be used on an 
encrypted laptop/tablet purchased through ITG. REDCap Mobile App with reviewed and approved by 
[CONTACT_367208]. As a back -up, we may need to collect data 
using paper surveys and then entering data into REDCap when an internet connection becomes 
available. If paper surveys are used, those files will  be held in a locked case, and stored in locked 
cabinet in a locked office to securely handle these data.    
Qualitative Data.  Interviews will be digitally audio- recorded and professionally transcribed and 
transcri pts will be uploaded into qualitative analysis software (NVivo) by [CONTACT_367209]. Recordings will be destroyed following analysis. Qualitative interview data will be stored at 
Comagine on secure servers in password -protected files, accessible only to researchers and subject 
to Comagine’s policy on safeguarding electronic data. Study documents and audio recordings will not contain any identifiable information, but instead will be assigned a unique study identifier. The list linking participants  to their unique identifier will be password- protected and maintained within the 
study’s secure REDCap database.  
   
All study personnel will complete on- line training  in appropriate conduct of research through the 
OHSU IRB, or equivalent training. The Institutional Review Board of Oregon Health & Science 
University has policies in place that meet the requirements of [ADDRESS_458822] 
Page 16 of 17   
 reviews all protocols that involve prisoners; does not permit waivers of consent for subjects who are 
prisoners; requires OHRP certification once IRB approval is granted; and includes a prisoner representative on the Board during consideration of prison- related proposals, continuing reviews, and 
amendments. The research protocol will also adhere to the federal policies for protection for children involved as subjects in research (45 CFR 46, Subpart D). The proposed research complies with the Additional Protocol Requirements of 45 CFR 46, Subpart A. The research will be on a condition (substance use disorder) that particularly affects children age 13- 21. 
 
 Risks and Benefits  
a) Risks to Subjects  
 
Risk of Underlying Conditions:  As the study population will have significant ongoing health and 
substance use issues, events related to complications of HCV  and substance use may occur, including 
admission for substance use detoxification  and treatment, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_367179], and death. These events  will be captured on study specific forms.  
 
Risks to Confidentiality : There are also risks to confidentiality, particularly because we collect 
information about substance use. There is also a risk to confidentiality when using telehealth due to the 
internet and Wi -Fi use.  
 
Phlebotomy Risks:  Blood drawing for confirmatory testing may cause pain or bruising at the site and 
carries a small risk of infection.  
 
Telemedicine Risks: Telemedicine participants may be less likely to engage in other primary care 
services than peer -assisted primary care intervention arm.  
 
b) Potential Benefits to Subjects  
Subjects may benefit from participation in the proposed study by [CONTACT_367210], and harm reduction services during screening. 
Subjects who are diagnosed with hepatitis C may also benefit by [CONTACT_367211] a region with little current treatment access.   
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
    
 
  
Page 17 of 17   
  
  
 
   
 
   
 
  