 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RESEARCH PROTOCOL AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Localized mHealth approach to boosting COVID -19 testing and vaccine literacy, access, and uptake among women 
with criminal legal system involvement  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
06/21/2022   
RESEARCH STRATEGY  
SIGNIFICANCE  
Public health problem : The COVID -[ADDRESS_67744] numbers of women with 
ongoing criminal legal system involvement (CLSI) . A study by [CONTACT_62934]'s incarceration has 
grown at twice the pace of men's incarceration in the last decades and that most women are held in jails, not 
prisons .[ADDRESS_67745] these facilities every day, COVID -19 testing or vaccine  is not integrated into 
release plans (or for many facilities, confinement plans). Incarcerated women risk exposure while detained, 
and most of these women return to communities  strongly impacted  by [CONTACT_4113] -19. Some jurisdiction s have 
reduced or eliminated bail, and are releasing detainees to home arrest or community supervisio n19. A 
significant portion of these women are ill -prepared to deal with the pandemic and even less prepared, under 
these conditions, to conform to recommended COVID -19 mitigation practices, includin g testing and vaccine .  
The COVID -19 vaccine is a breakthrough in this pandemic .20 (ref). While the rollout of vaccine in the U.S. 
was  rapid, exceeding expectations, uptake has been lower than it needs to be to achieve herd immunity .[ADDRESS_67746] immunity because of vaccine hesitancy and low uptake .21 
As we monitor uptake of vaccine in our country’s local jails, we are seeing vaccination uptake rates below  50% 
in most jails , but with some outlier s.[ADDRESS_67747] rates of COVID -19 – five times that of the general 
U.S. population .[ADDRESS_67748] likely Americans to accept vaccine .1 
Given low anticipated rates of vaccine uptake among people with CLSI, the need for  continued  COVID -
19 testing in communities with low vaccine uptake is  critical . Imagine a woman, recently out of jail, 
homeless, and sharing a room in a house with an acquaintance: if she says she has symptoms, manages to 
get tested, and then finds she’s positive for COVID -19, she’d would risk getting kicked out of her immediate 
sourc e of shelter and safety. Would she choose to get tested considering these consequences? From a  
scientific perspective, we know so little about how people are making decisions about COVID -[ADDRESS_67749]-vaccine world , one and a half years  into the devastation of a pandemic where rates of fatigue, 
employment, family, and housing instability are high. We know that families bringing their children with COVID -
19 symptoms to clinics are hesitant to get tested when offered, owing to fears about prolonged quarantine and 
implications for employment .23,24 Families would rather forgo testing decisions than disrupt employment, 
education, or childcare routines . For women with CLSI, the precariousness of their housing, employment, 
romantic, peer, and criminal -legal circumstances  will make testing decisions even more difficult. It is in this 
context that we work to understand women’s testing attitudes and practices; their vaccine hesitancy and 
beliefs, and immediately work to facilitate understanding and utilization of both. We propose a two -year study 
to rapi[INVESTIGATOR_62910] (Aim 1), build and push (Aim 2), evaluate and disseminate (Aim 3) an m Health intervention to 
boost COVID -19 testing and vaccine literacy, access, and uptake among women with CLSI in three cities.  
Health disparities population: This application is highly responsive to the RADx -UP Phase II call for 
research that tests interventions to reduce COVID -19 disparities among underserved populations and 
understands testing behaviors in a climate where vaccine is available .7 People with CLSI are disproportionately 
socioeconomically disadvantaged ( only between 1 -30% of women have full -time employment after jail ,25 and 
the system of mass incarceration has targeted a disproportionate share of racial and ethnic minorities (Black 
women are 1.8 times as likely to be incarcerated; with Latinx women 1.3 times as likely as White women3). To 
that end, th e population of women with CLSI , the focus of this application,  meets  the criteria for a health 
disparities population outlined by [CONTACT_62935] .2 It is also worth n oting that much of the conversations on mass 
incarceration and COVID -19 are about men. The needs of women, who comprise 15% of the CLSI population 
(but are two million strong annually), are often overlooked . This study focuses on their unique needs and risks 
in this pandemic.  The study is intersectional in its focus – addressing COVID -19 disparities while 
simultaneously confronting the intersecting oppressions of CLSI, racism, poverty, and gendered experiences of 
violence, housing instability, incarceration, and health.  
Opportunity: Our team has a unique opportunity to both study and immediately intervene  on promoting 
COVID -19 testing and vaccine literacy,  access, and uptake  using mobile health  (mHealth ) technologies  (text 
and Web)8 to provide information and engage  women with community -based criminal legal system involvement  
in three geographically, socio -politically, and culturally different cities: Birmingham, AL, Kansas City, MO/KS, 
and Oakland, CA.  We are positioned to embed the proposed study into an existing  evidence -based women’s 
health literacy online intervention platform (www.shewomen.org, 2R01CA181047) for women leaving jail. We 
are also well positioned to push the mhealth COVID -[ADDRESS_67750] already recruited to our tri -city cervical health study of women with CLSI (R01C A226838), for which we 
have an 82% retention after one year of follow -up.9,[ADDRESS_67751] COVID -19 literacy . 
 Preliminary studies and h ealth literacy intervention framing:  In May -June 2020, we surveyed study 
participants in Kansas City, Birmingham, and Oakland exploring their sources of information about COVID -19. 
Out of the 335 participating women, 82 % said that they get information from the TV, and over 55 % said that 
they get COVID -19 information from social media .29 Only 15 % of them talked with a medical provider about 
COVID -19. When asked about the source they trust the most,  television ranked first (over 40 % of 
respondents), followed by [CONTACT_60942] a medical provider (only 10 % of respondents). Media  represents 
the women’s primary source of information; thus, their risk of exposure to misinformation is real and current.  In 
interviews we conducted in March 2021  with CLSI women from Kansas  City, vaccine hesitancy was driven by 
[CONTACT_62936] -19 literacy as well as by [CONTACT_14181] -vaccine attitudes from family and friends .30 
 In a paper on how criminal justice -involved 
women navigate COVID -19, based on a series of 
semi -structured interviews we conducted with 35 
women enrolled in our ongoing studies, we report 
that women were anxious, frightened about the 
pandemic, and lacking g eneral knowledge about 
the virus.31 A few women across the sites 
mentioned that "they heard that COVID -[ADDRESS_67752] the U.S. for the killing of an 
Iranian leader." [ADDRESS_67753] year, we found that COVID -19 
made already bad living circumstances even 
worse  (see table) . Half of the women sought 
COVID -[ADDRESS_67754] year, and 
knowledge about COVID -19 varied . The women 
reported doing well at COVID -19 mitigation, 
though admittedly 80% reported housing 
problems made worse . Knowledge was variable: 
with 28% of women saying that taking vitamins 
can prevent the spread of COVID -19, but most 
(over 90%) knowing that a person can have 
COVID -[ADDRESS_67755] in the effectiveness and safety of vaccine is 
low (which will no doubt be exacerbated by [CONTACT_62937]). Finally, we found that 
COVID-19 Experiences among CLSI Women in Tri City Cohort, 
N=408 (number of women who answer COVID-19 specific questions) 
Age (avg) 43.7  
Race  
     Black 
     White 
     Latinx only  
60% 
28% 
4% 
Healthcare providers cancelled in-person medical appointment 39% 
Healthcare providers conducted telehealth appointments  58% 
Tested for COVID-19  49% 
Positive COVID-[ADDRESS_67756] 8% 
Sheltered in place under state order  82% 
Practiced social distancing  94% 
Able to wash hands or soap  95% 
Wears masks  98% 
Laid off from job 33% 
COVID-19 made worse 
     Housing/finding a place to stay 
     Getting medical care 
     Getting medicines or prescriptions 
     Making money 
     Paying rent, utilities or other bills  
     Getting enough to eat  
     Personal or family relationships  
     Level of stress  
     Alcohol use  
     Drug use 
     Interpersonal violence    
80% 
97% 
91% 
93% 
97% 
83% 
76% 
93% 
91% 
85% 
77% 
 
misinformation  abounds – rumors about some vaccine doses being placebos and conspi[INVESTIGATOR_62911]  (ref). We found that 53% were explicitly not willing to get 
vaccinated; an additional 8% said maybe; and 12% said only if it was required for work or for family reasons .[ADDRESS_67757], 
misinformation, conspi[INVESTIGATOR_62912] , and bridge the large gap between the women’s concerns, discomfort, and 
their eventually uptake of both COVID -[ADDRESS_67758]  successfully leveraged a health literacy framework to reach the target audience of women with 
CLSI. We used this framework (targeting knowledge, beliefs, self -efficacy, and confidence navigating health 
systems – our operationalization of health literacy) to increase cervical health literacy over time and improve 
cervical cancer screening tests rates .[ADDRESS_67759] cancer risk, 
sexually transmitted infection risk, and bolster women’s reproductive goal planning (ref). We are confident 
based on two prior health literacy R01s for reaching CLSI women that a health literacy intervention framing is 
an effective way to reach women with CLSI and address their barriers to health promotion . We will leverage 
this same framework to develop COVID -[ADDRESS_67760] data are collected with 
stakeholders as part of the proposed study ( Aim 1 ). Once we complete data collection with CLSI women as 
stakeholders, we will use the intervention content to develop the COVID -19 module for the mHealth 
intervention ( Aim 2 ). The platform for mhealth intervention already exists through another ongoing project 
(www.shewomen.org , 2R01CA181047 ), which will save both resources and time, in our effort to quickly  build 
an intervention to reach CLSI women in a timely manner.  We will then rapi[INVESTIGATOR_62913] ( R01CA226838) , whom we are in the second/four years of follow -up, giving us ready -
made -access to a cohort. This will also save resources, time, and effort, and allow us to intervene directly with 
our high risk and high need population  and assess our impact on COVID -19 testing and vaccine literacy, 
access, and uptake (Aim 3 ). 
 Based on our prior work with CLSI women, m Health strategies are an excellent way to keep in touch and 
push just -in-time content. During the pandemic, we were forced to close field sites and stop any in -person 
follow -up visits. Even prior to the pandemic, telephone follow -up surveys were conducted w ith 60% of 
participants. Post -pandemic, we conducted 95% of those surveys over the phone, with the remaining over 
email or mail correspondence. The majority of our women use text messaging regularly and  can acces s the 
Web on their phones.  Our ongoing RCT (N=70 participants completed) of an m Health intervention on 
reproductive health , and reproductive goal planning  shows this modality is feasible for delivering information 
and engaging participants.  Specifically, we found that 81% of women who initiate are able to complete the 
intervention . The average time for completion of one module, for example on sexually transmitted infections , 
took 19 minutes , whereas cervical cancer took 13 minutes to complete. We estimate the proposed module on 
COVID -19 testing and vaccine will take on average between 15 to 20  minutes to complete.  This time for 
intervention completion, combined with text message information about any new COVID -19 mitigation news 
(e.g. boosters, vaccine for children, new testing recommendations , testing locations, etc. ), should result in 
about 30 -60 minutes of total formal engagement  over the duration of the study .  
 What we propose  will be brief, but targeted messaging  intervention  from verified sources, delivered in an 
adequate lay language and using spokespersons that are relatable and familiar, and can be trusted, which has 
been proven effective in changing targeted behaviors .32,33 Our intervention design also draws on lessons COVID -19 Vaccine Literacy Intervention Content  
Knowledge   Beliefs   Self-Efficacy   Confidence   
COVID -19 transmission  
COVID -19 risk, mitigation  
COVID -19 vaccine 
risks/efficacy/safety  
COVID -[ADDRESS_67761] in media sources  Incarceration/d rug use/ 
homelessness/ transportation/ 
financial/ other barriers to 
testing and vaccine 
appointments  Confidence navigating COVID -
[ADDRESS_67762] public health m essaging. To the 
critique of whether the intervention is sufficient, we don’t know. We hypothesize that the intervention will be 
effective at boosting COVID -[ADDRESS_67763] that hyp othesis.  One advantage of this approach is the ability for nimbleness, that is, being able to adapt in 
real-time to new information about the pandemic and being able to push that new information out to women 
using the proposed intervention platform . Anothe r unique advantage is the scalability of such an intervention, 
and its ability to be made widely available to all CLSI women in the [LOCATION_002].  
 What is known and what remains to be known:  We know  1) Women leaving jails and prisons will bear a 
far greater share of COVID -19 morbidity, given that jails and prisons are sites for the country’s largest 
outbreaks and given the disproportionate representation of socioeconomic disadvantage and racial/ethni c 
minority status among women with CLSI (both known correlates of disparities in COVID -19); 2) Hesitancy for 
taking COVID -19 vaccine  is high,  and uptake remains low among people with CLSI – with less than  half of this 
population currently expected to get vaccinated . Testing will be critical to mitigating spread of COVID -19 in 
unvaccinated groups ; 3) Main information sources currently used by [CONTACT_62938] a high risk of exposing 
them to information that may increase their vaccine and testing hesitancy; 4 ) Few, if any, interventions are 
being designed to specifically target this group; 5) We have a proven health literacy framework and mhealth 
intervention platform  that we can use for a just-in-time interven tion to mitigate women’s concerns and boost 
COVID -19 testing and vaccine uptake.  
 What remains to be known  is 1) While hesitancy is great, we know so little about CLSI women’s access  to 
testing and vaccination , which is a center for debate in the “hesitancy” literature  (ref). Our study presents an 
opportunity to study the intersection of access issues with hesitancy, mistrust, literacy, and uptake  of both 
testing and vaccine . 2) We don’t know how testing and vaccine beliefs  vary across women of different 
racial/ethnic groups and geographic regions. Anecdotally we are finding that women in Oakland, where st ate 
policy and perhaps culture are much for COVID -19 mitigation progressive (early and prolonged protective 
orders, like mask mandates, and normalization of vaccine), compared to Birmingham and Kansas City, are 
more willing to get vaccine . But we don’t have systematic data measuring these differences. We know nothing 
about how any women in this population feel about testing in a vaccine environment, at all. This study will allow 
us understand beliefs and practices . 3) While data will emerge about ongoing te sting and vaccine uptake in 
jails and prisons, probably few researchers are following the high risk but often overlooked group of women 
with CLSI . This group is far more populous than women in actual jails and prisons, but perhaps more or equally 
at risk for COVID -[ADDRESS_67764] demonstrated excellent retention rates (upwards of 8 2% after more than a year).  
4) We don’t know what kind of interventions work to boost COVID -19 testing and vaccine uptake. The health 
communications community (refs) has some ideas about what will work and  has employed various public 
outreach strategies (refs). But there is an immediate need for efficacy information about tailored interventions 
for high risk populations to boost COVID -[ADDRESS_67765] utility for this pandemic, for future pandemics to come, and for 
boosting testing and vaccine in an extremely understudied populatio n.  
Summa ry of significance:  Interventions focused on women leaving CLSI  that address COVID -[ADDRESS_67766] 
appropriate moment to build adequate, evidence -based knowledge about COVID -19 testing and vaccine 
barriers , and help shape sound COVID -19 literacy that will hopefully also equip women with skills to filter 
misinformation. As part of this proposal, our content management system ( CMS ) for the existent mHealth 
intervention will be upgraded to be able to send  timely messages  about testing protocols, vaccine safety , 
availability, and any coming changes in guidance over the next t wo years . Given that our study population has 
the least access to medical innovations and the most distrust of those innovations (especially the pandemic 
and vaccines), we would be well -positioned to adapt to changing pandemic realities to offer information from a 
trusted source , information that they can understand and relate to . Our proposed study is significant in that we 
will intervene on COVID -19 health disparities among an extremely vulnerable and overlooked population – 
women with CLSI . Findings can be used to push out this and similar intervent ions to marginalized women, 
most of whom have access and are regular users of mobile technologies in this pandemic and in future 
ones.35,36  
INNOVATION  
This study is innovative in the following ways: 1) Understanding COVID -[ADDRESS_67767] jails and prisons annually. 2) This proposed  intervention can be built onto 
existing interventions (like we propose to do ) to increase speed of implementation , rapid uptake, and impact. 
Further, we are adjusting the m Health approach to meet the needs of marginalized p opulations and leveraging 
a health literacy framing that we have already proven effective with our population.  3) The proposed 
intervention is designed to be adaptable to local contexts – at a minimum three cities in the proposed 
application, but with solid plans built into evaluation to disseminate rapi[INVESTIGATOR_62914].  4) We integrate participants as stak eholders  throughout the grant period , not only 
soliciting feedback at every step, but also budgeting time  for stakeholders as research assistants . Stakeholder 
feedback on development ( Aim 1) , implementation ( Aim 2), and evaluation and dissemination ( Aim 3 ) will be 
critical not only to developi[INVESTIGATOR_62915], but also to building something 
sustainable . 
APPROACH  
Overview:  We propose a two -year study to rapi[INVESTIGATOR_62910] (Aim 1), build and push (Aim 2), evaluate and 
disseminate (Aim 3) an m Health intervention to boost COVID -[ADDRESS_67768] geographical regions of the U.S.  
• Finalize IRB protocol/approvals/data collection instruments  
• Convene stakeholders (participants) from each site (20 each from KC, 
BHM, OAK)  
• Conduct interviews with stakeholders (20 each from KC, BHM, OAK)  
• Analyze and summarize interview data in consultation with stakeholders  • Themes related 
to COVID -19 
testing, 
attitudes, 
practices in a 
vaccine 
environment  • Report with findings from Aim 1 
presented to intervention design 
team  
AIM 2.  Develop, pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], and implement a COVID -19 mhealth intervention for women with CLSI that responds dynamically to local, 
cultural, and access differences in testing, and evolving public health recommendations.  
• Develop the scripts for video/animation segments for the COVID -19 
training (knowledge, testing and vaccine)  modules based on Aim 1 data, 
preliminary studies, and literature  
• Produce the video/animation files for the COVID -19 training modules  
• Programming for the COVID -19 training  module s 
• Programming for the delivery of tailored (localized) content  
• Develop the protocol, changes to the U.I. and administrator dashboards, 
and program the upgrade to the SMS and email systems.  
• Recruit 45 women (15 from each site) to pi[INVESTIGATOR_62916].  
• Conduct initial pi[INVESTIGATOR_62917] 45 women for the COVID -19 module  
• Refine content of modules/timing  
• Finalize the structure and content of the online  intervention  
• Activate  the pi[INVESTIGATOR_62918] (N~500 
women)  • User interaction, 
acceptability 
and useability of  
COVID -19 
testing and 
vaccine literacy 
module  
 • Mhealth COVID -[ADDRESS_67769] of an mhealth intervention on COVID -19 testing  and vaccine  literacy, access, and uptake among women 
with CLSI over time.  
women with CLSI using an m Health modality, also 
built specifically for women with CLSI. While we are 
submitting this application as a clinical trial (it met all 
four NIH criteria for clinical trials), we employ a simple 
pre/post intervention design, collecting baseline data 
before i ntervention implementation and post -intervention 
follow -up for the entire sample. Given the emergency of 
the COVID -19 pandemic and need for immediate 
effective testing interventions  in a vaccine environment , 
we felt it would be unethical to use a randomize d study 
design and withhold a low risk, potentially beneficial 
intervention from high need women.  
Team:  Due to the multi -site nature of this study and 
the needed expertise spanning criminal legal systems, 
health, COVID -19, stakeholder engagement, health 
literacy, health communications, m Health, and mixed 
methodology, we have a large but close team. MPI 
[INVESTIGATOR_62919] a decade. MPI [INVESTIGATOR_62920] a 
specialist in health communication  with expertise in underserved populations ; Ramaswamy and Geana built an 
mHealth women’s health literacy intervention together (2R01CA181047) , and their work has generated several 
papers . Co-Is Lorvick, Cropsey, and their staff members have been work ing with Ramaswamy on the tri city 
cohort study since 2017 ( R01CA226838 ). Together they have a seamless system for collaboration and 
success, with both studies resulting in half a dozen papers in press. They are committed to working together 
for the proposed project. Ramaswamy brings on long -time colleague and CDC Advisory Co mmittee on 
Immunization Practices member, [CONTACT_62952]; racism, mistrust, and history professor, [CONTACT_62953];  
stakeholder engagement specialist and mentee, Dr . Sharla Smith;  infec tious disease  doctor and COVID -[ADDRESS_67770]. An additional benefit of the team 
structure is the inclusion of paid time for stakeholder research assistants – that is women with CLSI – who will 
be hired at  each site  to get formal wo rk experience in research and contribute to the research process, and 
importantly, dissemination of findings for the study.  Because RADx -UP projects are encouraged to support 
early stage investigators  (ESIs) , specifically targeting diversity in research and practice, we would like to note 
that 50% of investigators/staff (9/18) are faculty and staff who identify as people of color.  Three of the ESIs on 
this application identify as persons of color.  
Timeline , syncing with ongoing studies , and impact : The table below shows the timeline of proposed 
study aims against the backdrop of ongoing studies. From a feasibility perspective, we are taking advantage of 
having both the cohort to whom we plan to push the intervention to (ongoing cohort study below) an d the 
platform with which to design the intervention (ongoing m Health intervention). This allows us to work fast, 
which is critical in this pandemic. We propose a t wo-year study to rapi[INVESTIGATOR_62910] (Aim 1),  build and push (Aim 
2), and evaluate  and disseminate  (Aim 3) an m Health intervention to boost  COVID -[ADDRESS_67771] (get high risk women into COVID -19 testing and 
vaccine) and have utility for the future (as ongoing COVID -19 testing and vaccine boosters are needed37) new 
pandemics emerge, and as we try to build the science of vaccine uptake among women with CLSI – a science 
that is needed but almost non -existent.  
Study Timeline:  Overlap with Ongoing and Proposed Studies  • Verbal consenting of 5 08 existing tri -city participants to new COVID -19 
study (expect 95% acceptance rate)  
• Baseline (pre -intervention) survey conducted  
• 1, 12-month (post -intervention) follow -up surveys conducted  
• Quarterly phone/text/drop -in check ins to maintain contact [CONTACT_62939], update information, and boost retention  
• Meeting with participant stakeholders to plan dissemination  
• Meeting with researchers and professional networks to plan 
dissemination/diffusion of intervention  • COVID -[ADDRESS_67772] 
completion, 
testing  and 
vaccine literacy, 
access, and 
uptake  • Pre- and post -intervention 
findings about CLSI women’s 
COVID -19 testing and vaccine 
literacy, access, and uptake  
• CLSI  stakeholder , researcher, 
and practitioner plan for 
dissemination/diffusion of 
intervention to broader 
population of CLSI people  
 
Preliminary Work 
mhealth platform Tri City cohort 
AIM 1 
Convene and identify 
AIM 2 
Develop, pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], and 
implement 
AIM 3 
Evaluate and 
disseminate 20 people each city (60 total) 
15 people each city (45 total) 
508 people + engage 
stakeholders for strategies to 
push out to 13 million people 
Ongoing ACCESS TO THE THREE CITY COHORT  
R01CA226838, 2018 -2023 Tri -City Cervical Cancer Prevention Study among Women in the Justice System  
 Ongoing PLATFORM FOR mHEALTH INTERVENTION  
2R01CA181047, 2019 -2024, Sexual Health Empowerment for Jail -Involved Women's Health Literacy and Prevention  
 New Proposed mHEALTH COVID -[ADDRESS_67773] ing, recruitment : We will use convenience sampling for this study – in that we will recruit from  the 
TriCity  cohort  (ref). Based on our prior experience, we expect 95% of women to accept participation in the new 
study.  The sample currently available includes 108 women in Kansas City, 166 women in Birmingham, and 
234 women in Oakland  (ref). The Kansas City sample was originally recruited in jails (seven years ago)  but has 
now been community based since (with some periodic local reincarceration). The Birmingham sample was 
recruited two years ago in a community corrections program. The Oakland sample was recruited through 
probation offices and in working with local r eentry organizations, four years ago. We have maintained contact 
[CONTACT_62940] – at 82%.  
For recruitment, w omen will be invited to participate by [CONTACT_62941], with an IRB -
approved verbal consent that reviews study procedures, risks, benefits, and the voluntary nature of 
participation. For the last year, given the pandemic, 100% of research activities occurred virtually, with 9 5% of 
interviews over the phone and 5% over email  or postal service mail  correspondence . Though our study field 
sites are opening up, we expect most recruitment will be over the phone. At the end of  the verbal recruitment 
and consent process , the study staff member will ask the woman, “Would you like to participate in this study?”  
We used this exact same method to recruit women into the original tri -city cohort study, since those women 
were already participating in other studies at each site. The method was IRB -approved, effective, and resulting 
in 95% participation among all of th ose invited  (ref). An advantage is that the study team, particularly the field 
staff, has remained the same over the last seven -10 years. For the present study, participants will know the 
person inviting them, thus having the benefit of familiarity with personnel and typi[INVESTIGATOR_62921].  For 
sustainability purposes, we will work with stakeholders in Aims 1 and 3 to better understand how to reach new 
potential participants in future dissemination activities.  
We will tell women during the consent process that for Aim 1 , 60 women will be randomly chosen to 
participate in interviews; and for Aim 2, that [ADDRESS_67774] participants for Aim 1 and 2. If women complain during the consent process about 
unfairness and not being able to be selected for Aim 1 and 2 (which has not happ ened to us in the past), we 
will invite them to participate. Aim 1 and 2 do not mandate a random selection process for scientific reasons.   
Attrition  and retention : For Aim [ADDRESS_67775] 95% of the 508 women to agree to participate in study, resulting in a sample of 483 women at baseline  
assessment for this aim . Based on our ongoing community -based m Health women’s health literacy RCT, 
where 81% of women who initiated the m Health intervention completed it, we expect [ADDRESS_67776], we are at 100% retention for the post -intervention follow -up, so we 
expect to retain all [ADDRESS_67777] a final conservative attrition rate of 20%, based on our prior research activities following cohorts of 
women with community -based CLSI . Thu s, the smallest expected N for the final sample will be  [ADDRESS_67778] -to-reach samples, e.g. those with recent CLSI , drug users, and the 
homeless  (refs tri city 68,69 ). These methods include supplementing existing participant contact [CONTACT_62942], addresses, phone numbers of participant, family members, friends; places of hanging out like 
bars, bodegas, street corners, o r churches; places for usual drug or mental health treatment (with signed 
approval to contact [CONTACT_62943]), places of previous incarcerations, Facebook  and Instagram  handles. We 
will employ quarterly check -ins during which we verify contact [CONTACT_62944] . Pre -COVID -19 we 
had field sites  in Oakland and Birmingham (Birmingham is still open as it’s a city site). We had also negotiated 
the rental of a field site in Kansas City. We anticipate that these will reopen in the next year, and all are located 
in places familiar to participants out i n their community, which will further boost our attempts at long -term 
retention. Finally, this study has the benefit of part -time emp loyment of “stakeholder research assistants,” that 
is, women with CLSI. This approach should help us identify and test new strategies for retention.  
 Intervention content  and modality:  The COVID -[ADDRESS_67779] published research 
on social and health care circumstances of CLSI women during COVID -19 using survey research29-31; 
perceived risk, attitudes, and behaviors related to COVID -19 and vaccine using open -ended interviews31; and 
trust in sources of information about COVID -1930-31, that will provide the foundation for some of this intervention 
development. Semi -structured interviews wit h stakeholders in Aim 1 will provide the necessary localized 
knowledge about testing in a vaccine environment -  new information.  
 These sources will inform the development of the COVID -19 literacy module that  covers the following 
health literacy domains:  COVID -19 knowledge about transmission, risks , testing recommendations, vaccine 
and side effects ; COVID -[ADDRESS_67780] ; COVID -19 self -efficacy for engaging in strategies for protection, testing, getting to 
and completing  testing and  vaccine appointments; confidence in navigating institutions responsible for testing 
and vaccine administration . Operationalization of "literacy" as knowledge, beliefs, and self -efficacy follows the 
operationalization of content -specific critical health literacy as used in our previous and ongoing interventions 
for women with CLSI  and is described in the significance section26-28. The table on the following page , shows 
sample segments for the m Health module.  
In addition to increasing their health and media literacy, we will build trust and rapport with women through 
the study. Given that marginalized women, often women of color, have the least access to medical innovations 
(vaccines) and the most distrust of t hose innovations (especially the pandemic), we would be well -positioned to 
adapt to changing pandemic realities to offer information from a trusted source. The segments will include the 
words of women in the target population, text, and video content to of fer information, and interactive features 
like quizzes about testing and vaccine beliefs and maps to show how to find appointments.  
  
 We will also integrate a media literacy segment 
in the COVID -19 literacy module with a focus on 
two major areas of media literacy: misinformation 
and disinformation. Media literacy is a complex 
construct, but at its core, it focuses on the ability to 
"access, analyze, evaluate, and produce both print 
and electronic medi a."38 Although we will not 
address the "produce both print and electronic 
media" component in this training, we will address 
critical thinking about sources of information, how 
to identify disinformation, and about sharing erroneou s information on social media , as an essential part of 
stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_62922]. With this segment, w e aim not only to create an aware audience but also to 
empower these women to actively play a role in curbing mediated misinformation and disinformation, 
especially among their highly vulnerable communities.  
 Finally, the  mHealth application  has been designed to simultaneously reach all participants with location -
tailored pertinent information as it becomes available (such as COVID -19 vaccination opportunities and any 
new information about testing locations, or testing recommendations or boosters, for example ).  
Web development and programming:  The Center for Excellence in Health Communication to 
Underserved Populations (CEHCUP)  from the KU School of Journalism and Mass Communications , will 
provide web development for the COVID -19 vaccine literacy module and segments, as well as the media 
literacy module. The Content Management System (CMS), which was developed by [CONTACT_62945] -COVID 19  Literacy Module  (example)  
Segment 1  Cause, transmission and symptoms  
Segment 2  Disparities  
Segment 3  Testing matters! Testing attitudes and beliefs  
Segment 4  Vaccine matters! How vaccine works, efficacy, 
safety, side effects  
Segment [ADDRESS_67781]?  
Segment [ADDRESS_67782]!  
Women website  (www.shewomen.org) , already can seamlessly integrate the COVID -19 module, once 
developed, which will benefit from the same platform and structure as current modules on women's health . 
Nevertheless, we will perform relevant improvements to all areas of the application  to address the delivery of 
localized information and improve scalability . The administrative section will be enhanced to support the 
definition and management of new video components together with the related questions, permanent storage 
to the database, as well as reports designed to extract the data and make it available for review and further 
analysis. The participant section will be upgraded to support the display of the new video components, together 
with associated functional ity to pause the delivery of the video, display overlayed questions, and provide 
explanations at set timestamps. We will also upgrade activity logging and recording of participants' answers to 
the database.  We should note that for this particular group of women we have chosen an integrated, 
multimedia electronic vaccine literacy text -Web platform intervention system . Most  women (76%) use text 
messages, and 80% have smartphones.  We also know from follow -ups, that many women have “burner” type 
mobile phones, not permanent smart phones , which makes using a dedicated mobile app problematic, and 
some access the Internet through private or public computers, for which a mobile app would be useless . A 
web-based application provides the largest reach to a multitude o f devices.    
A content management system (CMS) is the foundation of the software platform that will be updated to 
support the current study and will provide seamless integration of SMS (text) messaging with the Web -
delivered content. As one of the purposes of this research is to be the starting point for wider dissemination of 
this intervention, the technology we will implement should also serve as the core for future development. 
Considering both the characteristics of the target audience as well as the specific requirements of the project, 
the proposed CMS will 1) allow publication of content in various formats (text, audio, video); 2) a synchronous 
communication with users using various methods, starting with SMS messaging ; 3) s ynchronous 
communication with users (e.g., chat) ; 4) integration with various social media channels  for sharing of updates 
on testing and information vaccination  (e.g. Facebook , Instagram ); 5) track user interaction with the COVID -19 
literacy content and automatically respond to certain user actions (e.g., send SMS reminders if the user does 
not open the content within a certain period of time), and 6) collect data using automated metrics (e.g., access 
logs, data usage logs) and survey -like tools . A dedicated administration dashboard will provide researchers 
with aggregated as well as individual data on website use, and allow full management of the CMS. User 
access to content will be PIN -protected, and data transfer will be encrypted.  Because the underlying platform 
already exists via the SHE -WOMEN project, and some of the COVID -19 literacy information for the module has 
been already produced, we are leaving only six months to develop and pi[INVESTIGATOR_62923].  While this is an 
aggressive timeline, we are well -poised to build on existing infrastructure/ access to participants to build and 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268].  While content is developed  (scripting, filming, etc.) , upgrades to programming of the SHE -WOMEN web 
application will be performed to support the new content and study requirements. Based on our experience 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_62924] a women’s health literacy m Health intervention, we are convinced this timeline is 
feasible (and necessary given the importance of pus hing the intervention as quickly as possible).  
 Procedures for getting participants to initiate mhealth intervention:  We estimate an aggregated 
contact [CONTACT_31398]  30-[ADDRESS_67783] communication 
with the research team through the website . However, because it is a text -Web intervention, accessing content 
will be dependent on user engagement with the platform. We will measure uptake of the intervention 
components as it relates to number of minutes participants actively engage with the content,  and length of time 
for COVID -19 literacy module completion . Participants who successfully initiate the intervention will be sent 
texts to their mobile phone or email  with a link to content on the SHE-Women website  (www.shewomen.org) . 
Content will be delivered through a mix of short videos of the health educators and standardized patient actors 
discussing content (available in mobile -optimized video as well as audio only format), interactive quizzes, and 
multimedia . We have found these content packaging and delivery methods to be highly engaging for women 
with CLSI (ref). Through automatic feedback from t he website, t he study manager at each site will monitor 
whether participants access content after receiving the text messages. If participants have not accessed 
content within [ADDRESS_67784] n’t responded, they will receive a phone call from the site’s study manager , re-inviting 
them to access content for that day.  In our ongoing RCT, we found that the average time from baseline to 
initiation of inter vention was two days. The SHE -Women website also will have a tab available to live -chat with 
a health educator 5 days a week for 8 hours a day. This feature will be managed centrally at the Kansas City 
site (home of the MPIs). Participants will be able to send messages to the health educator through the SHE -
Women website, if they are not able to live chat. The asynchronous messaging will be location -dependent and 
will be automatically directed to each of the sites’ research teams. This feature will be available in addition to 
standard text -message access to a health educator during business hours. We will add weekend or evening 
hours if necessary.  Participants will be given a one-week window for self -directed completion of the COVID -[ADDRESS_67785] -assessment will be offered to participants over the phone or through an electronic link to 
the survey. Participants will be sent any relevant COVID -19 information over text message throughout the 
study period, with uptake of these messages and user engagement (i.e. responses, live c hats, emails, phone 
calls, etc.) documented.  We are aware that knowledge about COVID -[ADDRESS_67786] study design  and ethical considerations : We have chosen a pre -post design for evaluating the 
effectiveness of the intervention in this study . We are testing the hypothesis that relative to baseline COVID -19 
testing and vaccine literacy, access, and uptake, after the intervention, participants’ COVID -19 testing and 
vaccine literacy, access, and uptake increases. In other words, w e will measure  the outcomes of COVID -19 
testing and vaccine literacy, access, and uptake  at baseline; deliver the intervention to the entire sample; and 
then measu re post-intervention outcomes at  1- and 12-month follow -up. While there are strong study designs 
for evaluating intervention effectiveness , like the gold standard randomized controlled trial , or a waitlist  
controlled design (which we have employed before for a low -risk intervention ), we have determined that it 
would be unethical to withhold or make participants wait for a low -risk potentially high impact intervention of 
this sort. Based on what we know about women with CLSI – especially for those women in the community – 
they are rar ely the target and recipi[INVESTIGATOR_62925]. Our analytic plan below describes 
the strategies we plan to employ to boost the rigor of the methodological approach to this study design. People 
with CLSI have three times the risk of death from COVID -[ADDRESS_67787] decided to proceed given the ethical obligation to participants 
and commitment to narrowing COVID -19 disparities.   
Outcome measures:  The table below lists outcomes , modality, and  measures for each aim.   
Aim Outcomes  Modality  Measures  
1 COVID -19 testing, 
attitudes, 
practices in a 
vaccine 
environment  Semi -
structured 
interviews  Prompts relating to attitudes and practices related to testing; difficulty accessing 
testing/ vaccine or success stories; concerns heard from friends, family, news, social media, 
the streets; trust of government, health departments, pharmaceutical companies, 
corporations, doctors; perception of knowledge to make informed decision about  testing 
and vaccine  (acknowledging any regional differences)  
2 Acceptability and 
useability  of 
COVID -19 testing 
and vaccine 
mhealth  module  Survey 
items and 
semi -
structured 
interviews  Acceptability of mhealth intervention adapted from Sekhon et al (ref); usability scale 
adapted from Brooke (ref), open -ended questions developed by [CONTACT_62946], opi[INVESTIGATOR_62926]/most favorite parts, any other participant feedback  
[ADDRESS_67788] completion  and vaccine access and uptake questions developed by [CONTACT_62947] (where, how many  tests, results,  vaccines, which, challenges/barriers/facilitators, side 
effects); COVID -19 literacy adapted from Roberto Biasio et al (ref), media use during 
COVID -19 survey by [CONTACT_17483] (ref), COVID -19 knowledge, attitudes, and avoidant 
behaviors survey from Center for Economic and Social research (ref); COVID -19 testing 
attitudes s cales to be developed at study start (based on current scientific an d media 
reports on attitudes about testing in a vaccine environment; vaccine mistrust and hesitancy 
scales, by [CONTACT_62948] (ref) ; attitudes about racism and mistrust by [CONTACT_62949] (ref)  
Validation of outcomes:  As in our previous research, we will attempt to validate the self -reported 
outcomes of COVID -[ADDRESS_67789]  completion  and vaccine receipt. In our research on validating self-reported Pap 
tests among CLSI women (ref) we assessed medical records, semi -structured interview results probing about 
last Pap test recall, and a Pap test knowledge score based on a survey. We found that self -report of Pap 
testing  accuracy was associated with Pap test recall and Pap test knowledge scores. Thus, in all analyses of 
self-reported COVID -[ADDRESS_67790]  completion  and vaccine receipt, we control for COVID -19 literacy scores and run 
an analysis of the two -three questions about testing and vaccine recall to assess whether those factors should 
also be controlled for in analyses.  
Data collection  and compensation : For Aim [ADDRESS_67791] m Health intervention content (ref) , as 
well as analyzing website logs to understand pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]’s partici pants’ interaction with the COVID -[ADDRESS_67792] been using an IRB -approved, secure, cloud -
based data capture software, RedCap.  In the majority of our follow -up of the tri -city cohort, 95% of interviews 
were conducted over the phone, by a staff member, with the staff member entering data directly into the 
RedCap database. In 5% of cases, we either emailed participants a link to the RedCap survey at their request 
or printed a copy and mailed it to them with return postage (in the case of participants who become 
incarcerated during the study). The RedCap platform has worked pretty seamlessly across the three city study 
sites for tracking needed surveys, doing quarterly check -ins, and conducting su rveys with participants. We will 
continue employing this method for the present study.  Quantitative data from website logs in the form of 
standardized reports (engagement time, module and segment completion times, number of logs, asynchronous 
interaction, correct answer to quizzes) will be retrieved and will complement the survey data.  
We have always paid our research participants for their time. Less than one -third have stable employment, 
with many engaging in sporadic, under -the-table work to try and make ends meet. We have found in our 
combined decades of experience that compensating participants is necessary and appreciated. Participants for 
Aim 1  stakeholder interviews will be compensated $25; Aim 2  intervention completion will be compensated 
$25; Aim 3 quarterly check -ins will be compensated $10, and for each follow -up survey partic ipants will be 
compensated $50. When participant stakeholders are brought together,  they will also be compensated $25 for 
participation in feedback sessions on future dissemination, in addition to being invited to co -author reports, 
presentations, and papers with us. In our team’s combined experience with multiple interventional and 
longitudinal studies with women with CLSI, this amount of compensation hits the sweet spot of being enough to 
retain participants over time, but not be so much as to coerce them  to participate.   
Data analysis:  Aim [ADDRESS_67793] used the narrative analytical approach in previous research and 
found that, with its ex tended units of analysis, the story -based technique renders visible nuances of 
perspective and experience that may be obscured in other qualitative methods  (refs 47,48). For Aim 2 , a 
descriptive analysis of survey items on acceptability and usa bility will be conducted  and guide subsequent 
changes for interventions. Qualitative data will be analyzed using a thematic analysis across interviews and will 
be led by [CONTACT_62950] (health communications/m Health intervention expert) and Ramaswamy (jail health 
literacy intervention expert) to decide how and where to make changes in the final m Health intervention.  Aim [ADDRESS_67794], bivariate tests will be 
performed to examine the distributional properties of the survey data  (COVID -[ADDRESS_67795] completion, testing and 
vaccine literacy, access , and uptake ), website log data (usage of and interaction with the COVID -19 literacy 
module; i.e., intervention fidelity/dosage), and their correlations at each time point (0, 1, 12  months) within the 
sample, as well as in comparisons between participant subgroups (s tudy sites, age, race/ethnicity, education, 
employment , etc.). Second, growth curve modeling (GCM ) will be utilized to explore the changes in each 
outcome over the 13-month study period , while properly accounting for (a) the dependency of observations  
(e.g., autoregressive residual covariance) , (b) the baseline characteristics imbalanced between dropouts and 
completers, and (c) other confounders (e.g., study sites  reflecting policy climate /local promotion of testing and 
vaccine , age, race/ethnicity, educati on, employment , intervention fidelity/dosage ). Third, hierarchical linear 
modeling (HLM) will be conducted to estimate the longitudinal impacts of COVID -[ADDRESS_67796], 
hesitancy  (independent variables) on test completion,  vaccine access , and uptake 
(challenges/barriers/facilitators , update [yes/no]; dependent variables). S ite-specific effects will be identified in 
a follow -up subgroup analysis using data from the Kansas City, Birmingham, and Oakland subsamples.  Lasty, 
a survival analysis will be conducted. Specifically, we will estimate the cumulative probability of taking COVID -
[ADDRESS_67797] or vaccine over 12 months (i.e., survival function) ; and we fit Cox proportional hazards models to 
identify the factors (e.g., literacy , and demographic variables) tha t significantly contribute to the time to get 
vaccinated (i.e., survival time) . 
Power considerations:  Aim [ADDRESS_67798] enough information from stakeholders to supplement what is 
known in the health literacy and COVID -19 communication literature to develop the intervention.39 Given on our 
prior research in developi[INVESTIGATOR_62927]30-31, 60 participants 
will be sufficient to meet our goals. If we feel that we don’t have enough information to detect re gional 
differences in stakeholders’ feedback and believe that some may exist, we have the time and resources to ask 
more structured questions in this regard. Aim 2  will be pi[INVESTIGATOR_60528] 45 participants, 15 from each site. The goal 
of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_62928] m Health intervention delivery, multimedia design, see which parts of the 
intervention are great, and which ones don’t resonate, and to get feedback on what other areas of content 
need to be added in. In our prior research developi[INVESTIGATOR_62929] l iteracy interventions27, this sample is sufficient.  
We expect a complete sample of 313 participants for Aim 3  based on a 95% acceptance rate  and 81% 
completion rate  over the 13-month study period. Because there is little or no previous research that can guide 
power calculation for our Aim [ADDRESS_67799] size (MDES).[ADDRESS_67800] ‘true’ effect for which this study can detect with N=313, 80% 
power, and Type I error controlled under 5%. The estimated MDES are small —d=0.15 for mean difference, 
g=0.08 for proportion difference, ρ=0.16 for correlation, and f=0.08 for GCM/HLM when 0.[ADDRESS_67801] that this study will be adequately 
powered (> 80%) even when the ‘true’ effects of the intervention are small in this population.   
Potential problems and alternatives:  The biggest potential problem is the aggressive timeline for Aims 1 
and 2. For Aim 1, we are well -practiced in recruiting and conducting qualitative interviews with our sample. If 
this activity takes more than the three months allotted, we plan to continu e data collection and analysis while 
simultaneously doing the work for Aim 2 on intervention development , especially considering that data analysis 
for the qualitative study in Aim 1 will happen concomitantly with data collection . Findings in Aim 1 will be  
integrated in real -time for Aim 2. Aim 2 also has an aggressive six-month timeline for mHealth module 
development  (three mo nths in common with Aim 1) . Fortunately, we already have a dedicated website and 
SMS platform through which to deliver the intervention (www. shewomen.org). That website and SMS platform 
already has modules on cervix, breast, sexually transmitted infection, and reproductive goal planning 
developed and being tested in an ongoing RCT. Software programming starts from an existent structure  that 
only needs to be upgraded, which is can be achieved within the dedicated timeline. The initial programming of 
the SHE -WOMEN website did took into consideration future upgrades, so we have created the adequate frame 
to ensure seamless integration of new modules . Therefore the structures and protocols already exist for 
development of an mHealth module , and software updates will be mostly conducted in the first three months 
(timeline common with Aim 1), leaving three dedicated months for content creation  and pi[INVESTIGATOR_48124] . While the 
activities for Aim [ADDRESS_67802] been 
followed for 7 years; the Oakland women for 3 years; and the Birmingham women for 2 years. Based on this 
experience, our attrition estimates should be pretty accurate . And statistical power for determining intervention 
effectiveness is premised on some loss to follow -up. The final problem is the changing nature of COVID -19: 
whether that be disease patterns, outbreaks, new waves, new strains, new testing requirements, pauses in 
vaccine, the need for boosters, and changing information and levels of community trust. This is a reality of our 
times, and our work directly with stakeholders, and nimbleness in being able to adapt the mHealth intervention 
and push new informati on out to participants, should help us navigate changes during this pandemic.  
Dissemination:  Due to the changing and urgent  nature of the COVID -[ADDRESS_67803] with providing mitigation and vaccine protocols, 
information, and as resources for questions. We anticipate staying  fully engaged in both formal and informal 
dissemination activities throughout the pandemic and (hopefully) post -pandemic period. Our formal manuscript 
plan is presented below. We engage stakeholders in multiple activities (Aim 1 data collection, Aim 2 and 3 data 
interpretation, and facilitate this by [CONTACT_62951]-time stakeholder research assistant positions in Kansas City, Birmingham, and Oakland). The latter 
activity will both ensure the rigor of findings prior to and during d issemination,  but will also engage extremely 
marginalized CLSI women with formal employment opportunities. Of note is that half of our peer -reviewed 
manuscripts will be co -authored with participant stakeholders. We also plan to report findings in academic 
blogs, as auth ors of op -eds, through social media, presentations to NIH officials on findings, presentation at 
academic and local conferences, through our study website (www.kumc.edu/she), and in annual newsletters to 
participants in the three cities . We h ave also budgeted funds to support communications staff at University of 
Kansas Medical Center, University of Alabama Birmingham, and RTI Berkeley, to help boost dissemination 
and engage the broader media community.  
Planned Peer -Reviewed Manuscripts  
Aim Paper  
1 Regional differences in COVID -19 testing, attitudes, and practices  among CLSI women in three cities ( co-authored with 
selected stakeholders ) 
[ADDRESS_67804] -in-time COVID -19 literacy mHealth intervention for women with CLSI (co-
authored with selected stakeholders)  
3 COVID -19 testing and vaccine literacy, access, and  uptake among CLSI women  (baseline, pre -intervention)  
1-3 Working with CLSI participant stakeholders to design and assess outcomes (co-authored with selected stakeholders)  
3 Facilitating access to COVID -19 testing and vaccine among women with CLSI (based on 12 months  of follow -up data)  
1-[ADDRESS_67805], we will convene a group of CLSI stakeholders, similar to our methods in Aim 1, in order to explore 
diffusion of the intervention through the women’s social networks. This would entail, for example, assessing 
whether and how the women would share the mhealth intervention link with their networks. Secon d, we will 
take advantage of Co -I [CONTACT_62954]’s COVID -[ADDRESS_67806] an opensource set of materials and technological platform available to the 
community of people working directly with people leaving the criminal legal system – a group of two million 
women who leave jails annually and another [ADDRESS_67807] JA, DiLaura G, Dolovich S. COVID -19 Cases and Deaths in Federal and 
State Prisons. JAMA . 2020;324(6):602 -603. doi:10.1001/jama.2020.[ZIP_CODE]  
2. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, National Institutes of 
Health Sexual and Gender Minority Research Coordinating Committee. NIH FY 2016 -2020 Strategic 
Plan to Advance Research on the Health and Well -being of Sexua l and Gender Minorities. 2015. 
https://dpcpsi.nih.gov/sites/default/files/sgmStrategicPlan.pdf  
3. Carson EA. Prisoners in 2018. April 2020. https://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/p18.pdf  
4. Khorasani SB, Koutoujian PJ, Zubiago J, Guardado R, Siddiqi K, Wurcel AG. COVID -[ADDRESS_67808] among Corrections Officers and People Who Are Incarcerated at Middlesex County Jail, 
[LOCATION_005]. J Urban Health . May 26 2021;doi:10.1007/s11524 -021-[ZIP_CODE] -y 
5. Stern MF, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_62930], Strick LB, et al. Willingness to Receive a COVID -19 Vaccination Among 
Incarcerated or Detained Persons in Correctional and Detention Facilities - Four States, September -
December 2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . Apr 2 2021;70(13):473 -477. 
doi:10.[ZIP_CODE]/mmwr.mm7013a3  
6. Strassle C, Jardas E, Ochoa J, et al. Covid -19 Vaccine Trials and Incarcerated People — The Ethics of 
Inclusion. New England Journal of Medicine . 2020;383(20):1897 -1899. doi:10.1056/NEJMp2025955  
7. Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health, . Emergency Awards: 
Community -engaged COVID -19 Testing Interventions among Underserved and Vulnerable Populations 
– RADx -UP Phase II (RFA -OD-21-008). 2021.  
8. Sexual Health Empowerment Team. (S)HE Women. Accessed June 17, 2021, www.shewomen.org  
9. Salyer C, Lipnicky A, Bagwell -Gray M, Lorvick J, Cropsey K, Ramaswamy M. Abnormal Pap Follow -Up 
among Criminal -Legal Involved Women in Three U.S. Cities. International Journal of Environmental 
Research and Public Health . 2021;18(12):6556.  
10. Wickliffe J, Kelly PJ, Allison M, Emerson A, Ramaswamy M. Retention Strategies in Working With 
Justice -Involved Women. J Correct Health Care . Jul 2019;25(3):231 -237. 
doi:10.1177/[ADDRESS_67809], McClinton A. The COVID -19 pandemic: a call to action to identify and address racial and 
ethnic disparities. Journal of racial and ethnic health disparities . 2020:1 -5.  
13. Montoya -Barthelemy A, Lee CD, Cundiff D, Smith E. COVID -19 and the correctional environment: the 
American prison as a focal point for public health. American Journal of Preventive Medicine . 2020;  
14. Kajstura A. Women’s Mass Incarceration: The Whole Pie 2019. 2019. October 29, 2019. 
https://www.prisonpolicy.org/reports/pie2019women.html  
15. Steadman HJ, Osher FC, Robbins PC, Case B, Samuels S. Prevalence of serious mental illness 
among jail inmates. Psychiatric services . 2009;60(6):761 -765.  
16. Alleyne V. Locked up means locked out: Women, addiction and incarceration. Women & Therapy . 
2007;29(3 -4):181 -194.  
17. Webb S, Kelly PJ, Wickliffe J, Ault K, Ramaswamy M. Validating self -reported cervical cancer 
screening among women leaving jails. PloS one . 2019;14(7):e0219178.  
18. Hawks L, Woolhandler S, McCormick D. COVID -19 in prisons and jails in the [LOCATION_002]. JAMA 
Internal Medicine . 2020;  
19. Wallace M, Hagan L, Curran KG, et al. COVID -19 in correctional and detention facilities —United 
States, February –April 2020. 2020;  
20. Cohen J. Shots of hope. Science . Dec 18 2020;370(6523):1392 -1394. 
doi:10.1126/science.370.6523.1392  
21. Volpp KG, Cannuscio CC. Incentives for Immunity — Strategies for Increasing Covid -19 Vaccine 
Uptake. New England Journal of Medicine . 2021;doi:10.1056/NEJMp2107719  
22. O’Keefe SM. One in Three Americans Would Not Get COVID -[ADDRESS_67810] 7, 
2020. https://news.gallup.com/poll/317018/one -three -americans -not-covid -vaccine.aspx  
23. Catalyst. The Impact of Covid -19 on Working Parents (Report). Updated September 29, 2020. 
https://www.catalyst.org/research/impact -covid -working -parents/  
24. Perelman D. In the Covid -[ADDRESS_67811] a Kid or a Job. You Can’t Have Both. [LOCATION_001] 
Times . July 2, 2020. https://www.nytimes.com/2020/07/02/business/covid -economy -parents -kids-
career -homeschooling.html  
25. Freudenberg N, Daniels J, Crum M, Perkins T, Richie BE. Coming home from jail: the social and health 
consequences of community reentry for women, male adolescents, and their families and communities. 
Am J Public Health . Oct 2005;95(10):1725 -36. doi:10.2105/ajph.2004.056325 PMCID: PMC1449427  
26. Ramaswamy M, Simmons R, Kelly PJ. The development of a brief jail -based cervical health promotion 
intervention. Health promotion practice . 2015;16(3):[ADDRESS_67812] -Intervention. Am J 
Health Promot . Jan 2020;34(1):87 -90. doi:10.1177/0890117119863714 PMCID: PMC6920557  
28. Emerson AM, Wickliffe J, Kelly PJ, Ramaswamy M. Feminism and Bourdieusian Social Theory in a 
Sexual Health Empowerment Project with Incarcerated and Recently Released Women. Soc Theory 
Health . Mar 2019;17(1):57 -74. doi:10.1057/s41285 -018-0068 -3 PMCID: PMC6404768  
29. Lorvick J, Hemberg J, Cropsey K, Wickliffe J, Faust A, Comfort M, Ramaswamy M. Health care 
experiences and sources of information related to COVID -19 among women involved in the criminal 
legal system in three U.S. cities. Arch Women Health Care . 2020; 3:5. PMC# in process.  
30. Geana M, Anderson S, Ramaswamy M. COVID -19 vaccine hesitancy among women leaving jails: A 
qualitative study. Public Health Nursing . 2021 May 11. doi: 10.1111/phn.[ZIP_CODE]. Online ahead of print. 
PMID: 33973268 (PMC# in progress)  
31. Ramaswamy M, Hemberg J, Faust A, Wickliffe J, Comfort M, Lorvick J, Cropsey K. Criminal justice -
involved women navigate COVID -19: Notes from the field. Health Educ Behav.  2020 Aug;47(4):544 -
548. PMC7375331.  
32. Gerend MA, Madkins K, Crosby S, et al. Evaluation of a Text Messaging -Based Human Papi[INVESTIGATOR_62931]: Results from a Pi[INVESTIGATOR_62932]. Ann Behav Med . Apr 7 2021;55(4):321 -332. doi:10.1093/abm/kaaa056 PMCID: PMC8025080  
33. Zhang Y, Fisk RJ. Barriers to vaccination for coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID -19) control: experience 
from the [LOCATION_002]. Glob Health J . Mar 2021;5(1):51 -55. doi:10.1016/j.glohj.2021.02.005 PMCID: 
PMC7871809  
34. Lawes -Wickwar S, Ghio D, Tang MY, et al. A Rapid Systematic Review of Public Responses to Health 
Messages Encouraging Vaccination against Infectious Diseases in a Pandemic or Epi[INVESTIGATOR_901]. Vaccines  
(Basel). Jan 20 2021;9(2)doi:10.3390/vaccines9020072 PMCID: PMC7909419  
35. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_62933], Wickliffe J, Emerson A, Smith S, Ramaswamy M. Justice -involved women's preferences for 
an internet -based Sexual Health Empowerment curriculum. Int J Prison Health. Aug 20 2019;16(1):38 -
44. doi:10.1108/ijph -01-2019 -0002. PMCID: PMC7412955  
36. Lipnicky A, Kelly PJ, Ramaswamy M. Facebook as a follow -up tool for women with criminal justice 
histories. Int J Prison Health . Apr 10 2020;16(2):117 -122. doi:10.1108/ijph -08-2019 -0042  
37. Kim JH, Marks F, Clemens JD. Looking beyond COVID -19 vaccine phase 3 trials. Nature Medicine . 
2021/02/01 2021;27(2):205 -211. doi:10.1038/s41591 -021-[ZIP_CODE] -y 
38. Aufderheide P. Media Literacy. A Report of the National Leadership Conference on Media Literacy. 
ERIC ; 1993.  
39. Chou WYS, Burgdork CE, Gaysynsky A, Hunter CM. COVID -19 Vaccination Communication: Applying 
Behavioral and Social Science to Address Vaccine Hesitancy and Foster Vaccine Confidence. 2020. 
https://obssr.od.nih.gov/wp -content/uploads/2020/12/COVIDReport_Final.pdf  
40. Bloom HS. Randomizing groups to evaluate place -based programs. In HS Bloom (ed.), Learning more 
from social experiments : evolving analytic approaches.  Russell Sage Foundation; 2005:xi, 246 p.  
 
 