IV vs PO A cetaminophen Pre operatively      1 
 
RESEARCH PROTOCOL  
 
Date  3/1/2018  
Title  Comparison of Out comes when Patients Receive Pre operat ive IV 
Acetaminophen versus Pre operative Oral Acetaminophen  
Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_401370], BSN, RN, CAPA  
Sub-Investigators  Jennifer Cox, BSN, RN; Elizabe th Burgess, MD  
Research Specialist  Rachel Baker, PhD, RN  
Department  Bethesda Butler, Perioperative Services  
Hatton #  17-114 
 
Purpose of Study     
 
In the f all of 2016 , there was a change implemented in the clinical care of patients undergoing 
surg ery at  Bethes da Butler. Previously, intravenous  Acetaminophe n was routinely ordered for 
surgical patients and administered  preoperatively , either by [CONTACT_101035] , or by [CONTACT_401385] .  A system -wide change occurred, and routine us e of preoperative 
intravenous Acetaminophen ceased; instead, patients were given oral Acetamin ophen prior to  
surgery.  Anecdotally , recovery room  nurses at Butler have noticed negative patient outcomes 
after this change in care was implemented.  An extensi ve literature search was undertaken, and 
no research was found that compared the different administration routes of Acetaminophen in 
surgical patients.  The current study proposes to fill this gap in the literature, and examine the 
trend that nurses have e xperienced during clinical care , to determine if there is a significant 
difference in outcomes related to the administration route  of pre operative Acetaminophen. 
Specifically, the study will compare the following outcomes o f surgical patients who receive  IV 
Acetaminophen wit h surgical patients who receive  oral Acetaminophen: post operative pain, 
postoperative opi[INVESTIGATOR_40533], postoperative nausea and vomiting, length of stay  in recovery room, 
and patient satisfaction  with pain control . Ultimately, we would plan to use the results of this 
study to advocate for best pre operative care for patients to improve patient outcomes and 
experience with care.   
 
Hypotheses or Research Questions  
 
Hypothesis 1:  Patients wh o received IV Acetaminophen pre operatively will report decreased 
pain in the PACU compared to patients who received oral Acetaminophen pre operatively.  
 
Hypothesis 2 :  Patients  who received IV Acetaminophen pre operatively will receive decreased 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_401371] p reoperatively.  
 
Hypothesis 3:  Patients wh o received IV Acetaminophen pre operatively will experience less 
negative effects of p ain medications (including post operative nausea and vomiting, respi[INVESTIGATOR_41826], and need for reversal agents) compared to p atients who received oral 
Acetaminophen pre operatively.  
IV vs PO A cetaminophen Pre operatively      2 
 
 
Hypothesis 4 :  Surgery patients wh o received IV Acetaminophen pre operatively will have a 
shorter length of stay in the recovery room compared to surgical patients who received oral 
Acetaminophen pre operatively.  
 
Hypothesis 5 :  Surgery patients wh o received IV Acetaminophen pre operatively will report 
higher satisfaction with their pain control  compared to surgical patients who received oral 
Acetaminophen pre operatively.  
 
Background   
 
Anecdotally, nurse s noticed negative patient outcomes after a change in care was implemented 
from patients receiving  Acetaminophen intravenously preoperatively to patients receiving 
Acetaminophen orally before surgery.  To assess clinical care before and after this practice  
change , a template was created through coordination with an assigned Lead Applications 
Programming Analyst from the Information Technology Department to pull retrospective data 
at Bethesda Butler.  An Epic report was generated to examine outcomes of surgi cal patients 
before and after the change in practice (no patient identifiers were included).  The report , 
completed at the end of June, 2017,  contained information mined from Epic from 2016, and 
included over 2000 surgical patients who had surgical procedu res under general anesthesia, 
and received either IV or oral Acetaminophen.  However, we were unable to draw conclusions 
based on this data because of missing documentation and variations in documentation; more 
than one third of the data (885/2609, or 34%)  had to be thrown out.  Additionally, the actual 
amount of opi[INVESTIGATOR_401372] (total mg or mcg) was not discoverable.   
 
To determine whether there was evidence around this practice change, a literature search was 
also completed.  Several studies examined the r elationship between giving IV Acetaminophen 
preoperatively, compared to not administering IV Acetaminophen (or administering a placebo),  
and found benefits including a reduction in reported pain (McNicol et al., 2011; Salihoglu et al., 
2009), a reduction i n postoperative opi[INVESTIGATOR_8556] (Jebaraj et al., 2013; Maund et al., 
2011; McNicol et al., 2011; Moon et al., 2011; Remy, Marret, and Bonnet, 2005; Salihoglu et al., 
2009; Song, Melroy, & Whipple, 2014), a reduction in postoperative nausea and vomiting (Song, 
Melroy, & Whipple, 2014), a reduction in length of stay (Hansen et al., 2016; Song, Melroy, & 
Whipple, 2014), and a reduction in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14051] (Hansen et al., 2016).  These studies 
report important benefits to patients receiving IV Acetamino phen preoperatively compared to 
not receiving Acetaminophen at all.  However, the debate is not whether to administer IV 
Acetaminophen or no Acetaminophen.  Oral Acetaminophen is currently being administered in 
an attempt to achieve the same outcomes that have been shown after IV Acetaminophen 
administration.   This translation from research supporting IV Acetaminophen administration to 
clinically administering oral Acetaminophen is not evidence -based.  To date, there have been 
no studies evaluating the use of oral Acetaminophen to achieve these same outcomes , and   
no studies comparing the effect of patients receiving IV Acetaminophen to oral Acetaminophen 
preoperatively .  Experts in the field have called for randomized studies that take the current 
evidence  a step further and compare the route of A cetaminophen administration 
IV vs PO A cetaminophen Pre operatively      3 
 
preoperatively (Boggs, 2017).   The current study proposes to address this gap in the literature 
by [CONTACT_28032] a significant difference in patient outcomes related to the 
adm inistration route of pre operative Acetaminophen  (IV vs oral) . Specifically, the study will 
compare the following outcomes of surgical patients who receive preoperative IV 
Acetaminophen with surgical patients who receive preoperative oral Acetaminophen: 
postoperative pain, post -operative opi[INVESTIGATOR_40533], postoperative nausea and vomiting, length of 
stay in recovery room, and patient satisfaction with pain control.  
 
Research Plan   
 
Study Design  
 
This study will use a randomized , double -blind,  controlled design  with two arms:  
Arm 1: Schedule d IV Acetaminophen provided pre operatively  
Arm 2: Schedule d PO Acetaminophen provided pre operatively   
 
 
Setting for the study  
 
This study will take place at Bethesda Butler Hos pi[INVESTIGATOR_401373] .  This unit  
consists of 12 preoperative bays, 8 operating rooms,  and 9 postoperative recovery bays.  The 
department provides care for patients undergoing procedures  including (but not limited to) 
arthroscopy, ear/nose/throat, gynecology, laparoscopy, ophthalmology, o rthopedic total joint 
replacement, plastics, and podiatry.  
 
Before the study begins, the study staff will provide education  to all of  the nurses working in 
the peri operative  department involved in patient care .  This education will include information 
abou t the study design, the intervention, the inclusion/exclusion criteria, and the data 
collection forms.  Letter to Patients will be provided to surgeons to hand out to their patients 
during the pre -surgical visit. Additionally, the presurgical services staff  who call the patients 
before surgery will be provided a script to read describing the study. Both the letter and the 
phone script will be used to provide information about the study to patients, but will not be 
used to determine eligibility or consent. By  [CONTACT_401386], we are hopi[INVESTIGATOR_401374].  
 
Participants  
 
This study will enroll patients who meet the inclusion/ exclusion c riteria and who consent to the 
study.  
 
Inclusion criteria:  
• 18 years old or older  
IV vs PO A cetaminophen Pre operatively      4 
 
• Admitted to Bethesda Butler Main Perioperative Services for an outpatient  surgical 
procedure performed under general anesthesia  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
• Allergy to Acetaminophen  
• Lactose intolerance or lactose allergy  (placebo capsules contain lactose)  
• Hepatic disease  
• Having taken a product containing acetaminophen within 6 hours of scheduled surgery 
time  
• Pregnant  
• Weight less than 60kg  
• Opi[INVESTIGATOR_9827] – admits to current opi[INVESTIGATOR_401375]/or substance abuse disorder, 
and/or currently in treatment for opi[INVESTIGATOR_401376]  
• Emergent or on -call procedures  
• Inpatient surgery  
 
Each day, the study staff will review the patients scheduled for surgery  to determine potential  
subjects.  In addition, the study staff expects that the staff education provided before 
implementation of the research study may result in clinical nurses notifying study staff when an 
eligible patient is identified .  By [CONTACT_401387], the study staff hopes to approach the majority of the potentially 
eligible patients .  When a patient  appears to be eligible, study staff will complete the 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria Checklist .  If the patient  is eligible, a study staff member will meet 
with the patient  and describe the study and answer any questions.  If the patient is  interested 
in enrolling in the study, the study staff will review the Informed Consent Form  and HIPAA form  
and obt ain written informed consent.  Patients  will receive a copy of their signed Informed 
Consent form and HIPAA form.  
 
Sample Size Determination:  No studies  were found examining the impact of IV versus oral 
Acetaminophen on the listed dependent variables.  Therefore, a power analysis was conducted 
using G*Power (version [IP_ADDRESS]) with a default medium effect size (0.5), power of 0.8, and level 
of significance 0.05.  It was determined that 53 patients would be needed in each group, for a 
total sample size of 10 6 patients.  We plan to enroll 120 patients (60 patients in each group) to 
allow for any missing data or withdrawals.  Additionally, [ADDRESS_506237] a clinically significant (2 point difference on a 0 -10 pain rating scale ) mean 
difference in pain scores between two groups.  
 
Procedures  
 
Randomization:  
After obtaining informed consent , the subject will be randomized into one of two groups:  
1. IV Acetaminophen  
2. Oral Acetaminophen  
IV vs PO A cetaminophen Pre operatively      [ADDRESS_506238] will be created from a computerized simple random number generator 
(1:1 randomization) pri or to the start of the study.   Only the pharmacists will have access to this 
information.  
 
The Study ID  number will be added to the top of the Data Collection Form . Study staff will add 
the patient’s name [CONTACT_401394]’s 
name.  This is the only list that will connect patient identifiers to study ID numbers.  Beginning 
with selection of the envelope, all documents will be labeled with only subject ID number and 
no patient identifiers.  
 
Intervention o r experimental aspect of the study  
 
Once the patient has been randomized, the nurse will provide study ID number to the 
pharmacist  who will provide the correct IV and oral medications:   
• Patients randomized to  Arm 1  (IV Acetaminophen group) will receive IV  Acetaminophen 
1000mg in 100mL once  and a PO placebo pi[INVESTIGATOR_401377]  
• Patients randomized to Arm 2  (Oral Acetaminophen group) will receive  IV saline 100mL 
once and  Acetaminophen [ADDRESS_506239] of care.  
 
Data Collection  
The following variables will be collected:  
• Independent variable:  
o Route of Acetaminophen administration (IV or oral)   
• Dependent variable:  
o Post operative pain score – patient’s self -report of pain using a 0 -10 pain scale as 
documented by [CONTACT_401388]’s electronic  medical record  
o Amount of post operative opi[INVESTIGATOR_401378] – this will be 
documented by [CONTACT_401388]’s electronic medical record when 
administered  
o Post operative nausea and vomiting – As documented by [CONTACT_401389]’s electronic medical record  
o Occurrence of respi[INVESTIGATOR_2341] – As documented by [CONTACT_6398] O2 saturation in 
the patient’s electronic medical record  
IV vs PO A cetaminophen Pre operatively      6 
 
o Administration of reversal agent – As documented by [CONTACT_401389]’s electronic medical record  
o Length of stay in recovery room – Duration of length of stay in PACU is routinely 
recorded on all patients’ electronic medical record  (this will include both Phase I, 
and Phase II when applicable)  
o Patient satisfaction with pain control – This question will be asked of patients 
during the post -operative telephone call, which generally takes place 1 day (3 
days if the procedure is performed on Friday) after surgery.  The patients will be 
asked:  On a scale of 1 -10 (with 1 being extremely dissat isfied and 10 being 
extremely satisfied), how satisfied were you with your pain control on the day of 
surgery?    
• Potentially confounding variables:  These variables are routinely documented in 
patients’ electronic medical record.  The study team will recor d this data from the 
medical records.   
o Age 
o Gender  
o Weight  
o Medications  
o Type of surgery  
o Length of surgery  
o Baseline pre -operative pain level  
o Postoperative nausea and vomiting risk score  
o Prophylactic anti -emetic administered  
o Nerve block given  
o Local medication injected  
o Additional preoperative medications given (ie. Celebrex, Oxycontin, Neurontin) 
for pain management  
 
Each day, the study team members will review the Enrollment Log from the previous day and 
the study team nur ses will make the clinical post operativ e discharge telephone calls for 
patients were enrol led in the study.  The telephone call will follow the standard script used 
clinically for all patients and then one additional question will be asked at the end of the call: 
On a scale of 1 -10 (with 1 bein g extremely dissatisfied and 10 being extremely satisfied), how 
satisfied were you with your pain control on the day of surgery?   The patient’s response to this 
question will be recorded on the Enrollment Log.  
 
To collect the remaining outcome data,  a pap er data collection form will be placed on the 
patient’s chart.  The RN caring for the patient post -operatively will be asked to complete the 
form at the time of patient care.  The form includes : Times of Acetaminophen /Placebo (IV and 
oral) administration, post operative pain scores  (before and after pain medication 
administration) , opi[INVESTIGATOR_401379] (including cumulative dose of each 
medication administered), any  occurrence of post operative  nausea, any occurrence of 
post operative  vomiting, any low O2 saturations  (<92%) , and any rev ersal medications 
administered.  The study team will conduct a review of the medical records of all patients 
IV vs PO A cetaminophen Pre operatively      7 
 
enrolled in the study  and complete the following information on the data collection sheet:  
Time surgery star ted, time surgery ended, time into recovery room and time discharged from 
recovery room  (includes Phase I, and Phase II when applicable) , age, gender, weight, type of 
surgery, baseline  preoperative pain score, post operative nausea and vomiting risk score, 
prophylactic anti -emetics administered, preoperative nerve block given, any local injected, 
additional preoperative medications given for pain management .  
 
Additionally, any adverse events experienced by [CONTACT_401390]’s clinical team.  The pharmacist(s) will be able to unblind 
Acetaminophen route administration if needed for clinical care of the patient.  All adverse 
events will be reviewed by [CONTACT_401391] (IRB) 
following IRB guidelines.  
 
Statistical Analysis  
 
Data will be recorded on paper data collection forms with only subject ID and no identifiers. 
Data from these forms will be entered into a password protected database.  Only study team 
members will have access  to the database.  No personal information will be entered into the 
electronic database.  Data will undergo range checks when entered into the database, and 
quality control procedures will be performed to ensure accuracy of the data in the electronic 
databa se.  
 
Statistical analyses will be performed using SPSS statistical software.   Descriptive statistics 
(frequencies for categorical data; means and standard deviations and ranges for continuous 
data) will be used to describe the sample.  The following analy ses will be performed to address 
each hypothesis:  
 
Hypothesis 1:  Patients wh o received IV Acetaminophen pre operatively will report decreased 
pain in the PACU compared to patients who received oral Acetaminophen pre operatively.  
To compare the effects of th e intervention, a Mann -Whitney U test will be used to 
compare mean pain  scores for patient s who received IV Acetaminophen  to the mean 
pain  scores of patients who receive oral Acetaminophen .  A level of signif icance of 
α=0.[ADDRESS_506240] for the potential confounding variables.  
 
Hypothesis 2:  Patients wh o received IV Acetaminophen pre operatively will receive decreased 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480] d oses compared to patients who received oral Acetaminophen pre operatively.  
To compare the  effects of the intervention, an independent samples t-test will be used to 
compare mean dose of opi[INVESTIGATOR_401380] s who received IV Acetaminophen  to 
the mean  dose of opi[INVESTIGATOR_401381] .  A 
level of significance of α=0.[ADDRESS_506241] for the potential confounding variables.  
 
IV vs PO A cetaminophen Pre operatively      8 
 
Hypothesis 3:  Patients wh o received IV Acetaminophen pre operatively will experienc e less 
negative effects of p ain medications (including post operative nausea and vomiting, respi[INVESTIGATOR_41826], and need for reversal agents)  compared to patients who received oral 
Acetaminophen pre operatively.  
To compare the effects of the intervention,  a Chi Square test  will be used to compare 
occurrence of postoperative nausea  and vomiting  for patients who received IV 
Acetaminophen to patients who receive oral Acetaminophen.  A level of significance of 
α=0.[ADDRESS_506242] operative respi[INVESTIGATOR_401382].   A level of significance of 
α=0.[ADDRESS_506243] will be used to compare 
occurrence of administration of reversal agents  for patients who received IV 
Acetaminophen to patients who receiv e oral Acetaminophen.  A level of significance of 
α=0.[ADDRESS_506244] for the potential confounding variables.  
 
Hypothesis 4:  Surgery patients who received IV Acetaminophen pr eoperatively will ha ve a 
shorter length of stay in the recovery room compared to surgical patients who received oral 
Acetaminophen pre operatively.  
To compare the  effects of the intervention, an independent samples t-test will be used to 
compare mean length of PACU stay  for patient s who received IV Acetaminophen  to the 
mean length of PACU stay for  patients who receive oral Acetaminophen .  A level of 
significance of α=0.[ADDRESS_506245] for the potential confounding variables.  
 
Hypothesis 5:  Surgery patients wh o received IV Acetaminophen pre operatively will report 
higher satisfaction with their pain control compared to surgical patients who received oral 
Acetaminophen pre operatively.  
To compare the effects of the i ntervention, a Mann -Whitney U test will be used to 
compare mean satisfaction rating  for patient s who received IV Acetaminophen  to the 
mean satisfaction rating  of patients who receive oral Acetaminophen .  A level of 
significance of α=0.[ADDRESS_506246] for the potential confounding variables.  
 
 
 
Ethical Considerations  
 
IV vs PO A cetaminophen Pre operatively      9 
 
Informed consent  
 
All study staff will complete CITI trai ning.  A study staff member will meet with potentially 
eligible patient s and describe the study and answer any questions.   If the patient is  interested 
and meets all the inclusion/exclusion criteria, the study staff will review the Informed Consent 
Form  and HIPAA form  and obtain written informed consent.   Patients  will receive a copy of their 
signed Informed Consent form and HIPAA form.  
 
Informed Consent forms and HIPAA forms will be stored in a locked cabinet that only study staff 
will have access to.  After the study closes, the signed Informed Consent forms and HIPAA forms 
will be boxed and sent to off -site storage and securely stored for [ADDRESS_506247] copy forms (including Informed Consent forms, HIPAA forms, and d ata collection sheets) 
will be stored in locked cabinets that only study staff will have access to.  Electronic data 
(including Enrollment Log  and data entered into an electronic database) will be stored on a 
password -protected folder on the U drive.  Only  study staff will have access to the electronic 
study documents.  After data analysis and dissemination is completed, hard copy forms will be 
boxed and sent to secure storage for [ADDRESS_506248] /Budget  
 
Pharmacy  Costs : 
• IV acetaminophen, $31.61/dos e x 60 subjects                  $1896.6 0 
• IV normal saline  100 mL bag, $1.40 /dose x 60 subjects                 $84.00  
• Empty bottles, $5.13  x 120 subjects                          $615.60  
• Bottle hangers, $1.20 x 120 subjects                             $144.00  
• TriHealth Pharmacy fee, waived for st aff study (per Steve Shepherd)     $0.00  
• Compounding Pharmacy  fee ( Tristate Compoun ding Pharmacy & Kunkel   
Pharmacy)  total from below                  $420.00  
• Colored/Opaque Capsules (#120 =  $20) 
• Acetaminophen 10 00mg capsules (#60 = $210)  
• Placebo Capsules (#60 = $180.00) 
IV vs PO A cetaminophen Pre operatively      10 
 
    
Dissemination Costs:  
National experts have stated a study comparing IV and oral Acetaminophen is needed. 
Disseminating this information to a surgical audience will help patients even outside TriHealth 
and will allow TriHealth to be at the forefront of disseminating this new knowledge.  Ultimately 
the work will be published, but because of time required for publication, we are requesting 
presentation at a professional organization conference (l ikely the American Society of 
PeriAnesthesia Nurses, or ASPAN, 2019 conference) first to impact patients as quickly as 
possible.   Attendance at the  (ASPAN 2019 ) conference is a requirement for poster submission  
and presentation . 
• Poster development =                   $70.00 
• Conference fees for 2 presenters =                          $1000.00  
(cost estimated based on 2017 conference registration fees:   
$400 member/$600 non -member ) 
• Travel costs for 2 presenters - mileage to Nashville  from Bethesda  
Butler = 2 98 miles  x $0.535 (current TriHealth mileage reimbursement)  
= 159.[ADDRESS_506249] , roundtrip =                              $318.86   
• Hotel for 2 presenters ($250/night x 3 nights) =                $750.00  
 
Total                     $5299.06  
 
(Grant funding has b een approved by  [CONTACT_401392] ) 
 
 
Estimated Period of Time to Complete Study  
When will study begin?  January 1, 2018 (date awards dispersed)  
Protocol Development 
Completed  2 weeks  
Admin Review Time  2 weeks  
IRB Approval  6 weeks  
Data collection  3 months  
Data analysis  2 weeks  
Presentation development 
(if applicable)  2 weeks  
Manuscript Development 
(if applicable)  1 month  
Journal submission process 
(if applicable)  3 months  
Study closure  1 month  
 
 
When and how will results be disseminated?  
IV vs PO A cetaminophen Pre operatively      11 
 
Results will be disseminated internally to the Bethesda Butler surgery  leadership and system -
wide through the TriHealth Research Council.  Results will be disseminated nationally through 
presentation at a professional organization conference.  Finally, result s will be disseminated 
nationally and internationally by [CONTACT_401393] a relevant peer -reviewed journal . 
 
 
References  
 
Boggs, W. (2017).  IV acetaminophen curbs need for narcotics after C -section.   Medscape, 
http://bit.ly/2q1vKY3  
 
Hansen, R.N., Pham, A., Strassels, S.A., Balaban, S., & Wan, G.J. (2016).   Comparative analysis of 
length of stay and inpatient costs for orthopedic surgery patients treated with IV 
Acetaminophen and IV opi[INVESTIGATOR_401383] -operative pain.   Advances in 
Therapy, 33 , 1635 -1645.  
 
Jebaraj, B., Maitra, S., Baidya, D.K., & Khanna, P. (2013).  Intravenous paracetamol reduces 
postoperative opi[INVESTIGATOR_401384]:   A systematic review of clinical 
trials .  Pain Research and Treatm ent.  http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/402510  
 
Maund, E., McDaid, C., Rice, S., Wright, K., Jenkins, B., & Woolacott, N. (2011).  Paracetamol 
and selective and non -selective non -steroidal anti -inflammatory drugs for the reduction in 
morphine -related side eff ects after major surgery:  A systematic review.  British Journal of 
Anaesthesia, 106 , 292 -297.  
 
McNicol, E.D., Tzortzopoulou, A., Cepeda, M.S., Francia, M.B.D., Farhat, T., & Schumann, R. 
(2011).  Single -dose intravenous paracetamol or propacetamol for pre vention or treatment of 
postoperative pain:  A systematic review and meta -analysis.  British Journal of Anaesthesia, 106 , 
764-775.  
 
Moon, Y -E, Lee, Y -K, Lee, J., & Moon, D -E. (2011).  The effects of preoperative intravenous 
acetaminophen in patients underg oing abdominal hysterectomy.  Archives of Gynecology and 
Obstetrics, 284 , 1455 -1460.  
 
Remy, C., Marret, E., & Bonnet, F. (2005).  Effects of acetaminophen on morphine side -effects 
and consumption after major surgery:  Meta -analysis of randomized controlled  trials.   British 
Journal of Anaesthesia, 94 , 505 -513.  
 
Salihoglu, Z., Yildirim, M., Demiroluk, S., Kaya, G., Karatas, A., Ertem, M., & Aytac, E. (2009). 
Evaluation of intravenous paracetamol administration on postoperative pain and recovery 
characteristic s in patients undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy.  Surgical Laparoscopy 
Endoscopy & Percutaneous Techniques, 19 , 321 -323.  
 
IV vs PO A cetaminophen Pre operatively      12 
 
Song, K., Melroy, M.J., & Whipple, O.C. (2014).   Optimizing multimodal analgesia with 
intravenous acetaminophen and opi[INVESTIGATOR_27262] p ostoperative bariatric patients.  Pain Management 
Pharmacotherapy, 34 , 14S -21S.  