 
 
 
Study Title: A Single arm, Multic enter, Prospective, Clinical Stu dy on a Novel Minimally Invasive 
Posterior Sacroiliac Fusion D evice: SECURE STUDY  
 
 
 
Principal Investigator:  
 [INVESTIGATOR_470756], MD  
Medical Monitors  
Jason Pope, MD  
Dawood Sayed, MD  
 
Version date: April 4, 2022   
Sponsor: PainTEQ  
Protocol V 5_04 April 2022 Confidential  Page 2 of 13   
 
Version date: 04 April 2022 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_470757]:  Jason Pope, MD and Dawood Sayed, MD.  
Study Title: A Single arm, Multic enter, Prospective, Clinical Stu dy on a Novel Minimally Invasive 
Posterior Sacroiliac Fusion D evice: SECURE STUDY  
Co- Investigator(s): up to [ADDRESS_603218]  Participation  ...................................................................................................................................................................... 8  
IV. Data Collection and  Protection  ...................................................................................................................................................... 9  
V. Data Analysis  and Reporting ........................................................................................................................................................... 9  
VI ....................................................................................................................................................................................................... 13 
Bibliography /  References  .................................................................................................................................................................. [ADDRESS_603219] -market study is to evaluate data and evidence on the safety and efficacy of 
utilizing the LinQ system for sacroiliac disease. SI fusion has been a long- standing treatment for 
refractory SI joint disease that has failed conservative treatment. SI joint disease accounts for 
approximately 30- 40% of all low back pain according to a recently published literature. Recently newer 
techniques have been developed to treat SI joint dysfunction in a less invasive method. A lateral approach utilizing three triangular titanium implants resulted in a statistically significant improvement 
in pain and disability when compared to conservative management for SI joint dysfunction. Although this approach is less invasive than a true open approa ch, it still carries significant risk and  invasiveness. 
Risk of laterally placed screws into the spi[INVESTIGATOR_470758]. Non -weight 
bearing status, incisional pain, and recovery time are significant factors that must be acceptable to the 
clinician and patient.  
 
Recently, an FDA approved posteriorly placed allograft into the mid -portion of the SI joint has shown 
significant promise as an alternative option to traditional or lateral SI fusion. The Linq system is a minimally invasive, percutaneous, single incision technique for SI fusion. Utilizing a posterior approach 
eliminates the risk of spi[INVESTIGATOR_470759]. Additionally, 
using a single incision and avoiding screws reduces invasiveness  and significantly reduces recovery 
times. A recent abstract presented by [CONTACT_470762] 20 consecutive patients showed an average 83% reduction in pain at 3 months with no serious adverse effects or complications using the Linq 
system[3]. The purpose of this mu lticenter, prospective, clinical series is to further establish the data, 
efficacy, and safety on the Linq system for chronic Sacroiliac Joint Disease.  
 
 
II. Research Plan and  Design  
 
A. Study Objectives:  
The purpose of this post -market study is to gather evidence documenting the performance 
and clinical outcomes associated with treatment of sacroiliac disease with the LinQ fusion 
procedure.  
 
B. Study Type and Design  
Multicenter Center, Prospective, Single arm Clinical study  
 
C. Sample size, statistical methods, and power  calculation:  
 
Anticipated study enrollment will be ongoing patients for registry.  
 
Power calculation based on paired T test, Alpha 0.05, Beta 0.2, Power 0.8, Effect Size 0.5, 
two sided yielded sample size of [ADDRESS_603220] Criteria:  
Inclusion  criteria:  
• Age 21-70 
• Patient has lower back pain for >6 months inadequately responsive to conservative  care 
• Patient has at least 3 of 4 physical examination maneuvers specific for the SI joint 
(FABER, Gaenslen test, Stork/Gillete, and Yoman)  
• Patient has improvement in lower back pain numeric rating scale (NRS) of at least 50% 
after injection of local anesthetic into affected SI joint(s) with confirmed arthrogram, within 30- 60 min from  injection  
• Degenerative sacroiliitis as SIJ mediated in in the context of either radiographic  evidence 
of SIJ degeneration, evident on computed tomography or Xrays or a history of prior 
lumbar  fusion.  
• SIJ disruption was defined in the study of as SIJ mediated pain in the context of 
asymmetric widening of SIJ on CT or Xrays or the presence of significant  contrast 
leakage during diagnostic SIJ block 
• Baseline Oswestry Disability Index (O DI) score of at least  30% 
• Baseline Low back/buttock pain score of at least 50 on 0 -100 mm visual analog scale 
• Patient has signed study -specific informed consent  form 
• Patient has the necessary mental capacity to consent and participate and is physically able to comply with study protocol  requirements  
• Patient has medical insurance that covers this standard of care procedure and all other anticipated and unanticipated procedure related  care. 
• Patient’s physician has decided that the best treatment for the patient’s sacro -iliac 
disease is the LinQ system and the patient has agreed to the  treatment.  
 
Exclusion  criteria:  
• Inability to confirm that the pain is arising from the sacroiliac  joint 
• Current severe back pain due to other causes, such as lumbar disc degeneration, lumbar disc herniation, lumbar spondylolisthesis, lumbar spi[INVESTIGATOR_16078], lumbar facet 
degeneration, lumbar radicular pain, and lumbar vertebral body  fracture  
• SIJ pain secondary to inflammatory conditions, Other known sacroiliac pathology such as: Sacral dysplasia, Inflammatory sacroiliitis (e.g., ankylosing spondylitis or other HLA- 
associated spondylo -arthropathy), Tumor, Infection, Acute fracture, and Crystal 
arthropathy.  
• Radicular pain extending beyond the buttock ≥ 30mm on VAS 
• Has complete resolution of pain from the diagnostic SIJ injection lasting 30 days or  more 
• Has had an injection with corticosteroid into the index SIJ within the last 30 days 
• Has had any neuraxial injection with corticosteroid within the last 30  days 
Protocol V 5_04 April 2022 Confidential  Page 6 of 13  • Has greater than 50% pain relief from diagnostic medial branch blocks at the L4/5  and/or 
L5/S1 levels  
• Has had a sacral radiofrequency ablation within the last 6  months  
• History of  any hardware placement within the sacrum or sacroiliac joint. Fusion at L5/S1 
is allowed if screws/hardware are not within THE Sacroliac joint. Any hardware or 
instrumentation that would obstruct the ability to access or place the Linq implant would be  exclusionary.  
• History of coccydynia or  coccygectomy  
• Clinical diagnosis of discogenic pain at L4/5 and/or  L5/S1 
• History of endometriosis or pudendal  neuralgia  
• History of recent (<1 year) major trauma to pelvis  
• Chronic rheumatologic condition (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis)  
• Any condition or anatomy that makes treatment with the Linq Implant System  infeasible  
• Use of medications known to have detrimental effects on bone quality and soft -tissue 
healing (metabolic bone disease, induced or  idiopathic)  
• Prominent neurologic condition that would interfere with physical  therapy  
• Current local or systemic infection that raises the risk of  surgery  
• Patient currently receiving or seeking worker's compensation, disability  remuneration, 
and/or involved  in injury  litigation.  
• Patient is participating in an investigational study or has been involved in  an 
investigational study within 3 months prior to evaluation for  participation  
 
• Patient with insurance coverage that does not cover the SI  fusion*  
• Implanted intrathecal pain  pump 
Withdrawal/Termination  criteria:  
• Patient’s participation will only be withdrawn by [CONTACT_470763]. There are no  criteria  
for termination of participation due to safety.  
 
E. Specific methods and techniques used throughout the  study 
 
Study Design: The PainTEQ  study is a prospective, multi -site, prospective, single arm study 
intended to collect clinical data outcomes data associated with the treatment of sacroiliac 
disease with the LinQ fusion procedure. Data will be collected using self -report measures 
including the visual analog scale (VAS) for pain assessment where the participant is asked to place a line perpendicular to the VAS line at the point that represents their pain intensity. Using a ruler, the score is determined by [CONTACT_23808] (mm) on the 10 -cm line between  the 
“no pain” anchor and the patient’s mark, providing a range of scores  from 0–100. Other self - 
report questionnaires will be administered including the Oswestry Disablity Index (ODI) to measure low -back pain and disability, and the P ROMIS [ADDRESS_603221] data  including:  
Protocol V 5_04 April 2022 Confidential  Page 7 of 13  • Patient Satisfaction with Procedure  
• Opi[INVESTIGATOR_8556] (Morphine Milligram Equivalents) at 1,3, 6, 12 ,18, 24 months.  
• Serious adverse events and mortality as related to implantation of the device and 
events associated with recovery and  rehabilitation  
• Device related  complications  
• Satisfactory deployment (Defined as radiographic imaging of the implant within 
the SI joint. P rocedure  time 
• Fluoroscopy time (in minutes)  
• Blood  loss 
• Type of anesthesia (local; MAC; general)  
• Patient  demographics  
• Age 
• Gender  
• Race 
• BMI 
• Smoking  (y/n) 
• Year of  Pain 
• Underlying diagnosis: degenerative sacroiliitis/sacroiliac joint  disruption  
• Prior lumbar fusion  (y/n) 
• Prior treatments (PT, FA, SIJ  injection)  
 
1. Timeline: Patients included in the study return for follow- up visits at [ADDRESS_603222] -treatment. Primary endpoint will be 6 month 
time point.  
 
2. No randomiza tion as treatment with the LinQ system will be performed regardless  of 
whether the patient agrees to be in the  research.  
 
F. Risk/benefit assessment:  
 
As appropriate, address the following parameters as each relates to the individual subject in the 
study.  
1. Psychological risk: minimal, less than  1% 
2. Social risk minimal, less than 1%  
3. Potential benefit of participating in the  study  
a. To the individual subject and/or parent if  any: 
Improvement in the following  domains:  
a. Pain 
b. Physical  functioning  
c. Emotional functioning  
d. Patient global rating of improvement and satisfaction  
e. Symptoms and adverse events  
f. Patient  disposition  
b. To the population from which the subject is drawn: The study will provide 
Protocol V 5_04 April [ADDRESS_603223] failed other treatment modalities.  
c. To science, society, and humanity in general: Advancement of minimally  invasive 
musculoskeletal techniques t hat may significantly reduce associated morbidity, 
mortality, and overall cost of treatment for chronic musculoskeletal related  pain. 
 
G. Location where study will be performed:  Multisite  
 
H. Collaboration:  Multisite  
 
I. Single IRB Review for a Multi -site study: 
 
IRB local approval  
 
J. Personnel who will conduct the study,  including:  
1. Indicate, by [CONTACT_60733], who will be present during study procedure(s): Study  coordinator, 
attending physician, company representative, fellow physician (when available).  
2. Primary responsibility for the following activities, for  example:  
a. Determining eligibility: PI, study attendings, senior  trainees  
b. Obtaining informed consent: Attendings at the study site including co - 
investigators, senior trainees at study site, and/or research  coordinators  
c. Providing on -going information to the study sponsor and the IRB: No Study 
Sponsors  
d. Maintaining participant's research records: Research  coordinator  
e. Completing physical examination: Attendings and trainees at study  site 
f. Taking vital signs, height, weight: Clinic  staff 
g. Drawing / collecting laboratory specimens: Not applicable  
h. Performing / conducting tests, procedures, interventions,  questionnaires:  
Attending physician and fellow physicians at study site 
i. Completing study data forms: Research coordinator  
j. Managing study database: Research coordinator  
 
K. Adverse Event  Monitoring  
 
Adverse events and unanticipated problems will be ascertained and handled per standard of care as applies to any procedure. Problems that would be considered serious and 
reported to the IRB include infection, new skeletal fracture resulting from procedure, unanticipated post- operative admission, and neurologic injury and would be monitored 
for on an ongoing basis as per standard of care. The reporting timeframe  would be within 
two weeks of incident to allow for appropriate additional diagnostic testing and treatment 
while maintaining study responsiveness to adverse  events.  
Protocol V 5_04 April [ADDRESS_603224]  Participation  
 
A. Recruitment: 1. Potential study participants will come from the existing patient population of the 
investigators in each individual practice.  
 
Recruitment can be performed by [CONTACT_470764] a candidate for the LinQ fusion procedure and meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria for the study. This research studies the LinQ system, a legally -marketed device, 
determi ned by [CONTACT_470765]. Patients 
will undergo treatment with the LinQ fusion procedure regardless of participation in the 
research. Therefore, the procedures being conducted because of the research a re limited to 
data collection and the use of the LinQ system is not a research  procedure.  
 
 
B. Informed consent process and timing of obtaining of  consent  
The following study personnel may participate in the consent process: PI, co -Investigators, 
senior trainees, research assistants, and research coordinator.  
 
After it has been determined that the patient is a candidate for LinQ fusion procedure and 
they meet the inclusion and exclusion criteria, the patient will be offered the opportunity to 
participate in this study. An IRB approved consent form will be used for this study and 
obtained on all study patients prior to collecting any study related information or 
documentation. All questions that the potential study patient has will be addressed.  
Participation in  the study is voluntary, study patients may withdraw at any time.  
 
The clinician will determine if the patient has the capacity to proceed with informed consent. 
Only patients with capacity to proceed with informed consent will be included in study.  
Minors  are not allowed to participate in the study. A legally appointed guardian, closest 
family member, or individual with power of attorney may not serve as a substitute.  
 
Alternatives to Participation:  
 
Alternatives to participation in research study is to not take part in this research.  
 
 
C. Costs to Subjects:  
 
The patient will not incur any costs because of research. The LinQ procedure will be 
performed regardless of participation in the research and standard charges will apply for the 
LinQ procedure. Eligibility criteria include insurance coverage for study procedure.  
Protocol V 5_04 April [ADDRESS_603225] and how it will  be 
documented:  
 
New information regarding treatment options or significant results that may affect care wi ll 
be conveyed and applied by [CONTACT_470766]. Standard of care includes 
appropriate, HIPAA compliant communication mediums. This information will be documented 
in the medical record as it applies to the patient’s treatment per standard of care . 
 
Payment, including a prorated plan for payment:  
 
 The subject will be paid $250.00 at the 24 month visit for taking part in this research.  
 
E. Payment for a research- related  injury:  
 
Study procedure is standard of care. Research -related injury will be handled as standard of 
care via accepted legal mechanisms, which include mediation, arbitration, or litigation for 
settlement.  
 
IV. Data Collection and  Protection  
A. Data Management and  Security:  
 
Data will be collected from electronic medical record, during surgery, and self -report 
questionnaires. Confidentiality will be maintained by [CONTACT_470767] a cloud based secured, HIPPA compliant system. Identifiable data will not be sent outside any 
practice institution.  
 
B. Procedures to protect subject confidentiality : 
 
Patient identifiers may be included in master spreadsheet for reference to clinical chart if 
need arises for further review. Data will be de -identified with master spreadsheet containing 
patient identifiers linked to generated ID. A secondary spreadsheet will be generated containing pertinent study measures linked to the generated ID. The study coordinator will 
serve as the honest broker or buffer between master and secondary spreadsheets.  
 
 
V. Data Analysis and  Reporting  
A. Statistical and Dat a Analysis:  
 
Statistical analysis will include paired t -test of quantitative measures such as VAS pain score, 
Oswestry  Disability Index, PROMIS 29, and quantitative secondary outcomes. ANOVA 
regression analysis will be performed to identify potential correlates of improved outcomes measures and adverse outcomes. IBM SPSS Statistics will be utilized to perform the analysis . 
Interim analysis will be performed on an anticipated monthly basis by a statistician. At no time will identifying information be transferred.  
 
B. Outcome  Measures:  
Protocol V 5_04 April [ADDRESS_603226] 20  mm 
 
b. Absence of device related serious adverse  events,  
 
c. Absence of neurologic worsening related to the lumbosacral nerve  roots,  
 
d. Absence of surgical reintervention (removal, revision reoperation or 
supplemental fixation) for SIJ pain 
 
ii. Secondary Outcome Measures  
 
1. Improvement in baseline in VAS from baseline at 6 months  
 
2. Oswestry  Disability Index at 6 months follow  up 
 
3. PROMIS -29 at 6 months follow up  
 
4. Patient Satisfaction with PGIC  
 
5. Morphine milligram equivalent usage at all time  points  
 
C. Study results to participants : 
 
Once final analysis completed, debriefing report will be given  at follow up appointment or via 
telephone call. If no further contact [CONTACT_48710], copy of published manuscript will be sent to 
patients. Purpose of this will be to debrief patients as to study results.  
Protocol V 5_04 April [ADDRESS_603227] 
7 days 
prior to  
Baseline  (within 4 
weeks of 
surgery)    
 
(+ 10 days)  
Informed 
Consent  x          
Inclusion / 
Exclusion  
Review   
X  
X         
Urine 
Pregnancy test 
(if required)   
X          
Surgery  
Information    X        
VAS x X  x x X x x x x 
PROMIS -29  X  X X X X X x x 
ODI X x  x x X x x x x 
Patient  
Satisfaction      x x x x x x 
Demographics 
& Medical  
History   
X          
Opi[INVESTIGATOR_470760]   X  x X X X X x x 
Adverse Events    x X X X X X x x 
 
 
 
 
 
E. Publication  Plan 
 
Plan will be for publication in peer reviewed medical journal.  
Protocol V 5_04 April [ADDRESS_603228] icable laws 
and regulations.  
 
 
SIGNATURE:     [CONTACT_81619]:   _ 
 
NAME  [CONTACT_470768]:    
 
INSTITUTION:     
Protocol V 5_04 April 2022 Confidential  Page 15 of 13   
 
VI. Bibliography /  References  
1. Ramirez, C., Sanchez, L, Oliveira, B., Prevalence of sacroiliac joint dysfunction and sacroiliac 
pain provocation tests in pe ople with low back pain. Annals of Physical and Rehabilitation 
Medicine, 2018. 61: p.  e152.  
2. Polly, D.W., et al., Two -Year Outcomes from a Randomized Controlled Trial of Minimally Invasive 
Sacroiliac Joint Fusion vs. Non -Surgical Management for Sacroiliac Joint Dysfunction. Int J Spi[INVESTIGATOR_470761], 2016. 10: p.  28. 
3. Pyles, S., Sacroiliac “LinQ” Fusion. A minimally invasive technique for interventional pain 
management. A report of 20 consecutive cases. 2019: The 2019 Florda Society of Interventional 
Pain Physicians Annual  Meeting.  
4. Dengler JD, Kools D, Pflugmacher R, Gasbarrini A, Prestamburgo D, Gaetani P, van Eeckhoven E, Cher D, Sturesson B. 1-Year Results of a Randomized Controlled Trial of Conservative 
Management vs. Minimally Invasive Surgical Treatment for Sacroiliac Joint Pain. Pain Physician. 2017 Sep;20(6):[ADDRESS_603229] J, Whang PG, Frank CJ, Glaser JA, Limoni RP, Cher  DJ, Wine KD, Sembrano 
JN, and the INSITE Study Group. Two -Year Outcomes from a Randomized Controlled Trial of 
Minimally Invasive Sacroiliac Joint Fusion vs. Non -Surgical Management for Sacroiliac Joint 
Dysfunction.bInt J Spi[INVESTIGATOR_83275]. 2016;10.Article 28. do i: 10.[ZIP_CODE]/3028.  
6. Polly DW, Cher DJ, Whang PG, et al. Randomiized Controlled Troal of Minimally Invasive Sacroiliav Joing Fusion Using Triangular Titanium, Implants versus Nonsurgical Managmement for Sacroliiac Joint Dysfunction: 12 month Outcomes. Neurosurgery 2015, Vol 77, Number 5, pg 
674-691 