IRB NUMBER: HSC -DB-20-1017 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 04/04/2025  1   
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Evaluation of Aerosol in a Dental Clinic  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Version Date: 04/04/2025  
   
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
IRB NUMBER: HSC -DB-20-1017 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 04/04/2025  2  Protocol  Title:  Evaluation of Aerosol in a Dental Clinic  
 
Principal  Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_532816] , DDS, Clinical Assistant Professor,  Department  
of Restorative Dentistry and Prosthodontics, School of Dentistry, 
UTHealth, Houston, TX.  
 
Co-Investigators:  Maria  A. Loza , DMD,  MS, Professor and Chair,  Department  of 
Restorative Dentistry and Prosthodontics, School of Dentistry, 
UTHealth, Houston, TX.  
Aaron Glick , DDS,  Clinical  Assistant  Professor,  Department  of General 
Practice and Dental Public Health, School of Dentistry, UTHealth, 
Houston,  TX.  
Gena Tribble , PhD, Associate Professor, Department of Periodontics 
and Dental Hygiene, School of Dentistry, UTHealth, Houston, TX. PhanThanh Saint John , Certified Dental Assistant, Department of 
Restorative Dentistry and Prosthodontics, School of Dentistry, UTHealth, Houston, TX.  
 
Population:  Approximately  40 participants,  18 years of older,  patients  of the 
Advanced Education in Prosthodontics Program Clinic, UTHealth School of Dentistry, Houston, TX.  
 
Number  of Sites:  1 UTHealth, School of Dentistry, Houston,  TX. 
 
Study  Duration:  [ADDRESS_691841]  Duration:  [ADDRESS_691842]  will evaluate  aerosols  in a dental  clinic.  We will investigate  safety measures  that can 
be used to potentially minimize the risk to the dental practitioners during patient encounters.  
 
Background Information  
 
SARS -CoV -2, the virus responsible for the COVID -19 pandemic, has a particle size of .25µm to 2.5 µm (Liu 
2020). At such a small par ticle size the virus has the potential to remain in the air for long periods, have 
increased pathogenicity (can penetrate lower airways), and travel further from the infection source 
(Anderson 2020). Infection with SARS -CoV -2 can be serious and fatal with a mortality rate of 2 -4.4% 
reported in a recent meta -analysis (Hu 2020).  
 
Routine dental procedures produce splatter and aerosols that can contain bacteria, viruses, and other 
potentially harmful pathogens to the provider and others within the operating environment. Individuals with active COVID -[ADDRESS_691843] claiming to  
Objectives  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -DB-20-1017 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 04/04/2025  3  − The primary objective is to evaluate the effectiveness of hydrogen peroxide mouth rinse and evacuation 
units during aerosol generating procedures in a dental  clinic.  
− The secondary objective is to determine the risk level for dental practitioners during aer osol generating 
procedures.  
Study Design  
− The study will be a randomized control trial. Groups will be compared as  follows:  
1. Hydrogen Peroxide + High volume evacuation  (HP-HVE)  
2. Hydrogen Peroxide + HVE + Extraoral vacuum aspi[INVESTIGATOR_13521] (HP - EVA)  
3. No Hydrogen Peroxi de + High volume evacuation (No HP - HVE)  
4. No Hydrogen Peroxide + HVE + Extraoral vacuum aspi[INVESTIGATOR_13521] (No HP - EVA)  
− Bacterial aerosols generated during dental procedures will serve as a proxy for viral aerosols. Bacterial 
colony  forming  units  (CFUs)  will be capt ured  before and during  the dental  treatment  by [CONTACT_532819]'s head. Once aerosol capture is complete, the petri dishe s will be incubated and 
quantified after the 72 hours, under BSL -2 safety conditions in the microbiology  laboratory.  
− The patients  will randomly  receive a 1.5 % hydrogen  peroxide  mouth  rinse  or a placebo  (plain  water).  This 
part will be blind, neither the patient nor the dentist will know if the participant is receiving hydrogen 
peroxide mouth rinse or placebo, as both will look the  same.  
− The expected duration of the study is [ADDRESS_691844] on one  visit.  
− Aim  1: Primary  aim is to quanti fy the effectiveness  of hydrogen  peroxide  mouthwash  and evacuation  units 
during a natural tooth preparation procedure in the dental clinic to reduce potentially harmful aerosols. Primary outcomes will be the number of bacterial colonies forming units (CFUs ) during the procedure 
compared to the baseline  results.  
− Aim  2: Secondary  aim is to quantify  the risk to the dental  providers  during  a tooth  preparation  procedure 
on natural teeth in the dental clinic. Secondary outcomes will be based on the CFUs changes (baseline vs. procedure) of the five different positions of the collecting  tools.  
Study Population  
Forty participants will be randomly selected from the A dvanced Education Prosthodontic Program clinic 
EHR scheduler.  
− Inclusion criteria: [ADDRESS_691845] one in the morning.  
 
 
 
 
Study Procedures  
− The participant will be only seen once, and the appointment should last at least an hour to allow enough 
time  to collect  the samples.  It must  be the first appointment  in the morning  to avoid  cross  contamination  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -DB-20-1017 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 04/04/[ADDRESS_691846] intervention with the participant besides the assignment of 
the evacuation device and/or the mouth rinse (either a solution of peroxide and water or a placebo). A 
consent form will be discussed and signed by [CONTACT_532820].  
- The participants will be randomly assigned to one of the experimental  groups:  
1. Hydrogen Peroxide + High volume evacuation  (HP-HVE)  
2. Hydrogen Peroxide + HVE + Extraoral vacuum aspi[INVESTIGATOR_13521] (HP - EVA)  
3. No Hydrogen Peroxid e + High volume evacuation (No HP - HVE)  
4. No Hydrogen Peroxide + HVE + Extraoral vacuum aspi[INVESTIGATOR_13521] (No HP - EVA)  
− Four (4) agar -petri dishes will be placed by [CONTACT_093]. The petri dishes will be placed at four 
standardized  locations  (1', 2', 3' & 6' from  the patient’s  head)  in the dental  operating  room  at: baseline  (during 
1 hour before the patient enters the c hair side) and treatment (during 1 hour from the start of the 
procedure). An Impi[INVESTIGATOR_7646] (REF) will be placed at each interval, 1 ' from the patient’s head. Ten (10) petri 
dishes will be needed per patient, including two extras to collect solution from  impi[INVESTIGATOR_532817]. 
− The petri dishes will be incubated at 37 degrees Celsius for 72 hours. Storage of bacterial specimens will 
be consistent with previously approved protocol IBC- 16-059.  
− CFUs will be counted, type of mouthwash given, type of intervention (evacuation devices u sed), the time 
and location of the petri dish will be recorded on an Excel  spreadsheet  
− CFUs will be quantified and compared among the four groups and between baseline and  treatment.  
− A separate  linking  log will be used  and kept  separate  from  the data  collection  spreadsheet.  No PHI  will be 
stored or  collected.  
Data and Safety Monitoring  
− Adverse events are not  expected.  
− Plans to report unanticipated problems include the routine standard of care informing patients if they 
develop  COVID -[ADDRESS_691847] the school.  In addition,  CFUs 
data will be continually monitored to assess the safety of dental providers in all conditions. Should an 
adverse event occur, the event will be documented and sent to  PI. 
− No patie nt information will be gathered for the study except for the procedures  performed.  
Statistics  
− Based on power calculations, the number of subjects planned to be enrolled is  40. 
− The level of significance to be used is p = 0.05.  
− Descriptive analysis and nonparametric statistics will be used to compare between the colony forming 
units (CFUs) at the petri dishes from the four different groups of evacuation devices and  mouth  
rinses will be evaluated and analyzed.  
Ethics  
− IRB approval  will  be sought  from  the Committee for the  Protection  of Human Subjects  of The  University 
of [LOCATION_007] Health Science Center at  Houston.  
IRB NUMBER: HSC -DB-20-1017 
IRB APPROVAL DATE: 04/04/2025  5  − Patients who are eligible and willing to participate in the study will be provided with informed consent 
forms  which explain the possible adverse events of treatment and the use of patient data for  research.  
Data handling and record keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  
− No information will be collected from the patient except the procedure performed. Therefore, no health 
protected information will be involved in this  study.  
Quality control and assurance  
− The PIs will provide oversight and monitoring to ensure the validity and integrity of the  data.  
− All the data will be stored in two different password- protected computers.  
Publication Plan  
− We plan to publish the results in a peer -reviewed journal in dentistry or health fields that would be 
available  for dental  and/or medical  providers.  In addition,  these  data  could  be presented  at dental/medical 
meetings to allow health providers to transfer the results of our study to aid in protecting other healthcare 
workers. We could also present this research at table clinics to provide student involvement.  
− Results will not be returned to resea rch subjects.  
 
 
ATTACHMENTS  
1. Consent  Document  
2. Data Collection  Form  
3. Linking  Log  
4. Data Sheet NovelClear Tubing 
References  
Liu Y, Ning Z, Chen Y, Guo M, Liu Y, Gali NK, Sun L, Duan Y, Cai J, Westerdahl D, Liu X. Aerodynamic 
characteristics and RNA concentration  of SARS -CoV -2 aerosol in Wuhan hospi[INVESTIGATOR_532818] -19 
outbreak. BioRxiv. 2020.  
Anderson EL, Turnham P, Griffin JR, Clarke CC. Consideration of the Aerosol Transmission for COVID ‐19 
and Public Health. Risk Analysis. 2020.  
Hu Y, Sun J, Dai Z, Deng H, Li X, Huang Q, Wu Y, Sun L, Xu Y. Prevalence and severity of corona virus 
disease 2019 (COVID -19): A systematic review and meta -analysis. Journal of Clinical Virology. 2020 Apr 
14:104371.  