 
1 
  
The Utility of Urinalysis Prior to In -office P rocedures: A Randomized Clinical Trial  
 
Principal Investigator (PI):  
Kyle A. Richards, MD  
Assistant [CONTACT_40758] of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health  
Department of Urology  
William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_361367]: [PHONE_7453]  
Fax: [PHONE_7454]  
E-mail: richardsk@ur ology.wisc.edu  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[ADDRESS_450241] Summary:  
The current state of practice  require s every patient to have a urin alysis (UA)  and if positive then a urine 
culture (UC) prior to any in office urology procedure. This practice may cause  diagnos tic delays , 
unnecessary cancellation of procedures and the over use of antibiotics , promoting antibiotic resistance. 
We predict that  there is no difference in the number of cases of urinary tract infections ( UTI) in patients 
that undergo in office procedures with or without prior UA. While a few procedure specific studies have 
shown this trend, thi s will be the first time this hypothesis is tested on a broad spectrum of procedures in 
a randomized clinical trial setting. The trial will consist of two randomized groups of patients . The control 
arm will receive a standard of care urinalysis with a refl ex culture if positive that their treating physician 
will be able to view before the procedure and may choose to delay/cancel the procedure if they deem 
necessary. The experimental arm will receive a urinalysis with a reflex culture if positive, but their treatin g 
physician will not view  the urinalysis results before the subject’s procedure. Both group s of patients will 
be followed -up via phone at one week and one month post -procedure to  assess the intervention’s impact 
on the number of post -procedure UTI c ases.  Any patients with positive  urine cultures will be alerted  and 
treated accordingly .  
Background and Significance:  
Currently all BCG patients undergo UA before their procedures, this practice is upheld at both the UW 
Urology Clinic and the VA. The reasoning behind the current practice is that any sign of a tentative 
infection could be aggravated by [CONTACT_8235]. Retro spective studies have suggested  that there is no 
difference in the rates of UTI in people who were administered UA tests before BCG treatments versus 
people who were not administered U A tests  before treatment . [1] However, for patients that had a UA, 
BCG i nstillation was delayed for 2.5% of the cases . [2] Additionally, a  study aimed at understanding the role 
of preventative antibiotics prior to in office cystoscopy found that the risk of symptomatic UTI is only 4.5% 
of patients, therefore the vast majority of patients did not benefit from UA or preventative antibiotics . [3] 
These studies suggest that a change in the standard protocol before in -office procedures is in order.  
The current guidelines for urologic in -office procedures might be hindering patient c are instead of 
improving it. A recent study by [CONTACT_361376] $4.24, 
which for the course of this proposed study alone (664 patients) could add up to $1,300 approximately 
when accounting for the randomization of the study . [1] The economic aspect shows a drain in resources 
that could be otherwise allocated to improve care . Furthermore, the results of these UA tests will 
occasionally lead to delays in procedures . If the UA was positive, then the pr ocedure would be delayed at 
the physician’s discretion . It is important to note that a previous study conducted at the Madison VA 
urology clinic has shown that >1% of urologic procedures have ever been cancelled due to a positive UA.[4] 
Additionally, a stu dy on the urin e cultures of 150 men  prior to prostate needle biopsy procedures found 
that fewer tha n 5% of men undergoing the procedure had a positive urine culture and none of the men 
with positive urine cultures showed evidence of developi[INVESTIGATOR_361368].  [5] Delays are cumbersome to the patients, but can also cause delays in more serious 
diagnosis,  for potential cancer patients undergoing cystoscopy or prostate biopsies  which could alter the 
care options available t o the patient. We hypothesize that eliminating UA before in -office procedures 
 
[ADDRESS_450242] of this study seeks to  support antibiotic stewardship across patient care. 
Preventative antibiotics are potentially contributing to a worldwide rise in multidrug resistance. [3] By 
[CONTACT_361377] -office procedures and thus the need to use antibiotics as a preventati ve 
measure, we will be making responsible use of antibiotics in the care provided. Antibiotic stewardship 
could be especially prudent in patients undergoing BCG treatments. One mechanism suggests that  BCG 
treatments could be therapeutic by [CONTACT_361378][INVESTIGATOR_361369], 
reduci ng the case for infections. [2] We hypothesize that in the case of BCG treatment an 
immunomodulatory effect will reduce the bacterial load and pot entially reduce the risk for UTI by 
[CONTACT_361379] -delayed procedures .  
Specific Aims/Study Objectives:  
The aim of this study is to assess the usefulness of UA and urine cultures in patients prior to in -office 
urology procedures. Specifically, we want to challenge the  current protocol of administering  UA prior to 
in office cystoscopy, BCG treatments, and prostate biopsy procedures. A change in protocol could allow 
for improved clinical efficiency, antibiotic stewardship, and be economically advantageous.  
Research Desig n and Methods:  
1. Study design: Prospective cohort, 664  patients, randomized trial  
2. Data Source: Urology Patients at the University of Wisconsin Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_361370] S. 
Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  
3. Study Population  
a. Inclusion criteria:  
i. Patients re ceiving an in-office  cystoscopy, intravesical BCG treatment  prior to 
first instillation , or prostate biopsy  
b. Exclusion criteria:  
i. Patients under [ADDRESS_450243] Identification:  
i. Subjects will be identified based on daily clinic schedules and screening will 
happen at the time of consent  
 
[ADDRESS_450244] will be confirmed at the time 
of consent     
iv. Patients will be randomized by [CONTACT_361380] a random number 
generator populated with study identific ation number s. 
1. Randomization specifications: Patients on this study receive a study  
identification number (Study ID ), which corresponds to what number 
patient they are on the study. For example, Study ID  0049 is the 49th 
patient to sign a consent form.  A random number generator was 
populated with the 664 study identification numbers used in this study. 
The generator divide s the numbers into two equally sized groups, with  
one group being the “control arm ” group and the other the 
“experimental arm ” group. Sea led envelopes were created from that list 
with the study identification number on the front on the envelope and 
the group sealed inside. That way, when patients are consented into the 
study, th eir study identification number determines what study 
treatment  they will receive, and the consenting/randomizing staff will 
have no way of guessing which arm the patient will get until they open 
the envelope.   
v. Patient s will not know to which group they’re assigned  
d. Estimated number of patients to be included:  
i. 664 patients recruited over approximately  a year  as estimated for an 
equivalence study  
e. Primary Cohorts:  
i. Control: Patients who will receive UA prior to treatment  and will be evaluated by 
[CONTACT_361381] d ictates . A 
UC, which will be administered according to the results of the UA.  
ii. Experimental: Patients will receive a UA prior to their procedure, but their 
physician will not evaluate the results of the UA and will instead proceed directly 
to conducting the  procedure. The patient’s UA and reflex urine culture (if 
applicable) will be monitored by [CONTACT_361382]. Richards will be alerted of 
any possible infections as soon as results are available.  In this manner,  we will 
know the necessary course of ant ibiotics for treatment ahead of time.  
f. Subset Cohort Analysis:  
i. None  
g. Primary Outcome Measured: Number of UTI occurrences within study period . The 
definition of UTI for the study will be inclusive, consisting of a suspi[INVESTIGATOR_361371] , bacteria, or nitrites present and a positive culture >10,000 cfu /mL 
(excluding diptheroids ) accompanied by [CONTACT_23805] .   
h. Secondary Outcome Measures:  
i. Streamlining of patient care  
 
5 
 1. Delayed procedures and reasoning behind delays will be recorded  
ii. Improved usa ge of antibiotics  
1. Information on antibiotic use and type of antibiotics used will be 
recorded  
4. Collaborating Sites  
a. None 
5. Information Collected  from Patients:  
a. Demographics  
b. Prior history of UTIs  
c. Prior history of urological procedures  
d. Charlson  Comorbidity Index  
e. Lower Urinary Track Symptoms  (LUTS)  Questions:  to be collected prior to procedure and 
at all follow ups.  
i. Number of times voided the day before  
ii. Number of times voided throughout the night before  
iii. Current state of urine  stream  
iv. Perceived a bility to completely empty  the bladder  
v. Number of times urgency for the bathroom occurred the day before  
vi. Number of times urine leakage was experienced and was it related to urgency 
or routine  (cough/strain/laughing)  
vii. Dysuria, flank pain, or suprapubic  pain  
viii. Presence of hematuria  
ix. Experiencing fever or chills  
f. Procedure notes  
g. If procedures are delayed, explanation of surgeons reasoning will also be recorded  
h. UA results   
i. Adverse events  
6. Specimen/data collection/storage:  
a. The data will be obtained from surveying  urology patients at the VA and the UW urology 
clinics. Only the necessary dat a for the study will be obtained to answer the research 
question  from patient charts . The data might include urologic history and general patient 
information including co -morbidi ties.  Only the PI [INVESTIGATOR_361372] s will 
have access to the data.  
b. Study data will be kept in accordance with the Department of Veteran Affairs record 
control.  
Risk -Benefit Analysis:  
This trial poses minimal risk to the patient in the phy sical, psychological, social and legal aspect s. While 
the physician will not have access to the experimental group’s UA results  at the time of the procedure , 
the results will be monitored so that patients can be alerted  of any medical care needed in case of a UTI.  
 
[ADDRESS_450245] before 
consenting them into the study.  
 As previously stated, t he definition of UTI for the study will be inclusive, consisting of a positive cult ure 
>10,000 cfu /mL, excluding diptheroids accompanied by [CONTACT_23805].  Any patients that develop 
symptomatic UTIs during the study will be treated with culture specific antibiotics per standard of care.  If 
there is an infection detected for a patient  in the experimental group  [CONTACT_361386] will notify the patient s 
and arrange treatment  [ADDRESS_450246] practice 
for care of a UTI can be seen in the cited document from the UW Health ER SOP for sepsis treatment . [6]  
For patients presenting to the emergency room or any other medical provider for the duration of the 
study, the study team wants to ensure effective communication in regards to any urine culture results or 
other important information related to participation i n this study.  Therefore, each participant will be 
provided an information sheet with basic details about the study, the contact [CONTACT_71722] (and 
back -up), and a place to write down details about the findings when informed about the results by t he PI.  
This would be provided to the patient when they enroll and could be provided to the physician in the ER.  
Only the researchers approved by [CONTACT_361383], 
protecting privacy. While any study poses a ri sk for breach of confidentiality, we plan on taking pre -
emptive action to prevent this from happening and in the case of a breach ; a report would be made to 
the IRB immediately and resolved with IRB guidance. Considering the benefits of the study, all asse ssed 
risks are minimal to the patient, and all possible preventative measures will be taken to avoid significant 
risks or harms. All study test results will be monitored as they become available  by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Richards ’ research 
assistant.  
Data and Safety Monitor ing Plan:   
 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_361373]. They will be proactive, as described above, to avoid any unanticipated problems or complications. 
If an unanticipated problem or compli cation does arise, the IRB will be notified.  Data analysis will also be 
performed every 100 patients and the experiment will be stopped if there is a statistically significant 
increase in the number of UTI incidences between the control and the variable groups.  We will also plan 
to perform separate analysis for both safety and efficacy between the different treatment groups (i.e. 
BCG controls vs. BCG variable group; prostate biopsy controls vs. prostate biopsy variable group; 
cystoscopy controls vs. cystoscopy variable group).  
Specific provisions are  in place to address unanticipated problems or complications BEFORE THEY OCCUR, 
as described above and again herein: All risks of the study will be minimized by [CONTACT_361384], within [ADDRESS_450247] to address unanticipated problems or complications AFTER THEY OCCUR. 
Namely, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_361374]. Solutions to 
address any unanticipated problems or complications will be applie d, based on advice from the IRB . 
 
Statistical Considerations:  
The study will enroll [ADDRESS_450248] with a proportion 
difference of 0.01 between the proportion of UTI for the group with urinalysis and reflexive culture visible 
to physicians (0.03) and the proportion of UTI for the urinalysis not ready for the physician to view prior 
to the in -office procedures. The null proportion difference is set at 0.[ADDRESS_450249] 
for comparison of medians, Fisher’s exact and chi -squared tests for comparison of categorical variables,  
and a logistic regression for predictors of UTI. All stati stical tests will be two sided with p -values <0.[ADDRESS_450250] K eepi[INVESTIGATOR_007] : 
Measures that will be implemented by [CONTACT_361385], including how 
and wher e data will be stored, include:  
1.) Any data or information collected will only be available to I RB-approved study team members . 
2.) Collection of sensitive information about subjects is limited to the amount necessary to ac hieve the 
aims of the research.  
3.) A ll data or information collected will be stored only on VA servers or hard drive of VA -approved and 
serviced computers with appropriate security (i.e., fire wall and password) protections.   
4.) All paper files that store  any data or information associated with this study will be housed inside locked 
offices in the security -protected VA office (B7 112G ). 
5.) Any data or information stored in the excel database  will be coded by [CONTACT_2329] a unique study code to 
which only the PI [INVESTIGATOR_361375].  
6.) Study data and the corresponding master list of identifiers will be stor ed on a VA departmental server.  
7.) VA research data and information will be retained in accordance with the applicable VA Records 
Control Schedule (NARA RCS 10 -1). 
8.) Per VA policy, a copy of all study data will reside within the VA protected environment ( B7112G ), 
including all codes use d to re -identify subjects' PHI.  
 
8 
 9.) VA sensitive data or information will only be transmitted using VA-approved solutions such as FIPS 
140-2 validated encryption or PKI encrypt ion for secure e -mail messages.  
10.) Access to research study data will be removed for study personnel when they are no longer part of 
the research  team.  
11.) In accordance with VA  policy, the ISO and PO and ACOS for Research will be notified within one hour 
of any actual or suspected data breach (i.e. unauthorized use, disclosure, transmission, removal, theft, 
loss, or destruction of VA research -related PHI, individually identifiab le private information, or 
confidential information).  
12.) VA information will be securely returned to the VA.  
References:  
1. Zhao LC, et al. Screening  urine analysis before Bacille Calmette -Guerin instillation does not 
reduce the rate of infectious complic ations. BJU International. 2011. 109, [ADDRESS_450251] 20, 2012  
3. Herr, HW. Should Anti biotics be given p rior to Outpatient Cystoscopy? A plea to Urologists to 
Practice Antibiotic Stewardship. European Association of Urology. August 30, 2013.  
4. Richards KA, Cesario S, Lim, AH, et al. Utility of routine urinalysis and urine culture testing in an 
ambulatory urology c linic: a quality improvement initiative in a Veterans healthcare facility. The 
Canadian Journal of Urology. February 24, 2017. (1):8627 -8633.  
5. Qi DZ, et al. Pre -operative urine culture is unnecessary in asymptomatic men prior to prostate 
needle biopsy. Int ernational Urology and Nephrology. November 23, 2017.  
 