Alcohol Impaired Driving in the Natural Environment       12/3/2021   
Procedure:  
Individual  characteristics  will be assessed  in the initial  laboratory  session  and include  a combination  of 
questionnaire  and task measures.  Daily  information,  including  details  on each  drinking  epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865],  will be 
compi[INVESTIGATOR_199142]  a combination  of EMA  morning  reports  and geospatial  data.  Finally,  within -event  
variables will  be collected  from  a combination  of EMA  report  and TAC.  A key aspect  of the project  is 
that the four core  AID risk factors  from  the original  project  will be assessed  under  multiple  conditions:  
1) while participants  are sober,  2) during  intoxication  under  controlled  laboratory  conditions,  and 3) 
while participants  are drinking  in the natural  environment.  The method  of measurement  across  different 
modalities  will be as consistent  as possible,  with appropriate  formatting  changes  when  necessary.  
Below we  describe  the assessment  of each  of these  constructs  across  modalities  (see Appendix).  AID 
attitudes (perceived  danger  of AID).  At baseline,  participants  will indicate  how dangerous  it is to drive  
after  
consuming  1, 3, and 5 drinks  in 2 hours,  using  a 4-point  Likert  scale.  As in Amlung  et al., 2015  & Morris  
et al.,  2014,  questions  will be linked  to estimated  BrAC  for each  participant  based  on weight  and sex. 
During the  alcohol  laboratory  session,  participants  will be asked  an in-the-moment  version  of these  
questions (“How  dangerous  it is for you to drive  right  now”?)  at multiple  points  of the BrAC  curve.  
During  the AA portion  of the project,  participants  in the Full AA conditions  will be asked  to rate the 
perceived  danger  of driving  “right  now”  at each  of the evening  reports  after  a drink  has been  reported.  
They  will also be asked  
to provide  a retrospective  rating  of the danger  of driving  the previous  evening  during  morning  reports  
following  a drinking  session.  Impulsivity.  At baseline,  participants  will complete  measures  of trait 
impulsivity  (UPPS -P (Cyders  et al., 2007),  delay  discounting  (Monetary -Choice  Questionnaire;  
Kirby  [CONTACT_199145]., 1999)  and inhibitory  control  (cued  Go/NoGo;  Fillmore  et al., 2008).  During  the laboratory  session,  
they will  complete  measures  of state  impulsivity  (Momentary  Impulsivity  Scale  (MIS;  Tomko et al., 
2014))  and delay  discounting  (5-Trial  Adjusting  Delay  Discounting  Task  (Koffarnus  & Bickel,  2014))  at 
multiple points  on the BrAC  curve.  They  will also complete  a measure  of inhibitory  control  (cued  
Go/NoGo)  at matched  BrAC’s  on the ascending  and descending  limbs.  During  the AA arm of the 
project,  all participants will  complete  measures  of state  impulsivity  (MIS)  and delay  discounting  (5-Trial  
Adjusting  Delay Discounting  Task)  at each  evening  report.  Research  Strategy  Page  [ADDRESS_237475]  PD/PI:  
[INVESTIGATOR_199143],  
DENIS  M Alcohol  demand.  Behavioral  economic  demand  for alcohol  will be assessed  at baseline  using  
the 
Alcohol  Purchase  Task  (APT;  Murphy  & MacKillop,  2006).  During  the laboratory  session,  demand  will 
be assessed  at multiple  points  of the BrAC  curve  using  three  items  corresponding  to the APT  indices 
(intensity,  breakpoint,  Omax)  developed  in Amlung  et al., 2015.  All participants  will also complete  
these indices  in evening  AA reports.  Subjective  intoxication.  Participants  will rate their  level  of 
subjective intoxication,  from  1 (“Not  intoxicated  at all”) to 10 (“More  intoxicated  than I’ve ever been”)  
(Morris  et al., 
2014).  During  the laboratory  session,  they will provide  this rating  at multiple  points  along  the ascending  
and descending  limb  of the BrAC  curve.  During  the AA arm of the project,  participants  will respond  at 
each  evening  report  where  drinking  is reported  and will answer  a retrospective  version  of this question 
about  their  previous  day’s  peak  intoxication  in morning  reports.  Laboratory  Session  The laboratory  
session is  estimated  to take approximately  five hours.  Prior  to beverage  administration,  participants  will 
complete  a battery  of questionnaire  measures  and computer  tasks  for baseline  asses sment.  The battery  
will include  a range  of measures,  including  demographics,  typi[INVESTIGATOR_2855]/recent  alcohol  and substance  use and 
related  behaviors, and  typi[INVESTIGATOR_2855]/recent  driving  behavior.  In addition  to the measure  of the four core 
constructs  (described  
above),  we will also collect  a baseline  assessment  of Working  memory  capacity  (OSPAN;  Unsworth  et 
al., 
2005)  and AID Perceptions  (positive  AID expectancies  (PEDD -Y; McCarthy  et al., 2006),  perceived 
personal  limit  (Amlung  et al., 2016)  perceived  negative  consequences  (Grube  & Voas,  1996),  and 
normative  beliefs  about  AID (Treloar  et al., 2012)).  After  completing  the baseline  battery,  participants  
will receive  an alcoholic  beverage.  To minimize  participant  risk, and consistent  with ongoing  work  in 
the PI’s 
lab, we will follow  procedures  outlined  in the NIAAA  Recommended  Council  Guidelines  on Ethyl  
Alcohol Administration  in Human  Experimentation  (NIAAA,  2005).  The dose  of alcohol  will be 
calculated  to produce  a peak  BrAC  of 0.10g%  (Curtin  & Fairchild,  2003),  the equivalent  of 
approximately  0.85g/kg alcohol  for males,  0.73g/kg  alcohol  for females.  This target  BrAC  was selected  
to ensure  that the majority  
of participants  reach  the legal  limit  of .08g%,  given  individual  variability  in metabolism.  Further,  this 
dose  
level  results  in an ascending  limb  period  of approximately  60 minutes,  which  allows  sufficient  time for 
the assessment  of primary  study  variables  at matched  BrAC  on the ascending  and descending  limb  (for 
assessment  of acute  tolerance)  and at peak  BrAC.  In addition  to the four core constructs,  during  the 
alcohol session  we will also assess  BrAC  (Alco -sensor  FST,  Intoximeters,  Inc.)  at 10 minute  intervals  
on the ascending  limb  and every  20 minutes  on the descending  limb  to match  assessment  BrAC  for 
study  tasks;
Subjective  Response  to Alcohol  (Subjective  Effects  of Alcohol  Scale;  Morean  et al., 2013)  and 
AID Intentions  (willingness  to drive)  at multiple  points  on the BrAC  curve.  In addition,  as part of 
K25 
AA024182  (PI [INVESTIGATOR_165675] -Stober),  ongoing  work  in the PI’s lab is focused  on developi[INVESTIGATOR_199144].  The laboratory  component  of the project  will include  tasks  from  
this line  of research  that are both associated  with AID and sensitive  to acute  alcohol  effects.  Ambulatory 
Assessment  The ambulatory  assessment  arm of the project  will involve  6 weeks  of data collection  for all 
study  participants.  During  this period,  data will be collected  via self-report  (EMA),  the BACtrack  Skyn 
(TAC),  and location  and movement  data passively  collected  from  the GPS  and accelerometer  of the 
smartphone.  Participants  will be randomly  assigned  to two Full AA groups  and the MA control  group. 
EMA.  During  their  AA participation,  participants  will provide  self-report  data using  a study -provided 
smartphone.  Following  previous  research  (Trull  et al., 2008a),  participants  will attend  initial  orientation 
sessions  to be trained  in completing  assessments.  Participants  will return  to the lab every  7 days  for a 
brief session  to review  compliance  and receive  interim  payment,  which  has proven  to increase  
compliance  (Trull et  al., 2008b).  Participants  will complete  5 reports  per day – a morning  report  and 4 
“evening”  reports.  The “evening”  reports  will be scheduled  for 6pm,  8pm,  10pm,  and midnight.  
However,  participants  will be able to  reschedule  or self-initiate  the reports  if they are consuming  alcohol  
(or using  other  substances)  at other times.  The morning  report  will be scheduled  on an individual  basis,  
30 minutes  after  participant’s  self- reported  standard  waking  time.  If participants  go to bed prior  to the 
midnight  assessment,  they will 
complete  a final  assessment  and put the smartphone  to “sleep”,  which  will terminate  follow -up prompts.  
To 
facilitate  compliance,  assessments  are designed  to be short,  with each  assessment  requiring  less than [ADDRESS_237476] inking  and transportation  the previous  day, including  drinking  location(s),  transportation  used  and 
options  available;  social  context  of drinking  epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]  (Thrul  & Kuntsche,  2015);  and intentions/plans  
for drinking  and transportation  the Research  Strategy  Page  [ADDRESS_237477]  PD/PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_199143],  DENIS  M 
upcoming  evening.  For the evening  reports,  participants  will report  on their  mood,  craving,  core study 
variables,  current  drinking  behavior  (if any) and AID intentions.  When  participants  do not report  
drinking, additional  “filler”  questions  on current  mood  will be assessed  to equalize  time to complete  the 
report.  For 
the MA control  condition,  participants  will complete  abbreviated  versions  of each  report,  with no 
questions  
specific  to AID.  The morning  report  will ask about  drinking  location,  transportation,  and social  context  
the previous  day, with no questions  on plans/intentions.  The evening  reports  will assess  mood,  craving,  
core study  variables  (except  for AID attitudes),  and current  drinking  behavior.  In addition  to the four 
core constructs,  the EMA  Evening  Assessments  will also include:  Mood.  Questions  from  the Positive  
and Negative  Affect  Schedule  (PANAS -X; Watson  & Clark,  1999);  Alcohol  craving.  Using  a single  
100-point visual  analog  scale,  asking  “How  much  do you want  a drink  right  now?”;  Social  Context.  
Participants  will be  provided  a list of who they are currently  with and asked  to check  all that apply,  
including  1) romantic partner,  friend,  coworker,  child(ren),  parent,  other  family,  someone  else. This 
measure  is used  in EMA studies  of drinking  behavior  by [CONTACT_15957]-investigator  Trull  (Lane  et al., 2015);  AID 
Intentions.  Will be assessed at  each  evening  assessment  for those  in the Full AA conditions.  
Transdermal  Alcohol  Concentration (TAC).  TAC  measurement  will be taken  continuously  by [CONTACT_199146].  
All participants  will be asked  to wear  
their  Skyn  throughout  the AA assessment  period,  but particularly  during  drinking  epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841].  A change  in 
the revised  application  is that participants  will not be able to see their  current  TAC  at any time.  However,  
for participants  in the Full AA conditions,  once  the Skyn  registers  that they have  reached  .05 g/dl TAC,  
the app will  prompt  them  to consider  alternative  transportation.  Clickable  links  for local  taxi/ride  
services  will also be  presented.  Participants  will be told that this prompt  is based  on their  current  TAC,  
and that it indicates  it is not safe for them  to drive,  but will not be told the TAC  trigger  for this prompt.  
As noted,  participants  will wear  the Skyn  during  their  laboratory  alcohol  session.  This will allow  us to 
collect  data on the accuracy  of the  Skyn’s  TAC  estimates  and, if necessary,  develop  individualized  
algorithms  for estimating  BrAC from TAC.  Geospatial  data.  Throughout  the AA assessment,  participant  
location  and movement  data will be passively  recorded  on the study -provided  smartphone.  At the end of 
the AA period,  this data will be combined  with EMA  data.  When  a participant  reports  drinking  (or 
records  a positive  TAC),  information about  their  drinking  location,  distance  from  home,  travel  using  a 
motor  vehicle,  and what  time they 
returned  home  will be recorded.  The most  recent  evidence  for the accuracy  of cellphone  GPS  systems 
indicate  sufficient  precision  for our proposed  use (Zandbergen  & Barbeau,  2011).  Using  a much  earlier 
generation  of smartphones,  they concluded  that position  estimation  errors  were  uncommon,  for example 
finding  that horizontal  location  errors  ranged  from  5-[ADDRESS_237478]  ideal  conditions  (static  indoor 
testing).  Data  were  more  precise  when  moving  outdoors,  due to the clearer  access  to satellite  data.  Based  
on
this, we will use this geospatial  information  to provide  a validity  check  on participant  self-report. 
Discrepancies  between  participant  selfreported  location,  use of motor  vehicle,  etc., will be probed  
during their  next TLFB  interview.  As noted,  [CONTACT_199154]  will provide  the project  with a database  of 
GPS locations  for all nearby  [CONTACT_199147]:  
Aim 1. Integrating  laboratory  and event -level  predictors  of AID.  For Aim 1, we will employ  a two-part 
(hurdle)  model  to test laboratory  and AA predictors  of AID.  Part one of the model  examines  predictors  
of engagement  in AID (or driving  after  any drinking).  For this part of the model,  we will employ  a 
mixed logistic  model  examining  factors  that are predictive  of a dichotomous  variable  indicative  of 
whether,  for a given  drinking  event,  a participant  drives  after  drinking  alcohol.  The second  part of the 
model  will employ a  Gaussian  linear  mixed  model,  and examines  predictors  of a participant’s  
TAC/BrAC  level  at the time of driving  for drinking  events  where  driving  is reported.  This analytic  
approach  provides  us with both increased  flexibility  and precision  in our analyses.  For example,  we will 
be able to identify  predictors  of driving  after  any drinking  as well as predictors  that may be specific  to 
driving  at higher  TAC.  We believe that  this flexibility  is an important  improvement  to our approach  in 
the revised  application.  For example, Hypothesis  1.3 will examine  whether  contextual  factors  increase  
the influence  of AID risk factors  on the likelihood  of AID.  Hypothesized  contextual  factors  are based  on 
studies  demonstrating  that drinking location  (fewer  miles  to home;  Kelley -Baker  et al., 2013)  and venue  
(drinking  in restaurants;  Gruenwald  et al.,  2002)  are associated  with increased  AID risk. Our two-part 
model  will allow  us to test whether,  for example,  drinking  venue  increases  the effect  of AID risk factors  
for driving  after  any drinking,  while drinking  location  increases  the effect  of AID risk factors  when  
predicting  driving  at higher  TAC/BrAC.  In addition  to examining  TAC/BrAC  at time of drinking  as a 
continuous  attribute,  our approach  will allow  us 
to examine  rational  cutpoints  for TAC  – specifically,  we will test models  for cutpoints  of TAC/BrAC  of 
the current  U.S. legal  limit  (.08)  and NHTSA’s  proposed  limit  (.05).  Research  Strategy  Page  [ADDRESS_237479]  
PD/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_199143],  DENIS  M Both  models  will have  two levels,  comprised  of drinking  events  within 
participants.  We will estimate  models  via both Maximum  Likelihood  methods  and Generalized  
Estimating Equations;  the former  method  can result  in more  accurate  parameter  estimates  in certain  
situations  (Stroup,  
2013),  whereas  the latter  method  can be more  flexibly  extended  to assumption  violations  (e.g.,  variance 
heterogeneity).  Modeling  will proceed  by [CONTACT_199148] -level  measures  and the DV. The lower -level  measures  will be at the event  level  
(including  such variables  as drinking  venue),  so they will directly  address  Hypothesis  1.2. Once  these  
lower -level associations  are established,  we will then incorporate  laboratory  measures  to address  
Hypothesis  1.1, followed  by [CONTACT_199149]  1.3. For example,  consider  studying  the 
relationship between  event -level  impulsivity  and AID.  We will first person -center  the impulsivity  
variable,  so that the associated  regression  weight  provides  information  about  the effect  of impulsivity  as 
a participant  departs from  his/her  mean  level  of impulsivity.  We will then establish  an association  
between  impulsivity  and AID using  a two-level  logistic  model,  where  multiple  eventlevel  variables  are 
included  as IVs. The models  will account  for individual  differences  in assoc iations  between  the event -
level  variables  and AID,  and they will be  further  extended  (using  level -2 IVs and cross -level  
interactions)  to study  the laboratory -based  effects and  moderation  effects  from  Hypotheses  1.[ADDRESS_237480]  to choice  of predictors.  This is 
important  because  unmodeled  heterogeneity  (resulting  from  omitted  predictor  variables)  can adversely  
impact  model  estimates  (Mood,  2009).  To estimate  power  associated  with these  models,  we adopted  a 
simulation -based  approach  (Gelman  & Hill, 2007).  This involved  generating  artificial  data from  an 
assumed  true model,  fitting  the proposed  GLMM  to each  artificial  dataset,  and computing  power  based  
on the  results.  To estimate  our power  to detect  an association  between  event -level  impulsivity  and AID,  
we specified  parameter  values  for the true model  based  on previous  studies.  First,  based  on pi[INVESTIGATOR_123704],  
we assumed  that participants  report  driving  following  15%  of drinking  events.  We also assumed  that 
each  5- point  increase  in impulsivity  (as measured  by [CONTACT_199150])  was associated  with (i) a 10%  
increase  in the  odds  of driving  after  drinking  (the low end of observed  effect  sizes  for core study  
constructs)  and (ii) a BrAC  increase  of .01, with random  participant  effects  included  in “maximal”  
models  (Barr  et al., 2013).  In using  these  parameter  values  along  with the anticipated  sample  sizes,  our 
estimated  power  to detect  these  
associations  is .91 in the logistic  model  and .99 in the linear  mixed  model.  If Aim 2 is realized,  then we 
can only  use half of the Full AA group  (the half that does  not receive  AA for the first six weeks),  along  
with the
MA control  group,  to assess  raw associations  between  lower -level  variables  and AID.  In this case,  we 
estimate  power  of .[ADDRESS_237481]  the associations  (using  the same  values  as above  with a 
reduced sample  size).  We computed  additional  power  estimates  for moderation  Hypotheses  1.3, using  
both the logistic  model  (where  AID is a binary  DV) and the Gaussian  model  (where  TAC/BrAC  is the 
DV).  We assumed  that Aim 2 was not realized,  reducing  the overall  number  of participants  that we 
could  enter  into the  analysis.  For the logistic  model,  we assumed  (as above,  based  on pi[INVESTIGATOR_123704])  that 
each  5-point  increase in  impulsivity  was associated  with a 10%  increase  in the odds  of driving  after  
drinking.  We further assumed  that this relationship  was moderated  by [CONTACT_199151],  such  that the 
relationship  was diminished when  participants  were  drinking  at a restaurant.  Under  this scenario,  power  
was .[ADDRESS_237482].  For the Gaussian  model,  we assumed  (as we did above)  that each  5-point  increase  in impulsivity  
was associated  with a mean  BrAC  increase  of .01. We further  assumed  that this relationship  was 
moderated  by [CONTACT_199152],  such  that the relationship  was absent  if a person  was drinking  [ADDRESS_237483]  across  experimental  groups,  examining  
whether  or not AID differs  between  the groups  with Full AA and the MA control  group.  To address  this 
question,  we will again  employ  the two DVs  of driving  after  drinking  and TAC  in separate  GLMMs  
(where  drinking  events  are nested  within participants).  The IVs in each  model  will be dummy  variables  
that are related  to each  participant's  condition and  to the time within  the study.  Specifically,  the dummy  
variables  will reflect  whether  or not the 
individual  is currently  receiving  AA, as well as whether  or not the individual  ever previously  received  
AA. This  will allow  us to disentangle  the effect  of currently  receiving  AA from  effects  that may last 
after  the individual  has received  AA. In computing  power,  we assumed  100 participants  receiving  AA at 
differing times  (as described  in Overview  of Proposed  Work)  coupled  with 100 participants  in the 
control  group.  We further  assumed  that (i) active  reception  of AA reduces  driving  after  Research  
Strategy  Page  [ADDRESS_237484] PD/PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_199143],  DENIS  M drinking  from  an average  of twice  per month  
to an average  of 1.5 times per  month  (with  individual  differences  in this effect),  and (ii) active  reception  
of AA reduces  TAC  of driving  events  by [CONTACT_199153] .01. In employing  assumption  (i) in a logistic  
mixed  model,  we obtained  a simulation -based  power  estimate  of .[ADDRESS_237485]  of 
active  AA. In employing assumption  (ii) in a Gaussian  linear  mixed  model,  we obtained  a simulation -
based  power  estimate  of .[ADDRESS_237486].  
     