Title:  Mechanisms  of Fall Resistance  to Diverse  Slippi[INVESTIGATOR_717033] 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
11 Mar 2021  
Study  Protocol  
For all gait collections, participants  will arrive at the Biomechanics Research Building on the University of 
Nebraska  at Omaha  campus.  All participants  will be consented  and screened  prior  to gait testing.  During  
the consent  process,  participants  will be asked  if they  can be contact[CONTACT_717035].  
During the screening, participants  will undergo a short medical history.  
Partic ipants  will be asked to put on  a form  fitting  suit for data collection. Body  weight, height and  
extremity anthropometry  will be collected  (length  of arm and leg segments).  Retroreflective  markers  will 
be placed on the legs, arms, torso and head to obtain whole -body kinematic data. A ceiling -mounted 
safety harness will also  be fitted to each participant . Prior to performing any  walking trials,  the 
participants  will be allowed to "sit" in the harness to experience how it feels when it catches them.  
 
 
Aim [ADDRESS_977458]  kinematic  data  at 120 Hz 
throughout  each  trial. Data will be collected at a comfortable walking speed of 1.3 m/s53. Walking 
speed will be monitored using timing gait plates placed along the path. Participants will be coached to 
maintain prescribed walking speed. A repeated  measures design will have participants  slip both feet at  3 
different  times in  the gait cycle for each of 3 path curvatures for a total of 18 slip epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]. Slips will be 
delivered while walking along a straight path (infinite radius), or curved paths with radii of [ADDRESS_977459] approximately 270 minutes. All participants  will be fitted with a form -fitting singlet, a safety 
harness mounted  to the rigging  of the CAREN  system,  lab-provided  shoes,  and a full- body  retroreflective  
marker set.  A load  cell placed  in line with  the safety  harness  will allow  for the quantification  of forces  
exerted  on the harness at 80 Hz. Data  will be collected with the treadmill set at a comfortable walking 
speed of 1.3 m/s53. A repeated measures design will have participants  slip at 3 different times in the 
gait cycle for each of 5 different uphill/downhill slopes and at 3 times to both feet for 2 cross -slopes for 
a total of 27 slip  epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841]  (3 phases  x 5 slopes  that foot doesn't  matter  + 3 phases  x 2 feet x 2 slopes  that 
foot  matters).  
Specifically,  slips  will be delivered  over  sloped  ground  surface  of no slope,  ±5.0  and ±10.0  degrees  slopes 
in the direction of walking, and 5.0 and 10.0 degrees perpendicular to the direction of walking.  
Sloped  surfaces  will be generated  with  the CAREN  system  treadmill,  which  is capable  of pi[INVESTIGATOR_717034] 
±[ADDRESS_977460] for normality and employ the appropriate parametric or non -
parametric descriptive statistics. Histograms and plots for each variable will be made and examined. 
Statistical hypothesis  testing  will be done  using  custom  software  written  in R statistical  computing  
language  (R Core Team).  General  linear  mixed -effects  model  will be used  to determine  the effects  of 
diverse  slip conditions on reactive movements and slip severity measures for all aims. This mixed -effects 
model will be used to include participants  and order as random factors while testing for differences 
between conditions. For  example,  even  though  these  data  will have  repeated  measures  from  the same  
subject,  a linear  mixed effect model can resolve those non -independencies by [CONTACT_717036] a 
random factor and  accounting  for changes  from  baseline  participant  variation.  Aim 1: independent  
variables  will be a) turn radius (4 levels: no turn, 2m, 1m, 1/2m), b) slip timing (3 levels: early,  mid, and 
late stance). Aim  2: independent variables will be a) slope (7 levels: no slope, ±5.3 degrees AP, ±10.6 
degrees AP, ±5.3 degrees ML, ±10.6 degrees ML).  