Cover Page for ClinicalTrials.gov 
 
Document: 
Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan 
 Official Study Title: Dulce Digital-Me: An Adaptive mHealth Intervention for Underser ved Hispanics with Diabetes 
 NCT# 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 Document Date May 30, 2017 
Dulce Digital-Me Protocol 
The proposed randomized controlle d clinical trial will enroll 4 14 participants according to the inclusion 
and exclusion criteria listed below to compare the effectivenes s of Dulce Digital (DD) and Dulce Digital-
Me (DD-Me) in improving participants' clinical control (HbA1c-p rimary, LDL-c, and SBP), adherence, and 
patient-provider communication in underserved Hispanics with po orly controlled type 2 diabetes 
mellitus (T2DM) across 12 months. The protocol was developed in  accordance with Good Clinical 
Practice, SPI[INVESTIGATOR_61192], and CONSORT 2013 guidelines. 
The primary aim of this study is to compare the effectiveness o f DD-Me versus DD in improving diabetes 
clinical control [HbA1c-primary, low-density lipoprotein choles terol (LDL-c), and systolic blood pressure 
(SBP)] over [ADDRESS_66103] and/or acceptability differ significantly b etween DD-Me adaptive feedback methods 
[i.e., automated messaging versus telephonic MA Health Coach-de livery]. 
 
1. INCLUSION/EXCLUSION CRITERIA  
Inclusion Criteria: 
 • Self-identified as Latino/Hispanic • Age 18 or older • Registered patient of the co llaborating Federally Qualified H ealth Center (FQHC) 
• Diagnosed with T2DM (Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus) 
• HbA1c ≥ 8.0% and/or SBP ≥ 140 and/or LDL-c ≥ 100 mg/dL) withi n 90 days of enrollment 
 Exclusion Criteria:  
• Severe illness precluding  regular clinic visits 
• Pregnant or lactating 
• Type 1 or gestational diabetes 
• Lack of minimal literacy 
• Plans to relocate 
• Severe auditory or visual problems 
• Primary language other than Spanish or English 
• Not willing to carry a mobile phone 
 
Individuals who meet inclusion criteria (and do not meet exclus ion criteria) will be randomized to the 
Dulce Digital or DD-Me intervention condition. 
 
2. SETTING AND SCREENING 
 
The trial will be conducted at, a  Federally Qualified Health Ce nter (FQHC) that serves a low-income, 
largely Hispanic population of over 66,500 patients in San Dieg o County. A business agreement between 
Scripps Health and the FQHC will be established and approved by  [CONTACT_61201]. 
Patient census data retrieved in preparing the current proposal  support the feasibility of the proposed 
timeline and target sample. Electronic health records (EHR) wil l be used to identify potentially eligible 
patients who will be contact[CONTACT_61202], bilingual research assistants. The support of the 
FQHC administrative leadership, staff, and utilization of EHRs for recruitment, our experience in 
recruiting patient samples from community settings, and the lar ge number of potentially eligible 
patients will maximize our abilit y to recruit the sample in a t imely manner. Recruitment and screening at 
all stages and for all study components will use IRB approved s cripts and data collection forms. 
Established standards of practi ce for clinical research will be  followed for consenting and enrollment of 
participants. A screening database will be developed and mainta ined throughout the trial. All 
information necessary for clinical trials reporting will occur in accordance with (NIH) CONSORT 
guidelines.  
 
3. RECRUITMENT 
 
Referrals to the trial will be m ade through review of EHR, whic h compi[INVESTIGATOR_61193]. Guidance on participant recruitment will be provided 
by [CONTACT_61203]. Potentially eligible participants will be  contact[CONTACT_61204], 
bi-lingual research staff, who will describe the study, and rev iew eligibility and interest. 
 
 
4. WRITTEN INFORMED CONSENT; ENROLLMENT AND RANDOMIZATION 
 
Written Informed Consent and Enrollment: 
 
Patients who are eligible and interested will be invited to an in-person, group-based, “Initial Visit,” at 
which the study will be fully described, written informed conse nt will be obtained (Informed Consent 
document uploaded with this initial Study Application), and bas eline self-report and clinical assessments 
will be performed. Approximate duration for this visit is 3 hou rs. 
 
Randomization: 
 
The study will apply a block ra ndomization scheme, which will b e computer-generated by [CONTACT_61205]. The study statistician will place 
assignments into sealed envelopes labeled with participant ID n umbers. At the conclusion of the Initial 
Visit, the Project Manager will unveil group assignment. Labora tory staff who perform the clinical assays 
(primary study outcomes), data analysts, and research staff (wi th the exception of the Project Manager 
who will conduct randomization) will be blinded to group assign ment. 
 
At the conclusion of the Initial Visit, participants will be ra ndomized to DD or DD-Me, delivered through 
automated text message, or tel ephonic communication, meet study  staff (nurse, medical assistant 
[MA]), and receive training on in tervention devices. All partic ipants will continue to receive standard 
care at the clinic. Month-6 and month-12 assessments will be co nducted at the same site. DD and DD-
Me will be delivered between base line and month-6 assessments, and are both intended to enhance the 
self-management support component of the Chronic Care Model (CC M).  
 
5. INTERVENTION 
 
5.a. Dulce Digital: 
 
Practical barriers (e.g., work, caregiving, transportation) lim it the reach of traditional or face-to-face 
DSME programs for underserved, at-risk patients. mHealth techno logies have the potential to 
circumvent some of these obstacles. Recently we developed Dulce  Digital (DD), which included 
culturally-tailored and health literacy-sensitive educational a nd supportive text messages [i.e., short 
message service (SMS)], combined with patient monitoring and tr ansmission of blood glucose values. 
Dulce Digital participants received text messages derived from the Project Dulce DSME curriculum, 
medication reminders, and blood glucose monitoring prompts. As a “static” intervention, all Dulce 
Digital participants received the  same content and dosage of me ssages (2-3 messages daily initially, with 
frequency tapered over 6 months). A care-team nurse monitored t ransmitted glucose values, assessed 
possible reasons for high-risk values, and encouraged follow up  with the primary care provider as 
needed. In a recent RCT of N=126 Hispanic patients with poorly controlled T2DM (HbA1c ≥ 8%), Dulce 
Digital led to improved glycemic control across 6 months, relat ive to usual care [HbA1c mean Δ = -1.0% 
vs. -0.2%, p<.05]. Our process evaluation indicated that DD was  both feasible and acceptable; however, 
patients expressed a preference for intervention content tailor ed to their individual self-management 
needs and behavioral progress (i.e., an “adaptive” intervention ).  
Participants in this group receive the original DD, culturally and health literacy-appropriate text 
messages between baseline and six months (“Core Content”). Over  this same period, participants are 
encouraged to regularly check glucose using a cellular-enabled monitor (“Remote Glucose Monitoring”), 
manage their oral medication(s) monitor their medication taking  using the cellular-enabled pi[INVESTIGATOR_61194] 
(“Remote Medication Adherence Monitoring”) and respond to ecolo gical momentary assessment 
(“EMA”) questions about health behaviors and well-being via tex t message.  
 
5b. Dulce Digital Me (DD-Me): 
 
To accommodate patient and provider feedback and consistent wit h research asserting the value of 
adaptive interventions, Dulce Digital Me (DD-Me) will include t he DD components described above plus 
adaptive behavioral feedback/goal-setting. The adaptive behavio ral feedback and goal-setting 
component will be facilitated by [CONTACT_61206] (developed a nd maintained by [CONTACT_61207] – a 
subcontracted institution on this grant), and will be informed by [CONTACT_4317]’ real-time, wirelessly-
transmitted ecological momentary assessment (EMA) and medicatio n adherence data. The 
feedback/goal-setting specific t o DD-Me will be delivered elect ronically using a computer-generated 
algorithm in 50% of the DD-Me sa mple, and by a specially traine d, bilingual medical assistant (MA) in the 
other 50% to evaluate difference in delivery mode. 
 
 
6. STUDY DEVICES   
Blood glucose monitor .  Telcare Verizon blood glucose meter (BioTelemetry, Inc, Malv ern, PA).  Wireless 
medication adherence device .  WisePi[INVESTIGATOR_61195] 3G (Wis ePi[INVESTIGATOR_61196], Western Ca pe, South 
Africa).  Cellphone .  Participants not owning a cell phone received an option of t wo different types of cell 
phones, a BLU Jenny (Doral, [LOCATION_012]) or an LG Expression with q werty keyboard (Englewood Cliffs, New 
Jersey). Wireless service will be p rovided by U.S. Mobile with unlimited text and voice plans for the 
duration of the intervention. Data plans will not provided to a ny study participants.  
 
7.  STUDY SCHEDULE Intervention assignments are described above. The follow-up per iods at months [ADDRESS_66104] of the intervention,  respectively.  
x~1 week prior to Baseline Visit :  EHR Screening, Telephone Screening 
xBaseline Visit :  Informed Consent, Randomization, Brief diabetes education se ssion to be 
delivered, Labs, blood pressure (B P) and anthropometric data to  be obtained, Self-report 
surveys to be collected 
xMonths 1 -6:  Delivery of text messages all groups, automated (group 2) or  telephonic 
feedback (group 3) 
xMonth 6 :  Labs, BP and anthropometric data to be obtained, Self-report  surveys to be 
collected 
xMonth12 :  Labs, BP and anthropometric data to be obtained, Self-report  surveys to be 
collected 
 7.  ASSESSMENTS AND DATA COLLECTION 
 
Clinical Measures: 
 
• Clinical specimens (blood draws), HbA1C and lipid assays 
• Physical measures (blood pressure, weight, height) 
 
As part of Aim 1, we will evaluate  key clinical indicators of d iabetes control by [CONTACT_61208]1c, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], 
and BP. At baseline, month-6, and month-[ADDRESS_66105] Diagnostics 
Inc., which adheres to all guidelines set forth by [CONTACT_9891]. The primary 
outcome of HbA1c will be assayed b y Immunoturbidimetry (Integra  800, [COMPANY_002]). Research assistants will 
measure BP and anthropometrics using standardized protocols and  instrumentation.  
 
Self-Reported Measures and EHR Data Extraction: 
 
• Participant responses to survey instruments  
• Records of demographics, comorbidities, and medications extra cted from EHRs; 
 
For Aim 2, participants will complete self-report measures of p atient-provider communication, and 
adherence to medication and other diabetes self-management beha viors (dietary intake, physical 
activity, blood glucose monitoring) at all 3 time-points. Via s elf-report we will also assess demographic 
and health related factors (including medication use) for scree ning and sample description purposes, 
and the fit of the overall theoretical model. Patient EHRs will  also be reviewed for patient information 
(i.e., demographics, comorbidities, and medications). 
 
Patient Focus Groups: 
 
As part of the Process Evaluation, 20 participants from the DD- Me condition [split evenly between 
automated messaging (n=10) and MA-delivered (n=10)] will be inv ited to key informant interviews to 
share their experiences with the intervention. Focus group part icipants must be willing to provide 
informed consent; available for  scheduled focus group/s; and sp eak Spanish or English. We will not 
conduct focus groups with Dulce Digital participants as a proce ss evaluation has already been conducted 
as part of our original RCT. 
Electronic health records abstraction:   
Demographic and other data are extracted from the EHR for each participant upon enrollment, and 
clinical and health service utilization data is abstracted for 12 months from each patient’s unique 
enrollment date from all laboratory and ambulatory clinic sites . Standard of care laboratory or 
anthropometric values resulted in the EHR within the qualifying  assessment window will be used for 
outcome analysis purposes for any participants with missed foll ow up visits to enhance data 
completeness. The  Scripps Health IRB approval provi des permission to audit the EH R for patient 
identification and outc ome analysis purposes. 
 
8. DATA TRACKING   
All data are tracked in a Research Electronic Data Capture (RED Cap) database and reviewed on a regular 
basis by [CONTACT_61209] s taff.  Intervention fidelity for ms are used to track the frequency, duration, 
and content of all telephone outre ach to participants, includin g blood glucose triage and “no (EMA, 
blood glucose, or Wisepi[INVESTIGATOR_4382]) data” calls for all participants; a nd weekly MA Health Coach feedback calls for 
the DD-Me telephonic Health Coach group. The CYCORE system acti vely tracks the content and 
date/time of delivery or receipt  of outgoing core content, EMA items, and feedback messages, as well as 
participants’ responses to EMA it ems. CYCORE reports are review ed on a regular basis to ensure that 
intervention content is delivered as designed; any deviations f rom protocol or temporary system 
outages are tracked in REDCap.  
9.  CONFIDENTIALITY AND DATA ACCESSIBILITY 
 
Confidentiality will be protected  by [CONTACT_61210] a participant ID number, which will be 
linked to participant identifiable information only on a master  list, stored in password protected form on 
a password protected computer at both primary performance sites , separate from any other study data, 
and available only to the study PIs, project managers, and othe r trained research personnel working 
under the PIs’ supervision if necessary for participant contact , tracking, or follow-up purposes. In 
general, the trial will take every possible precaution to prote ct data and ensure that confidentiality is 
protected both within and across performance sites, via use of ID numbers, safe transport, and other IRB 
approved procedures. All procedures will be discussed with clin ic staff prior to implementation and will 
be reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_61211], SDSU, and UC San Diego  IRBs.  
 
Access to individually identifiable private information about t he participants will be available only to 
MPIs Philis-Tsimikas and Gallo a nd trained research staff (e.g. , project managers) working under their 
supervision who require this in formation for a specific purpose . All participant information and data will 
be de-identified (identified by [CONTACT_61212]). In al l cases where data transfer between sites is 
required, data will be directly tr ansferred from site to site ( without stops, excepting emergency) and will 
be transported in de-identified form, separated from consent fo rms or other identifying information, 
and carried in a locked storage box. 
 
8. RETENTION STRATEGIES.  
 
The research team has gained substantial experience with approa ches to minimizing attrition through 
previous efforts. These lessons learned will be applied to main tain the cohort in the proposed study. All 
participants will receive cohort maintenance postcards at inter im study points and reminder postcards 
prior to each assessment appointment, and will be contact[CONTACT_61213].  
 
Participant Compensation: 
 
Monetary compensation ($50, $25, $40 gift cards for baseline/in itial visit, month-6 and month-12, 
respectively) for time and effort rendered will be offered to a ll participants following each assessment 
visit.  
 
Staff Skill: 
 
All research staff will be carefully trained in research protoc ols and interviewing methods including the 
process of developi[INVESTIGATOR_61197] a friendly but pr ofessional interaction style to ensure 
that participants have a positive experience with the study. 
 
9. STUDY OVERSIGHT 
 
Collaborating Sites and Plan: 
 
Performance sites include Scripps  Whittier Diabetes Institute ( SWDI) of Scripps Health (MPI [INVESTIGATOR_61198]-
Tsimikas), SDSU (MPI [INVESTIGATOR_61199]), and UC San Diego (Co-Investigator Farcas). In addition, patient recruitment, 
assessment, and intervention activities will take place at a co llaborating FQHC. The study investigators 
will work with clinic leadership, providers, and staff to optim ize plans for patient identification, data 
collection, and study implementation, including collaboration i n developi[INVESTIGATOR_61200]. Twice monthly research meetings (or more often as needed) involving the study PIs and all 
central study staff across both sites will maintain consistent processes and communication. All research 
staff will be centrally trained and supervised by [CONTACT_45210] .  
 Oversight of Clinical Outcomes and Intervention: 
 
SWDI will have primary oversight for Aim 1 (clinical outcomes),  cohort identification process via EHR, 
and interventionist (nurse, MA) training and support, and will also act as the primary liaison to the clinic 
sites and stakeholders groups. A Project Manager will be housed  at Scripps to oversee patient 
identification, EHR and (overall) implementation of the interve ntion and staff trainings. 
 
Oversight of Self-Reported Outcomes:  
 
SDSU (with appropriate registration volunteer staff as required ) will have primary oversight for the 
patient reported outcomes Aim (2). MPI [INVESTIGATOR_61199] (SDSU) will also o versee the overall program evaluation, 
in close collaboration with Co-I Fortmann (Scripps), including conducting patient focus groups and 
obtaining nurse, MA, and other provider input regarding the int ervention, and database development, 
data entry, data verification, and overseeing data analysis in collaboration with the study statistician. A 
Project Manager will be employed  at SDSU to oversee and contrib ute to the patient reported 
assessment outcome and overall program evaluation. 
 
Oversight of CYCORE System:  
 
Co-Investigator Farcas (UC San Diego) will oversee the developm ent and maintenance of the CYCORE 
(CYberinfrastructure to support COmparative effectiveness REsea rch); a secure, scalable and extensible 
platform with the ability to support adaptive or dynamic mHealt h interventions) system and study 
technologies, and a Project Manager will coordinate development  and implementation of the CYCORE 
system. The CYCORE system will be responsible for the programmi ng of text messages (DD-Me and 
Dulce Digital) and adaptive feedback/goal-setting (DD-Me only).  For a detailed description of the 
CYCORE system please see below: 
 
"CYCORE (CYberinfrastructure to support COmparative effectivene ss REsearch) is a secure, scalable and 
extensible platform with the ab ility to support adaptive or dyn amic mHealth interventions. With 
CYCORE, participants take daily measurements related to health parameters of interest [in early use 
cases, BP, pulse, and weight]. Through mobile phone based self- report, called EMA, researchers capture 
information on other indicators o f interest from participants ( e.g., adherence, other health behaviors, 
emotional well-being). The mobile phone or other Internet-conne cted device sends the data to 
CYCORE’s back-end services. Clin icians can monitor these data d aily to determine the need for patient 
outreach. CYCORE has been extremely well received by [CONTACT_1962] a nd their support persons. Finally, 
CYCORE is device and sensor agnostic and can be readily adapted  to the DD-Me project. In particular it 
can handle both inbound data capture from the glucose and medic ation monitors, and support the logic 
behind the text message-based EMA and interactive communication  (i.e., personalized feedback and 
goal-setting) with study participants. It has a secure HIPAA co mpliant database that facilitates data 
visualization and analysis." 
  
 
 
 
Statistical Analysis Plan Study Aims 
Primary Aim  
To compare the effectiveness of DD-Me versus Dulce Digital in i mproving diabetes clinical control 
[HbA1c, primary outcome), low-density lipoprotein cholesterol ( LDL-c), and systolic blood pressure 
(SBP)] over 12 months.  
Secondary Aim  To compare the effectiveness of Dulce Digital versus Dulce Digi tal Me (Automated and Telephonic) in 
improving patient reported outcomes (patient adherence, diabete s distress, patient-provider 
communication over 12 months.  
Statistical Methods  
Power and Sample Size This study will enroll N = [ADDRESS_66106] statistically sign ificant differences between any of the 3 
groups: (a) Dulce Digital, (b) DD-Me (automated delivery), and (c) DD-Me (telephonic MA delivery). For 
HbA1c, the study primary outcome,  a clinically meaningful chang e of 0.5% with a 1.3% standard 
deviation was used to determine power. To transform this estima te into an effect size ( d=.33), standard 
deviations (SD) from prior studies in the same and similar popu lations were used. To determine the 
minimum sample size necessary, as sumptions included: (1) An alp ha level of .05 and a power level of 
.80; (2) a missing data rate of 15% at each time-point or a 30%  missing data rate overall, and (3) a 
stationary autoregressive structure (lag 1) for the variance-co variance matrix of the repeated measures, 
using an autocorrelation value of .45. Given these assumptions and the estimated effect size from 
above, 414 participants are needed at baseline (i.e., n=138 in each of the 3 groups).  Although power 
analyses used HbA1c as the pri mary outcome, N=[ADDRESS_66107] size for all  physiological and patient-reported outcomes, given a missing da ta rate of 30% 
over the course of the study. Allowing for up to 30% attrition,  the minimum number of participants 
required to be retained at 12-months follow-up to ensure adequa te power for statistical analysis is 290. 
Analytic Plan All analytic strategies will follow published standards, includ ing intent to treat principles. Preliminary 
data screening and cleaning will require examination of distrib utions for normality, outliers, and missing 
data patterns at both the uni- and multi-variate level. Prelimi nary inferential statistical testing and effect 
size consultation will be used to determine if random assignmen t has resulted in statistical equivalence 
between groups. Significant covariates will be added to adjust for nonequivalence. Or variables related 
to missing data Multilevel models using full information maximu m likelihood estimation will be 
conducted to examine changes in the target outcomes for each Ai m. Analyses will include the between-
subjects factor treatment group and the within-subjects factor time. The cross-level group by [CONTACT_61214]. Within groups c hanges will also be examined to evaluate 
the clinical and statistical significance of relative change. O utcomes assessment will follow the intention-
to-treat principle; each participant will be included in betwee n-group comparisons regardless of 
adherence level and based solely on randomization assignment. 
 