Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700274]-McDermid Syndrome
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700275] 02710084
Document Date: April 20, 2016
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/[ADDRESS_950564] elucidated the 
neurobiology of several genetic subtypes of autism spectrum disorder (ASD) and led to important opportunities 
for developi[INVESTIGATOR_700278]. ASD can now be conceived of as having multiple distinct 
genetic risk loci and one example is SHANK3 , where haploinsufficiency through deletion or mutation causes 
Phelan -McDermid syndrome (PMS) , which is characterized by [CONTACT_700308], motor skills 
deficits, delayed or absent speech, and ASD. SHANK3 is the critical gene in this syndrome (Bonaglia et al., 
2006; 2011; Durand et al., 2007) and recent studies indicate that loss of one copy of SHANK3 causes a 
monogenic form of ASD w ith a frequency of at least 0.5% of ASD cases and up to 2% of moderate to profound  
intellectual disability (Leblond et al., 2014) . SHANK3 codes for a master scaffolding protein which forms a key 
framework in the postsynaptic density of glutamatergic synap ses and plays a critical role in synaptic function 
(Boeckers et al, 2006). Although SHANK3 deficiency accounts for a relatively small proportion of ASD cases, 
recent evidence suggests that the SHANK3 and glutamate signaling pathway s are common to multiple forms 
of ASD and that many different genetic causes of ASD may converge on several common pathways (Darnell et 
al., 2011; Sakai et al., 2011). Large -scale analyses also show that SHANK3 and associated pathways are 
implicated in multiple forms of ASD, inclu ding tuberous sclerosis and Fragile X syndrome (Darnell et al., 2011; 
Sakai et al., 2011). Using Shank3 -deficient mice and rats, our group has documented specific deficits in 
synaptic function and plasticity in glutamate signaling (Bozdagi et al, 2010). Im portantly, recent data from our 
group demonstrate that oxytocin reverses the neurobiological deficits in both social behavior and hippocampal 
synaptic plasticity in shank3 -deficient rats (Harony -Nicolas et al., unpublished; see Figure 1).   
The proposed pro ject will pi[INVESTIGATOR_700279] a novel treatment in PMS . We will use a double -
blind, placebo -controlled parallel group  design in [ADDRESS_950565] is to pi[INVESTIGATOR_700280], social memory, and language in this severely impaired population. Oxytocin is an FDA-approved, 
commercially available medication that can be compounded into an intranasal  solution  for passage through the 
blood -brain barrier (BBB).  In animal models, oxytocin has been demonstrated to increase eye contact, social 
approach, social recogni tion, social memory, and to reduce stress responses (Takayangai 2005; Liu 2008, 
Insel 2010). Oxytocin also influences social behavior in people and increases gaze to eye regions, social 
cognition, social memory, positive communication, empathy, perceptions  of trustworthiness, and cooperation 
within one’s own group (Guastella 2008a, 2008b; Domes 2007; Di Simplicio 2008; Fischer -Shofty 2009; Keri 
2009; Unkelbach 2008; Savaskan 2008; Rimmele 2009; Dizten 2008; Zak 2005, 2007; Theodoridou 2009; 
Pterovic 2008; K osfeld 2005, Baumgartner 2008; De Dreu, 2010). Specifically in ASD, oxytocin has shown 
promise for modifying social behavior in mouse model systems and in affected individuals. Importantly, 
oxytocin is effective in reversing phenotypic and electrophysiolog ical changes in rat  models of Phelan -
McDermid syndrome (Harony -Nicolas et al., unpublished), providing additional evidence that this pathway may 
be a target in diverse forms of ASD.  
Aims are to : 
1) Evaluate safety, tolerability, and feasibility of oxytoci n vs. placebo in children with PMS targeting 
social withdrawal  using the Aberrant Behavior Checklist – Social Withdrawal subscale (AB C-SW; Aman et al., 
1985) and other secondary outcome measures of language, repetitive behavior, and global improvement.   
2) Evaluate safety, tolerability, and feasibility of oxytocin vs. placebo in children with PMS targeting 
attention and social memory using a n objective Visual Paired Comparison Task (VPC ; Rose et al. , 2009 ) with 
eye tracking technology . 
3) Explore the feasi bility of objective assessments of expressive language and social attention using 
Language Environment Analysis (LENA) and the Social Orienting Task (Dawson et al.,  2004 ) respectively.  
Our working hypothesis, supported by [CONTACT_700309], is that oxytocin will be safe, well 
tolerated, and associated with improvement on the VPC task and the ABC -SW subscale compared to placebo 
by [CONTACT_700310], social cognition, and social functioning . At the conclusion of this study, we 
also ex pect that objective measures, such as automated analysis of natural language samples (i.e., LENA) and 
social orienting, will successfully measure expressive language and social attention and that treatment with 
oxytocin will be associated with improvement on these measures. This project has the potential to further the 
treatment of single gene disorders associated with ASD and may shed light on pathways relevant to the 
treatment of ASD more broadly.  
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/2016  RESEARCH STRATEGY  
Significance . The genetic liability to  autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is now understood to be due in 
part to rare genetic variants where isolated gene or chromosomal abnormalities contribute a major part of the 
susceptibility for an affected individual. Several of the ASD genes identified to d ate, including SHANK3 , are 
involved in the neuroligin -neurexin pathway at glutamatergic synapses (Bonaglia et al, 2011; Durand et al., 
2007; Gauthier et al., 2009; Guilmatre et al., 2009; Moessner et al., 2007; Rosenfeld et al., 2010; Schaaf et al., 
2011; Sebat et al., 2007). Glutamate signaling is also highly relevant to these pathways and to various forms of 
ASD. SHANK3  is a protein found in glutamatergic synapses that helps form the postsynaptic density, and upon 
which glutamate receptors are clustered ( Sheng and Kim 2000; Boeckers 2006; Kreienkamp 2008). There is 
now abundant evidence that SHANK3  is a key regulator of synapse development and function and a critical 
protein for many synaptic processes. Loss of SHANK3  causes Phelan -McDermid syndrome (PMS),  a 
monogenic cause of ASD and intellectual disability (ID) responsible for between 0.5% and 2 % of cases  
collectively . Importantly, large -scale analyses show that SHANK3  and associated pathways are implicated in 
multiple forms of ASD and ID, including tuber ous sclerosis and Fragile X syndrome (FXS) (Darnell et al., 2011; 
Sakai et al., 2011). According to the Interagency Autism Coordinating Committee 2011 Strategic Plan  and 
subsequent updates , there is a need for translational research that takes advantage of  genetic findings in order 
to: 1) develop animal models to understand the effects of these genetic variants on brain function, 2) inform 
which molecular signaling pathways are affected in ASD, and 3) discover specific targets for the development 
of novel t herapeutics. Following this approach, our group developed Shank3 -deficient rats and discovered that 
behaviorally, long -term social recognition memory and attention were impaired, with no significant change in 
contextual fear memory, social preference, or s hort-term social discrimination. Additionally, in the hippocampus 
and medial prefrontal cortex ( mPFC ), our group also found impairments in long -term potentiation (LTP) long -
term depression (LTD), but not in NMDA -dependent LTD (Harony -Nicolas et al., unpubl ished). Treatment with 
oxytocin was then tested and found to reverse electrophysiological and behavioral deficits in Shank3  
heterozygous and knockout rats (see Figure s 1-3). The  SHANK3  / glutamate signaling pathway is highly 
relevant to various forms of AS D; the link between deficits in synapse function and ASD suggest that treatment 
with oxytocin may have implications for ASD associated with disruptions in common underlying pathways, and 
this is supported by [CONTACT_700311]. This contribution will be significant because 
we aim to pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] a potentially disease -modifying treatment that has the potential to shed light on pathways more 
broadly relevant to ASD treatment.  
 Innovation . To date, the development of pharmacological treatm ents in ASD has mainly relied on 
strategies only loosely related to what is known about the neurobiology of the disorders, using etiologically 
heterogeneous samples, and delivering intervention broadly with mixed success. More recently, genetic 
discovery a nd model systems have led to important opportunities for developi[INVESTIGATOR_691202], disease -modifying 
therapeutics. The proposed project represents a unique effort between clinical and basic science resources 
and draws upon the experience of clinicians with recogni zed expertise in  PMS  and ASD. This work is based on 
preclinical evidence that establishes proof -of-concept with oxytocin reversing electrophysiological deficits in 
Shank3 -deficient rats, and on extensive clinical evidence that supplemental oxytocin can imp act social 
behaviors in ASD. A recent example of a similar approach is our group’s pi[INVESTIGATOR_700281] -like growth 
factor -1 (IGF-1) in PMS (Kolevzon et al., 2014)  and ongoing large scale clinical trials in tuberous sclerosis and 
FXS.  Additionally, a lar ge-scale trial of oxytocin in ASD (SOARS -B) is currently underway. The proposed 
project is innovative, in our opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649], because it is based on the combination of a previously tested drug 
development strategy, convincing preclinical evidence with oxytocin in  a rat model system, and a safe 
approved drug. In addition, it is innovative in that we introduce objective measures of attention, social memory, 
and language  in the context of experimental therapeutics.  
 Approach . 
 Aims: Evaluate safety, tolerability, and  feasibility of oxytocin vs. placebo targeting attention and 
social  memory using the Aberrant Behavior Checklist Social Withdrawal subscale as the  primary 
outcome measure and additional secondary and exploratory outcome measures including objective 
assessm ents of language and social attention.  
 Introduction. The objective  of this aim is to pi[INVESTIGATOR_700282] 40 patients with PMS in 
order to evaluat e safety, tolerability, and feasibility for ASD-related deficit s. We will approach  this ai m by 
[CONTACT_18120] a placebo -controlled, double -blind, parallel group design with 3 months of treatment with oxytocin or 
placebo followed by 3 months of open -label treatment with active drug. The rationale  is that successful 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/[ADDRESS_950566] ive behaviors, as measured by [CONTACT_32324]-SW subscale and the Repetitive Behavior 
Scale  respectively . Prior to this study, a literature review revealed  only two published reports of medication 
treatment in PMS , one case study with ris peridone (Pasini et al., 2 009) and one case series with intranasal 
insulin (Schmidt et al., 2008) , both with reported improvement. Results from the case study with risperidone 
were optimistic but uncontrolled: an 18 year old girl with PMS was treated with risperidone 0.5 mg BID wit h 
significant improvement on the Clinical Global Impression Scale (CGI; Guy 1976) in anxiety, aggression, and 
insomnia after one month that was sustained after six months. In the intranasal insulin study, six children 
received up to [ADDRESS_950567] domains, including cognitive, speech and language, and motor skills (Schmidt et al., 
2009). Insulin was hypothesized in these cases to improve neuronal function by [CONTACT_700312] (CNS) glucose uptake and enhance synaptic plasticity via glutamatergic receptors.  
Results from treatment with oxytocin in our Shank3 -deficient rat model are extremely intriguing (see 
Preliminary Studies).  Oxytocin has also shown promis e for modifying social behavior in mouse models and in 
people with ASD . Oxytocin is the brain’s most abundant neuropeptide. It can act as a classical  
neurotransmitter, a neuromodulator and a hormone with actions throughout the body (Gimple 2001, Veening 
2010, Baskerville 2010). Oxytocin’s half -life in the plasma is 1 -2 minutes compared to ~30 minutes in the CSF. 
Central release of oxytocin is dependent upon CD38 and dramatically stimulates further release of oxytocin 
(~1000 fold) and increases the number of  oxytocin -containing cells in the periventricular nucleus. Together 
these factors lead to long lasting oxytocin elevations throughout the brain following acute increases in CSF 
oxytocin.  In the oxytocin receptor null mouse, a single dose of oxytocin impro ved social deficits, reduced 
aggression and reduced vulnerability to drug -induced seizures, apparently acting through the vasopressin 1A 
receptor. Further, repeated doses of oxytocin improved reversal learning in these mice, indicating enhanced 
cognitive f lexibility (Sala 2011). A single dose of oxytocin also improved social deficits in Cd38 null mice 
(Higashida , 2010).  
In people with Fragile X syndrome, a single gene cause of ASD, oxytocin improved gaze avoidance 
and reduced cortisol elevations elicited b y social interaction (Hall 2011). In high functioning individuals with 
idiopathic ASD, single doses of oxytocin enhanced attention to faces and eyes, visual and auditory affect 
recognition, the ability to distinguish whether others were being cooperative, and preference for interacting with 
receptive individuals (Andari 2010; Gustalla 2010; Hollander 2007). Oxytocin challenge has also been shown 
to reduce compulsive and repetitive behaviors (Hollander et al., 2003).  
Sustained oxytocin treatment in autism h as been the subject of limited study and results to date are 
mixed. One pi[INVESTIGATOR_700283] (Reading 
the Mind in the Eyes Test, Baron Cohen et al., 1997)  and quality of life (World Health Organization Quality of 
Life Questionnaire, 1998) in a 6 -week randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled, parallel  design  trial of 
intranasal  oxytocin  versus placebo in 19 adults with ASD (Anagnostou et al., 2012 ). In another double -blind, 
placebo -contro lled, 50 male participants with Autis m or Asperger's syndrome  were randomized to receive 
either  oxytocin  or placebo nasal sprays, administered twice -daily for 8  weeks (Guastella et al., 2014). 
Participants who received  oxytocin  showed no benefit following treatment on primary or secondary outcomes. 
However, caregivers who believed their children received  oxytocin  reported greater improvements compared to 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/[ADDRESS_950568] ( CBCL ; Achenbach et al., 2000)  or the ABC (Tachibana et al., 2013).  
Several other chronic treatment studies are underway in idiopathic ASD, including a large,  multi -centered 
randomized controlled trial funded by [CONTACT_700313]  (PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700284]) .   
Preliminary Studies. Our group studied both mice and rats with a targeted disruption of Shank3, in 
which exons coding for the ankyrin repeat domain (ARD) were deleted and expression of full -length Shank3  
was disrupted (note that a poin t mutation in the ARD has been described in a child with autism ; Moessner et 
al., 2007). We examined synaptic transmission and plasticity by [CONTACT_700314] a 
reduction in basal neurotransmission in Shank3 heterozygous and homozygous  mice (Bozdagi et al., 2010 ; 
Yang et al., 2012 ) and in Shank3 -deficient rats (homozygotes and heterozygotes) (Harony -Nicolas et al., 
unpublished).  
Studies with a specific AMPA receptor antagonist and NMDA receptor antagonist demonstrated that the 
decrease in basal transmission reflected reduced AMPA receptor -mediated transmission. LTP was impaired in 
Shank3 heterozygous mice, with no significant change in LTD (Bozdagi et al., 2010 ). In concordance with the 
LTP results, persistent expansion of spi[INVESTIGATOR_700285] -induced LTP; 
however, only transient spi[INVESTIGATOR_700286]3 heterozygous mice. Behaviorally, male 
Shank3 heterozygotes also displayed less social sniffing and emitted fewer ultrasonic vocaliza tions during 
interactions with estrus female mice, as compared to wild -type littermate controls (Bozdagi et al., 2010).  
In Shank3  heterozygous and knockout (KO) rats, LTP was significantly impaired, with significant deficit s 
in mGluR -dependent LTD in Shan k3 homozygous (KO) rats only, and no significant change in NMDA -
dependent LTD. In concordance with the LTP results, high frequency stimulation of the hippocampus and 
prefrontal cortex showed impaired LTP in both Shank3 -Het and KO rats. Behaviorally, no sig nificant 
differences between WT and Shank3 -deficient rats were found using social preference, juvenile social play, 
habituation -dishabituation social recognition, or short -term social discrimination. In contrast, both homozygous 
and heterozygous rats showe d impaired long -term social recognition memory (SRM) when t ested on the long -
term social discrimination  test (Gur et al., 2014), even as contextual fear memory (Blanchard et al., 1972) was 
intact. The different outcomes in two tests of hippocampal -dependen t long -term memory suggest that Shank3 
deficiency selectively impairs long -term memory for social interactions. Additionally, in assessing attentional 
ability by [CONTACT_208263] [ADDRESS_950569] (Bussey et al., 2012; Mar et al., 2013), Shank 3-
deficient rats displayed lower mean accuracy levels compared to WT littermates. Taken together, these 
findings indicate that both attention and long -term SRM are impaired in the Shank3 -deficient rat model.  
 Oxytocin has a well -studied pro -social effect  on mammalian social behavior in general (Meyer -
Lindenberg et al., 2011; Insel, 2010) and has been directly implicated in SRM (Bielsky et al., 2004; Choleris et 
al., 2009). Given this, and the potential association between oxytocin and ASD, our group  exami ned the effect  
of oxytocin on social recognition impairment in the Shank3 -deficient rats. Our data show that 
intracerebroventricular  (ICV)  injections of oxytocin reversed impairments in long -term social recognition 
memory seen in the Shank3  deficient rats.  
We also found that oxytocin reversed the 
impairment in the maintenance of 
hippocampal LTP in Shank3 -deficient rats, 
without an effect on mGluR -LTD deficit in 
the Shank3 -KO rats , suggesting a specific 
mechanistic relationship between deficits in, 
and oxyto cin-induced rescue of, social 
memory , attention,  and hippocampal 
synaptic plasticity. In the proposed trial, we 
will be using the dose of 24 IU BID, as the 
dose used in the ICV injections in the rat 
study will not be applicable in human 
subjects. 24 IU BID  is the typi[INVESTIGATOR_700287].  
 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/2016  Figure 1. Reversal of electrophysiological deficits in hippocampal slices from Shank3 -deficient rats 
(n=4/genotype ) as compared to wild -
type mice (WT) after treatment with 
oxytocin . 
 
 
Figure 2. Reversal of i nduced 
hippocampal -prefrontal LTP deficits 
in vivo  from Shank3 -deficient rats 
(n=4/genotype)  as compared to wild -
type mice (WT) after treatment with 
oxytocin .  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Reversal of social discrimination deficits in Shank3 -Het (n=15 ) and KO (n=8) on the long -term 
Social Discrimination (SD)  test following treatment with oxytocin. *P<0.05.  
 
 
Research design. Treatment will follow a randomized, placebo -controlled parallel group design with 12 
weeks in the treatment arm  followed by a 12  week open label extension with oxytocin . The trial duration was 
selected based on what is commonly accepted as adequate in pediatric psychopharmacological trials in ASD, 
and our primary outcome s, the VPC and ABC -SW, are sensitive to change within this tim e frame ( Rose et al., 
2003; Aman et al., 2010).  
 Inclusion criteria:  The proposed pi[INVESTIGATOR_700288] [ADDRESS_950570] a minimum raw score of 12 on the ABC -SW (see Outcome Measures section). The minimum 
raw score was selected by [CONTACT_700315] -SW subscale score 
derived from a normative sample of 601 children aged  6-17 with intellectual disability (Brown et al., 2003)  and 

A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/[ADDRESS_950571] three months p rior to enrollment.  
Exclusion criteria : Cases will be excluded if any of the following are applicable: 1) allergy to oxytocin, 2) 
active cardiovascular disease or renal disease that is not controlled by [CONTACT_12617], 3) are pregnant, lactating or 
refuse to p ractice contraception if sexually active, 4) have caretakers who are unable to speak English, be 
consistently present at visits to report on symptoms, or are otherwise judged unable to comply with the protocol 
by [CONTACT_3476]; 5) comorbid conditions such  that the patient is too medically compromised to participate.  
 Drug Administration : Participants in the study will be randomly assigned to treatment with intranasal 
oxytocin or placebo. The oxytocin product will use a vehicle designed to optimize nasal a bsorption 
manufactured by [CONTACT_700316] (IND) from the FDA, (IND application submitted). Participants will start the trial with a dose of [ADDRESS_950572] two -week check  in call, if the drug is well tolerated, the dose will be increased to 24 IU BID. 
Each insufflation will deliver 4 IU and three  insufflations (12 IU) in each nostril will be given twice daily for a 
total daily dose of [ADDRESS_950573] commonly used  in the 
literature in ASD populations . This dose has been shown to be well -tolerated  and caution is warranted in this 
severely developmentally delayed population until safety is more firmly established. Doses may be re duced by 
8 IU/day if safety concerns emerge . Identical doses will be used during open treatment. Adherence to 
treatment will be assessed by [CONTACT_700317]. Randomization will be 
performed by [CONTACT_700318] h Pharmacy.   
 Outcome measures (Table 1):  
Efficacy measurements will be taken at baseline, and at weeks 4, 8, and 12 of each treatment phase  
(double blind and open -label) . Safety and tolerability will be measured every two w eeks throughout the trial 
during monitoring visits and phone calls (see Adverse Events). All safety and efficacy measurements will be 
repeated four weeks post -treatment to ensure safety and explore maintenance of treatment effects. Primary 
and secondary outcomes will be administered  by [CONTACT_700319].  All evaluators will maintain a minimum of 80 percent reliability through ongoing training 
and routine reliability assessments.  
Primary outcome: The ABC-SW subscale (Aman e t al., 1985)  is a parent -report rating scale used to 
monitor an array of behavioral features, including social withdrawal (i.e., Lethargy subscale). It was chosen as 
a primary outcome measure because our preliminary data suggest that it accurately reflects  the phenotype and 
because the ABC has been well validated in both intellectually disabled and ASD patients and is currently 
accepted as an appropriate outcome measure within the field of pediatric psychopharmacology research 
(Aman et al., 2010).  
 
Secondar y outcome s: Three tasks assessing aspects of attention will be used in the proposed study.  
Task 1 : Attention and Social Recognition Memory will be measured using a Visual Paired Comparison 
paradigm (VPC) in conjunction with eye -tracking technology . Childr en with ASD exhibit visual processing 
deficits for social information, such as face recognition ( Swettenham et al., 1998),  but have shown enhanced 
perceptual processing of nonsocial information . For example, individuals with ASD show superior performance 
as compared to healthy controls in extracting embedded figures during a block design task (Shah and Frith 
1993; Bradshaw et al., 2011). The VPC has specifically been widely used in young infants (<1y) and is 
therefore appropriate in children with PMS, and i s also predictive of risk for ASD and cognitive outcome (Rose 
et al. 2001, 2009, 2011; Fagan et al., 2007).  A VPC paradigm with eye -tracking technology found evidence that 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_241830] (TD) children show  preferential recognition for social ( faces ) and non-social ( simple 
objects ) stimuli , but not complex block patterns  (Bradshaw et al., 2010). Children with ASD , in contrast,  were 
successful at recognizing block patterns, but showed no evidence for face recognition. The VPC task with eye -
tracking has also been successfully used in Rett syndrome, another monogenic cause of ASD with evidence of 
synaptic deficits and severe developmental delay (Rose et al., 2013). Patients with Rett syndrome could 
recognize faces and patterns, though with poorer recogniti on than age -matched TD comparison subjects. On 
the VPC task, patients with Rett syndrome demonstrated less mature attention marked  by a more narrowly 
focused gaze, with fewer and longer fixations , more uneven gaze dispersion, and shorter looking time .  
Because our group’s Shank3 -deficient  rat displayed deficits in both attention and social recognition 
memory, we will use a VPC paradigm to assess these domains. In this paradigm, t he subject is initially 
presented with a target for familiarization  and the familiar target is then paired with a novel target . Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897] , the 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/[ADDRESS_950574] spends more time inspecting the novel target than the familiar one. Thus, recognition is indexed by a 
novelty score derived from the percentage of time looking at  the novel stimulus vs. the familiar stimulus (Rose 
et al., 2001 ) because subjects are presumed to spend less time looking at a familiar stimulus. The VPC task 
also measure s attention using eye tracking quantified by [CONTACT_700320], gaze dispersion, and 
number/length of fix ations  on the stimulus  (Rose et al., 2013).  The proposed study will make use of a well -
established battery of VPC p aradigms  (the ‘Rose’), which consists of nine stimuli: five using achromatic photos 
of faces and four using multicolored abstract patterns . Because this paradigm includes both social and non -
social stimuli, we will be able to separately examine the effect of oxytocin on social recognition as well as 
recognition memory and attention to non -social stimuli.  
Task 2 : The process of visual orienting  to a new stimulus comprises three successive steps (Posner 
and Cohen, 1984): disengagement of attention from a previously fixated stimulus, shifting attention to a new 
stimulus, and engagement of the new stimulus through visual fixation. A task used to as sess these measures 
of attention is the gap -overlap task, which we will employ in the present study. In this paradigm, three computer 
screens are set up side by [CONTACT_10167]. A stimulus initially appears on the central screen, and once the participant 
orients to t hat stimulus, another stimulus will appear on one of the lateral screens. In the “gap” condition, the 
central stimulus will disappear before the peripheral stimulus appears. In the “overlap” condition, the central 
stimulus will remain on the screen while t he peripheral stimulus appears. In both conditions, reaction times of 
the participant’s eye movements (saccadic reaction time) from the central stimulus to the peripheral stimulus 
will be measured. The gap condition will be taken as a measure of shifting a ttention, and the overlap condition 
will be taken as a measure of disengaging attention.  
Prospective studies using this task with dynamic, non -social stimuli have compared infants at high and 
low risk of being diagnosed with ASD. At 6 -7 months, no differe nces in ability to disengage attention were 
seen, but by 12 -14 months, the high risk cohort, and in particular those infants later diagnosed with ASD, 
showed longer disengage latencies in the overlap trials (Zwaigenbaum et al., 2005; Bryson et al., 2004; 
Elsabbagh et al., 2013). Another prospective trial, using static face and object images as stimuli, found that 
infants later diagnosed with ASD had longer latency times on the gap/shift trials and on the overlap/disengage 
trials by 7 months old (Elison et a l. 2013). In a study comparing three cohorts of 5 -year-old children (ASD, TD, 
and Down), Landry and Bryson (2004) demonstrated disengagement -specific impairment in children with ASD, 
who had longer reaction times for the overlap trials, though no differenc es were found on the gap/shift trials. 
Other studies found impairments in both the gap and overlap trials (van der Geest et al., 2001; Goldberg et al., 
2012). The proposed study will use the gap -overlap task, modeled on the studies described, in conjunctio n with 
eye-tracking technology to assess disengagement and shifting of attention.  
Task 3 : Another component of attention is temporal attention, which is necessary to identify individual 
components in a sequence of events (Batelli et al., 2007, 2008), and w hich plays a role in planning and 
executive function. This task, especially designed to isolate temporal resolution of attention, is a modified 
version of the phase discrimination task used in adults (Aghdaee and Cavanagh, 2007; Battelli et al., 2007), 
which has also been used in neurotypi[INVESTIGATOR_700289] X (Farzin et al., 2011; Farzin et al., 
2012). The “flicker task,” or the four -alternative forced -choice preferential looking paradigm, was adapted from 
Farzin et al., 2011, and makes u se of a screen with eye -tracking technology. With this task, we aim to isolate a 
measure of temporal resolution, or the time interval over which the visual system is able to parse information 
(Farzin et al., 2012). Four squares are arranged on the screen, and cycle between black and white states, with 
one “target square” 18 0° out of sync with the other 3  “distractor” squares. That is, the target square is black 
when the other 3 squares are white, and vice versa. The squares cycle between black and white at set 
experimental frequencies of 0.2, 0.5, 1, or 2 Hz. At slower rates, the target square should be easier to 
individuate and identify; at faster rates, individuation of the target square becomes more difficult. If subjects are 
able to individuate the targe t square, they should look a looking preference for that square, as measured by [CONTACT_700321]-tracker. A previous experiment in neurotypi[INVESTIGATOR_700290] X syndrome  (Farzin et al., 
2011) , a monogenic cause of autism, showed that TD infants we re better able to individuate the target square 
compared to FXS infants at frequencies of 0.5, 1, and [ADDRESS_950575] neither group differed from the chance condition at that frequency. The study also f ound, by [CONTACT_700322], that TD infants could resolve the target square at a rate of up to 1 Hz (1 
phase change per second), whereas FXS infants could only do so up to 0.5 Hz (1 phase change per 2 
seconds). Results from this experime nt will be useful to compare with the body of work on temporal resolution 
of attention in FXS, as both FXS and PMS are monogenic causes of autism.  
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/2016  Language will be measured using the Macarthur -Bates Communicative Development Inventory (MCDI; 
Fenson et al. , 1993; 2007)  and the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Communication Domain (Sparrow, 1984) ; 
repetitive behavior with the Repetitive Behavior Scale -Revised total score (RBS -R; Bodfish et al., 2000); 
sensory sensitivity and sensory seeking behavior using the Sens ory Profile (Dunn, 1999); Adaptive functioning 
using the Vineland Adaptive Behavior Composite (Sparrow, 1984); Caregiver strain using the Caregiver Strain 
Index (CSI; Brannan et al., 1997); global improvement will be measures using the Clinical Global Impr ession -
Improvement and Severity Scales (CGI -S; CGI -I; Guy, 1976) . All of the selected secondary measures have 
been previously validated as measurement tools in ASD populations and we aim to assess their utility in 
detecting change with oxytocin treatment i n PMS .  
Exploratory objective outcomes : Language Testing  will be performed with a combination of 
standardized measures that rely on parent/caregiver report, and objective, naturalistic assessments. [CONTACT_700338] -Flusberg co -chaired a working group assemb led by [CONTACT_700323] (NIDCD) which recommended using a combination of measures for improving 
language assessment and developi[INVESTIGATOR_700291] ( Tager -Flusberg et al., 2009). Two objective approaches can be taken with expressive natural 
language samples: verbatim transcription followed by [CONTACT_700324] (e.g., 
Systematic Analysis of Language Transcripts; Miller & Cha pman 2008) or automated technologies such as 
Language Environment Analysis ( LENA ). A recent study compared vocal production in 26 young children 
diagnosed mainly with Autistic Disorder to 78 typi[INVESTIGATOR_700292] a digital language processor 
(DLP) and LENA (Warren et al., 2010). Audio processing algorithms measured the amount of vocalizations 
produced during a 12 -hour period in the children’s natural environment. Significant differences in vocal 
production were found between groups and this st udy provides proof of concept that automated measurement 
can capture and distinguish speech -related and non -speech vocalizations in children with language delays and 
ASD. In addition, LENA measurements were positively correlated with previously validated p arent report 
measures (Warren et al., 2010), including the MCDI (Fenson et al., 1993; 2007)  which we intend to use as a 
secondary outcome . In the proposed study, LENA sampling will occur pre - and post -treatment during the semi -
structured ADOS -2 in the clin ic and during a 12 -hour time period in the child’s naturalistic home environment. 
Software quantifies and analyzes language output to count the number of times a child vocalizes during a 
given period and then filters out vegetative sounds such as respi[INVESTIGATOR_700293].  
Table 1: Outcome Measures  Baseline  Wk [ADDRESS_950576] -study  
Social:  
Visual Paired Comparison  
Group -Overlap Task  
Flicker Task  
ABC-SW subscale  
Social Orienting  Task   
X 
X 
X 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X 
X 
  
X 
X 
X 
X 
 
  
X 
X 
X 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X 
X 
  
X 
X 
X 
X 
  
X 
X 
X 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Language:  
LENA  
MCDI  
Vineland subscales   
X 
X 
X  
 
 
  
 
 
  
X 
X 
X  
 
 
  
 
 
  
X 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X 
Repetitive Behavior:  
Repetitive Behavior Scale   
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X  
X 
Other:  
Short Sensory Profile  
CGI Scales  
Caregiver Strain Index 
Vineland Behavior Composite  
Visual Analogue Scales  
Visual Evoked Potential 
Psychoeducational profile   
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
  
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X 
 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X  
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
X 
Social Attention  measurement will also be pi[INVESTIGATOR_700294] a Social Orienting Task (Dawson et al., 2004) 
as an exploratory outcome. Dawson and colleagues have developed the term “ social orienting impairment‟ 
which refers to the failure in children with ASD of orienting spontaneously to naturally occurring stimuli in their 
environment (Dawson et al., 1998). Impairments in joint attention and social orienting reflect core social defi cits 
and specifically differentiate young children with ASD from those without ASD (Ventola et al., 2007; Dawson et 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/2016  al., 2004). It has been suggested that early social attention deficits deprive children of social information input 
and lead to disrupted ne ural and behavioral development (Mundy & Neal, 2001). Failure of social orienting may 
represent one of the earliest and most fundamental social deficits in ASD (Dawson et al., 1998). In addition, 
social attention has been shown to be critical for the acqui sition of verbal and gestural communication 
(Carpenter et al., 1998) and possibly intellectual functioning (Poon et al., 2011). The proposed study will 
replicate the social orienting task developed by [CONTACT_700325] (2004). Orienting is defined as t urning 
the head or eyes toward an auditory stimulus and a series of four social (e.g., calling th e child‟s name) and 
four non -social (e.g., phone ringing) stimuli will be delivered three times each. A standard and familiar testing 
room will be used and the presence, latency, and duration of orienting (e.g., turning the head or eyes) will be 
measured b y trained coders through a one -way mirror and the use of video. We aim to explore the use of this 
measure and to assess its utility as an outcome measure sensitive to change with treatment.  
 Visual Evoked Potentials (VEPs) as measured by [CONTACT_25505] -channel el ectroencephalogram (EEG) will also 
be pi[INVESTIGATOR_700295]. VEPs offer a noninvasive electrophysiological technique that provides 
quantitative and objective information by [CONTACT_700326] ( EEG). VEPs assess the functional integrity of the visual pathways from the retina to the visual 
cortex via the optic nerve/optic radiations and are considered more effective than imaging techniques at 
obtaining quantitative evidence for neural dysfunction . They are thought to reflect the sum of excitatory and 
inhibitory postsynaptic potentials occurring on api[INVESTIGATOR_700296] (Creutzfeldt & Kuhnt, 1973; Purpura, 1959; Eccles, 1951) . Api[INVESTIGATOR_700297]. Therefore, an examination of GABAergic 
(inhibitory) and glutamatergic (excitatory) activity within the brains of children with neurodevelopme ntal 
disorders  may yield biomar kers for subtypes. VEPs are advantageous as they can be used on individuals of 
varying levels of functioning, including children who are intellectually disabled or nonverbal. VEPs have the 
potential to yield electrophysiological biomarkers and can be used to monitor the effects of 
psychopharmacological or behavioral interventions as has been demonstrated in previous literature. For the 
current study, VEPs will be administered using single -channel recording, which only requires three electrodes. 
In addition,  the study will utilize short -duration stimulations that have been adapted for use in this population. 
There will be no task demands during VEP recordings, with the exception of attending to the stimuli presented 
by [CONTACT_22123]. We aim to explore the use of t his measure and to assess its utility as an outcome measure 
sensitive to change with treatment.   
Psychoeducational Profile, Third Edition  (PEP -3, Pro -Ed 2005). The PEP -[ADDRESS_950577] testing and observation of child behavior across 
10 subtests. Six of the subtests meas ure developmental abilities (Cognitive Verbal/Preverbal, Expressive 
Language, Receptive Language, Fine Motor, Gross Motor, and Visual -Motor Imitation) and the other four 
measure maladaptive behavior (Affective Expression, Social Reciprocity, Characteristic  Motor Behavior, and 
Characteristic Verbal Behavior). From these subtests a Communication Composite, Motor Composite and 
Maladaptive Behaviors Composite can be derived. The second portion of the assessment is a Caregiver 
Report, which offers information ab out developmental level and severity across Problem Behaviors, Personal 
Self-Care, and Adaptive Behavior. The PEP -[ADDRESS_950578] 
treatment response.  
Adverse Events (AEs).  Monitoring AEs will be conducted during scheduled a nd unscheduled visits 
using an adapted semi -structured interview, the Safety and Monitoring Uniform Report Form (SMURF) every 
two weeks, and extensive clinical and laboratory assessments every four weeks (see Section on the Protection 
of Human Subjects). A Es will be carefully documented with respect to severity, duration, management, 
relationship to study drug, and outcome. Severity will be graded using a scale of mild, moderate, or severe.  
 Data Analysis : 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/[ADDRESS_950579] been enrolled. Based on the results of the 
interim analysis, the study will either continue to recruit to 40 individuals  or will end.  
General Modeling: Unless otherwise specified, we will fit a mixed longitudinal model with change from 
baseline to each post -baseline month for a response variable, treatment (oxytocin ver sus placebo) as the 
between -subjects factor, month as a within -subjects factor, their interaction, and baseline as a covariate. We 
will choose between two kinds of models: (1) a random coefficients model treating month continuously with 
random coefficients  for the intercept, slope, and slope squared, and an unstructured covariance matrix among 
them, and (2) an mixed model with repeated measures (MMRM) treating month categorically and examining 
unstructured, Toeplitz, AR(1), and compound symmetric covariance  structures among months. We will choose 
among these candidate models using an information criterion (AIC) while remaining blind to the significance of 
the treatment effect to avoid bias in the choice of model. Distributional assumptions will be examined u sing 
residuals. These mixed models could fail to converge or encounter difficulties based on their use of 
asymptotics. If they do, we will attempt to simplify the models in order to eliminate the problems, and if 
necessary, move to analyses that assume com pound symmetry, but use a Huynh -Feldt correction if compound 
symmetry fails.  
Missing Data:  The mixed models used to evaluate the continuous response variables are able to 
handle moderate amounts of missing data provided they are missing at random. We will  examine the missing 
at random assumption by [CONTACT_700327], as well as 
differences in response variables up to the point of premature withdrawal. If the missing at random assumption 
does not appear to be ten able, we will report the mixed models results but spend additional effort 
characterizing treatment effect at time of premature withdrawal. We will analyze each of the endpoints using 
the procedure described under general modeling and will use ABC -SW and th e combined social measure as 
the co -primary response variables, with the primary contrasts being the difference between treatment least 
squares means (LSMs) at month [ADDRESS_950580] these co -primary measures using a 
Bonferroni -corrected si gnificance level of 0.025 for each.  
 Sample Size and Statistical Power : Power estimates are based on a sample size of 40 individuals using 
baseline to week 12 change scores. Our Type I error rate ( α) was set at .[ADDRESS_950581] to demonstrate that oxytocin 
is associated with improvement on secondary  outcomes of social withdrawal , language delay, and repetitive 
behavior, as well as on functional outcomes of global severity and caregiver strain. If positive, results from this 
clinical trial will demonstrate potentially disease -modifying effects on core  and associated symptoms of ASD 
and may inform future trials.  
 Timeline and Milestones.  We will require three years to complete the study: six months for study 
preparation and [ADDRESS_950582] withdrawal; we will use the intent to treat principle so all 
randomized patients will be included in the data analysis. Second, c oncerns about recruitment feasibility must 
be raised with rare diseases. We have established an excellent working relationship with the national 
Foundation for affected families  and have already evaluated [ADDRESS_950583] be consid ered because the preliminary evidence is drawn from a preclinical rat model and 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/[ADDRESS_950584] selected a measurement tool (ABC) 
validated in developmentally delayed populations, sensitive to change w ith treatment, and reflective of the 
phenotype in our preliminary studies. Several secondary and exploratory outcomes will also be available for 
analysis and will provide meaningful data for future research should signal be detected elsewhere and not on 
the primary outcome. Standardized measures of receptive and expressive language (e.g., Vineland) that we 
use as part of our studies may not be sensitive to change in this intervention trial as standard error of 
measurement is approximately three months. For this reason, we have chosen an additional focus on 
measures of expressive language using natural language samples and objective measurement of language 
production in semi -structured and naturalistic settings.  
 Future directions . Future studies will refine  and characterize the phenotype using functional 
neuroimaging , prospectively studying the natural history of the disorder , and preparing for larger scale, multi -
centered clinical trials in PMS.  
Protection of Human Subjects  
Risks to the Subjects  
Participant s will undergo comprehensive medical evaluation by [CONTACT_15490]. Medical history, family 
history, physical, routine hematology and blood chemistry (including electrolytes, liver function, and prolactin),  
and electrocardiography will be performed t o determine eligibility for participation.  Prolactin will be followed 
due to oxytocin’s primary effects on milk let down and recent evidence that elevated prolactin levels may affect 
bone density and strength.  Patients will be monitored for safety at wee ks 4, 8, and 12 in both treatment 
phases, after 3 months of open -label treatment, and then again four weeks after treatment  completion using 
physical examination , routine hematology and blood chemistry including liver profile – see Table [ADDRESS_950585] that they require 24 -hour supervision, the likelihood of sexual 
activity is very, very low.  We will systematically elicit and document treatment emergent adverse effects, their 
severity and the clinician’s judgment about their relationship to treatment using the systematic longitudinal 
adverse effects instrument described in the Assessments section at every visit and during weekly phone calls. 
We will also tabulate all cases wher e a child withdrew from treatment due to adverse effects or inability to 
tolerate the nasal administration of oxytocin.  
 
There is a dearth of information about the safety of sustained use of oxytocin. There have not been any 
published studies on child and  adolescent populations using oxytocin. We will be using fairly small doses with 
the maximum dose of 24 IU twice daily. We will be monitoring intensively as described above.  
 
Oxytocin has been reported to exert a large number of effects in the body and th e brain (Gimpl & Fahrenholz 
2001). The classic physiological effects of oxytocin in humans as well as all placental mammals are uterine 
contractions and milk ejection. These are conclusively known to occur only under the hormonal conditions at 
the end of p regnancy and postpartum when oxytocin receptors proliferate in the uterus and mammary tissue 
and lactogenesis occurs. Theoretically, oxytocin administration could cause uterine contractions during phases 
of the menstrual cycle when estrogen levels are rela tively high or in women who are receiving estrogen. This, 
however, has never been demonstrated or reported. I ntravenous (IV)  administration of Oxytocin is FDA 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/[ADDRESS_950586] one report of life -threatening 
anaphylaxis during surgery when multiple drugs were being intravenously infused simultaneously (D. Pant, et 
al 2009). Symptoms that may result from anaphylaxis include generalized hives, itchiness, or flushing; crampy 
abdominal pain, diarrhea, and vomiting; a feeling of anxiety and impending doom; swelling of the lips, tongue, 
throat resulting in shortness of breath, wheezes or stridor, and low oxygen; a drop in blood pressure that may 
result in a feeling of lightheaded ness and loss of consciousness; reduced muscle tone with possible loss of 
bladder control; and, most seriously, coronary artery spasm may occur with subsequent myocardial infarction 
or cardiac dysrhythmia and possible death. There is also a report of psych osis occurring during oxytocin 
treatment although there are multiple ongoing pi[INVESTIGATOR_700298].  
 
It should be noted, however, that during a large number of research studies conducted over sev eral decades 
that collectively enrolled several hundred to a few thousand subjects (mostly men) who received a single high 
dose of oxytocin IV or intranasally (which produces very high blood concentrations), no medical complications 
were reported except fo r onset of psychotic symptoms in one subject (Ansseau et al ., 1987). The three adult 
studies of sustained oxytocin treatment conducted to date with doses ranging from 80 IU 4x/day for [ADDRESS_950587] not reported any significant side  effects associated with oxytocin.  
 
The potential stress, embarrassment and/or boredom associated with the psychological and behavioral 
assessments are considered to be minimal. Participants will be informed throughout the study that they may 
opt not to a nswer any question that they do not want to answer. Breaks will be taken as needed. There are 
risks to confidentiality with participation in any study of this kind; investigators will have access to subjects’ 
medical records and protected health informatio n.  
During laboratory blood draws the risks involved are pain, bruising, and rarely, infection at the location where 
the blood was taken.  
 
An internal Safety Monitoring Board will be convened and have primary responsibility for developi[INVESTIGATOR_700299]. The Safety Monitoring Board will be 
made up of [ADDRESS_950588] Risks  
Recruit ment and Informed Consent:   
The investigator will describe the protocol to potential subjects’ parents/guardians in person, although general 
information and assessment for eligibility can be carried out by [CONTACT_32627]. The Informed Consent may 
be read to the subjects’ parent /guardians, but, in any event, the investigator or designee shall give the 
subjects’ parents/guardians ample opportunity to inquire about details of the study and ask any questions 
before dating and signing the Informed Consent Form. The Informed Consent w ill be created with a level of 
language fully comprehensible to the prospective subjects’ parents/guardians. Informed consent will be 
documented by [CONTACT_2224] a written consent form approved by [CONTACT_659436]’ 
parents/guardian s and by [CONTACT_700328]. Each subject’s signed 
informed consent form will be kept on file by [CONTACT_32628]. 
The parents/guardians will receive a copy of the sign ed and dated written informed consent form and any other 
written information provided to the subjects’ parents/guardians, and will receive copi[INVESTIGATOR_32563]. Any amendments to the written information will be provided to pa rents/guardians.  
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/2016   
Ethics and Regulatory Considerations:  The study will be conducted according to Good Clinical Practice (GCP), 
the 1996 Declaration of Helsinki, and local rules and regulations of the [LOCATION_002].  
 
Confidentiality of Source Documents an d Study Data :  
A subject identification code will be used in lieu of the subject’s name [CONTACT_32645][INVESTIGATOR_700300]. All source documents and study data will be kept confidential, in accordance with all 
requirements of t he laws.  
 
Adverse Events  
Definition of an Adverse Event  
An adverse event (AE) will be defined as any untoward medical occurrence in a study subject, temporally 
associated with the use of the experimental medication, whether or not considered related to the medication. 
An adverse event can therefore be any unfavorable and unintended sign (including an abnormal laboratory 
finding), symptom, or disease (new or exacerbated) temporally associated with the use of the experimental 
medication. A serious adverse event (SAE) will be defined as an AE that meets any of the following criteria:  
 results in death;   
 is life threatening;   
 requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059];   
 results in a persistent or significant disability/incapacity;   
 any other adverse event that, based  upon appropriate medical judgment, may jeopardize the subject’s 
health and may require medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above.  
 
Adverse Events Reporting  
The Principal Investigator (PI) will be responsible for the de tection and documentation of events meeting the 
criteria and definition of an adverse event or serious adverse event, as provided in this protocol. During the 
study, when there is a safety evaluation, the investigator or team member will be responsible for  reporting 
adverse events and serious adverse events. Each subject’s parents/guardians will be instructed to contact [CONTACT_700329].  
 
Clinical laboratory parameters a nd other abnormal assessments qualifying as adverse events and serious 
adverse events  
Abnormal laboratory findings or other abnormal assessments that are judged by [CONTACT_700330] t he definition of an AE. Clinically significant abnormal 
laboratory findings or other abnormal assessments that are detected during the study or are present at 
baseline and significantly worsen following the start of the study will be reported as AEs or SAE s. The 
investigator will exercise his or her medical and scientific judgment in deciding whether an abnormal laboratory 
finding or other abnormal assessment is clinically significant.  
 
Medically attended visits  
For each AE the subject experiences, the su bject’s parents/guardians will be asked if they received medical 
attention defined as hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], an emergency room visit or a visit to or form medical personnel (medical 
doctor/doctor of osteopathy or nurse practitioner) for any reason. This informat ion will be recorded in the CRF.  
 
Lack of Efficacy  
Lack of efficacy per se will not be reported as an AE. The signs and symptoms or clinical sequelae resulting 
from lack of efficacy will be reported if they fulfill the AE or SAE definition.  
 
Time Period , Frequency, and Method of Detecting AEs  
All AEs occurring from the initiation of therapy until [ADDRESS_950589]’s CRF, irrespective of severity or whether or not they are considere d 
medication -related. Onset of chronic illness (e.g. autoimmune disorders, asthma, type 1 diabetes and allergies) 
and conditions prompting emergency room (ER) visits or physician office visits that are not related to well -child 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/2016  care, injury, or common acut e illnesses (e.g., upper respi[INVESTIGATOR_1092], otitis media, pharyngitis, and 
gastroenteritis) will be reported during the entire study period. The investigator will inquire about the 
occurrence of AEs at every visit/contact [CONTACT_700331] -up phase as appropriate. 
All AEs either observed by [CONTACT_1720] a clinical collaborator or reported by [CONTACT_423]’s 
parent/guardian spontaneously or in response to a direct question will be evaluated by [CONTACT_093]. AEs 
not previously documented in the study will be recorded in the Adverse Event form within the subject’s CRF. 
The nature of each event, date and time (where appropriate) of onset, outcome, intensity and relationship to 
drug administration should be established.  Details of any corrective treatment should be recorded on the 
appropriate page of the CRF.  
 
When an AE/SAE occurs, it will be the responsibility of the investigator to review all documentation (e.g., 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1088], laboratory, and diagnostic re ports) relative to the event. The investigator will then 
record all relevant information regarding an AE/SAE on the CRF or SAE Report Form as applicable. The 
investigator will attempt to establish a diagnosis of the event based on signs, symptoms, and/or o ther clinical 
information.  
 
Follow -up of Adverse Events and Serious Adverse Events and Assessment of Outcome:   
After the initial AE/SAE report, the investigator will actively follow each subject and provide further information 
on the subject’s condition. All AEs and SAEs documented at a previous visit/contact [CONTACT_479736]/not resolved or recove ring/resolving will be reviewed at subsequent visits/contacts. Investigators will 
follow -up subjects with SAEs or subjects withdrawn from the study as a result of an AE, until the event has 
resolved, subsided, stabilized, disappeared, the event is otherwis e explained, or the subject is lost to follow -up. 
In the case of other non -serious AEs, until they complete the study or they are lost to follow -up. Clinically 
significant laboratory abnormalities will be followed until they have returned to normal, or a s atisfactory 
explanation has been provided. The investigator may perform or arrange for the conduct of supplemental 
measurements and/or evaluations to elucidate as fully as possible the nature and/or causality of the AE or 
SAE.  
 
Regulatory Reporting Requir ements for Serious Adverse Events:   
All safety data will be reported to Safety Monitoring Board and IRB every six months, or, in the case of any 
major safety concern or question, immediately. If any study stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_32544], this will be reported 
immediately, and the study will be h alted, pending review by [CONTACT_700332]. The investigator has a legal 
responsibility to promptly notify, as appropriate, both the local regulatory authority and other regulatory 
agencies about the safety of a product under clinical investigation. Prompt no tification of SAEs by [CONTACT_700333]. The investigator, or responsible person according to 
local requirem ents, will comply with the applicable local regulatory requirements related to the reporting of 
SAEs to regulatory authorities and the IRB.  
 
Safety Measures  
Patients will be monitored for safety at weeks 4, 8, and 12 in both treatment phases and then aga in four weeks 
after treatment completion using physical examination (including anthropometric measurements, 
otolaryngological  exam , vital signs , routine hematology and blood chemistry including electrolytes, liver 
function, and prolactin) – see Table 2.  In addition, a neurological exam will be performed at baseline, Week 12 
and Week 24. Tolerability will be m onitored during visits at weeks  4, 8, and 12 in both treatment phases. There 
are a number of tertiary outcomes designed to monitor the safety of oxytoci n (see Tables 1 and 2). For each of 
the safety measures, the Safety Monitoring Board will establish a priori criteria for termination of the 
intervention (see Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_254357]).  
 
Monitoring for AEs will be conducted during scheduled and unscheduled vis its per clinical and laboratory 
assessments. If a subject develops significant neurological signs and symptoms (e.g. cerebrovascular event), 
they will be seen immediately for a comprehensive evaluation, appropriate treatment, and removal from active 
partic ipation in the study. We will also apply criteria for attribution of AEs by [CONTACT_700334].  
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/2016   unrelated to treatment 1  
 unlikely related to treatment 2  
 possibly related to treatment 3  
 probably related to treatment 4  
 definite ly related to treatment [ADDRESS_950590] in the oxytocin  study:  
 Withdrawal of Consent   
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_32542] (Safety Monitoring Board, IRB) believe withdrawal is necessary for the 
subject’s health, well -being, or best interests.   
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_32557]’s health, well -being, 
or best interests   
 Laboratory: any abnormality on any test with adverse event (AE, Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events, National Cancer Institute, scales) ≥ 3 or greater at any time in the study   
 Any AE of any sort (clinical, laboratory) ≥ [ADDRESS_950591]’s safety, the default mode will 
be withdrawal from treatment or active study participation, followed by [CONTACT_32621] (safet y follow up 
visits) and recommendation of standard treatment.  
 
Return of a subject to active study participation will not be permitted, except if a transient clinical or laboratory 
abnormality unrelated to study treatment has occurred and subsequent permi ssion of the Safety Monitoring 
Board to return the patient to active study has been provided.  
 
If a subject is withdrawn from active study during screening or observation phases of the study, they will be 
returned to the referring physician and standard c are will be recommended; in addition we will request the 
subject’s participation in an end -of-study visit.  
 
If a subject is wit hdrawn from active study during oxytocin  treatment, they will also be returned to the referring 
physician and standard care will  be recommended; however, in this case, we will in addition request the 
subject’s participation in clinical and laboratory safety assessments and follow up per protocol schedule.  
 
Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_32558] a Whole  
The study will be halted* if two patients experience stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_19944]. (Exceptions for this criterion: Patients 
who withdraw voluntarily for reasons not directly related to or intrinsic to the study, e.g. incidental 
considerations such as concerns about travel time to study visits, une xpected pregnancy in the family, etc. 
Clearly, patients who experie nce adverse effects during oxytocin  treatment would count towards this criterion 
for whole study stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007]).  
 
In addition, the study will be halted if one patient experiences a serious rela ted adverse effect (grade ≥ 4 AE).  
 
All safety data will be reported to the Safety Monitoring Board and IRB every six months, or, in the case of any 
major safety concern or question, immediately. If any study stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_32544], this will be report ed 
immediately and the study halted, pending review by [CONTACT_32598], and until the 
decision by [CONTACT_32599], suspend or close the study has been made.  
 
*Operationally, “halting” will ordinarily mean that no furth er screening of new subjects and no treatment 
initiation will occur until the safety issue has been investigated and resolved (i.e., a final decision has been 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/2016  made to resume, suspend or close the study has been made). Enrolled study participants who have n o new 
symptoms or adverse effects will ordinarily be allowed to continue study observation or treatment without 
interruption while the safety issue is being investigated, unless it is the contemporaneous judgment of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_700301], in which case all 
observation or treatment interventions will be suspended forthwith.  
 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/[ADDRESS_950592]-study  
Physical exam  X X X X X X X X 
Neurological exam  X   X   X  
Electrocardiography  X   X   X X ** 
Pregnancy test  X   X   X X 
Height  X X X X X X X X 
Weight  X X X X X X X X 
Vital signs  X X X X X X X X 
Side effect monitoring*  X X X X X X X X 
 
*In additi on to the above in -person visits, side effect monitoring will also occur  at Week 2 and Week 14 (after 
the first two weeks in each phase)  or at any time throughout the study should side effects emerge.  
 
** To be completed only if EKG at Week 24 was abnorma l.  
 
Table 2. Laboratory Safety Measures  
 
Measures  Screening  Wk 12  Wk 24  
Electrolytes (Na, K, Cl, CO2)  X X X 
Renal function (BUN/Cr)  X X X 
Glucose  X X X 
Liver function (AST/ALT)  X X X 
Prolactin  X X X 
 
 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/2016   
INCLUSION OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES  
The Seaver Autism Center has had great success in recruiting subjects for ongoing studies and receives over 
600 new referrals each year for research and/or clinical services. Of the individuals referred, approximately 
55% are white, 23% are African American, 13% are Hispanic, 5% are Asian, and 3% are other ethnicities. PMS 
is a rare condition and we anticipate that referrals will come primarily through the national Phelan -McDermid 
Syndrome Foundation (PMSF) which has an adequate number of families to support our recru itment needs. 
Estimates of demographic statistics are available from the PMSF database:  43% are males and 57% are 
females 89.4% are Caucasian, 2.2% are African American, 2.2% are Asian, and 6.2% are Hispanic. Among 
the 45 cases of PMS  evaluated to date a t our Center, the gender ratio is 58% males and 41% females; 96% 
are White and 4% are Asian; 98% are non -Hispanic and 2% are Hispanic.  
 
Inclusion of Women:  There will be no exclusion based on gender. Based on patients with PMS  evaluated to 
date at our Ce nter, the gender ratio is 5 8% males and 41% females . Autism in general is disproportionately 
present in males compared to females at a ratio of 4:1. Active recruitment efforts in the past have ensured the 
inclusion of appropriate numbers of participants fr om each gender. In three recently completed double -blind, 
placebo controlled trials in children and adolescents with autism, approximately 20% of the final sample were 
female patients. Every effort will be made to include a representative number of females .  
 
Inclusion of Minorities : There will be no exclusion based on minority status. Our center has demonstrated the 
ability to recruit adequate minority participation in child and adult autism research. In a recent child autism 
clinical trial in our center, the final sample consisted of approximately 32% minority participants including 
Hispanic, Black, and Asian individuals. Among the 45 cases of SHANK3 deficiency evaluated to date at our 
Center, 96% are White and 4% is Asian; 98% are non -Hispanic and 2% is H ispanic.  There are limitations given 
the rare nature of SHANK3  deficiency, but every effort will be made to include a representative sample of 
minorities.  
 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/[ADDRESS_950593] (Kolevzon) and a pediatric neurologist (Frank).   
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/2016   
REFERENCES  
 
Achenbach, T.M., & Res corla, L.A. (2000).  Manual for the ASEBA Preschool forms and  Profiles.  Burlington, 
VT: University of Vermont Department of Psychiatry.  
 
Aghdaee SM, Cavanagh P. Temporal limits of long -range phase discrim - ination across the visual field. Vis 
Res 2007; 47:  2156 –63.  
Aman MG, Singh NN, Stewart AW, Field CJ. The aberrant behavior checklist: a behavior rating scale for the 
assessment of treatment effects. Am J Ment Defic. 1985 Mar;89(5):485 -91. 
 
Aman MG, De Smedt G, Derivan A, Lyons B, Findling RL; Risperidone  Disruptive Behavior Study Group. 
Double -blind, placebo -controlled study of risperidone for the treatment of disruptive behaviors in children with 
subaverage intelligence. Am J Psychiatry. 2002 Aug;159(8):1337 -46. 
 
Aman, M.G. (2010, June Update). Annotated  Biography on the Aberrant Behavior Checklist (ABC). Unpub - 
lished Manuscript. Columbus, OH: The Ohio State University.  
 
American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. 4th ed. 1994, Wash - 
ington, D.C.  
 
Anagnostou E , Soorya L, Chaplin W, et al. Intranasal oxytocin versus placebo in the treatment of adults with 
autism spectrum disorders: a randomized controlled trial. Mol Autism. 2012;3(1):16.  
 
Ansseau M, Legros JJ, Mormont C, et al. Intranasal oxytocin in obsessive -compulsive disorder. 
Psychoneuroendocrinology. 1987;12(3):[ADDRESS_950594] of theory of mind: evidence from 
very high functioning adults with autism or asperger syndrome. J Child Psychol Psyc hiatry. 1997;38(7):813 -22. 
 
Barraza JA, Grewal NS, Ropacki S, Perez P, Gonzalez A, Zak PJ. Effects of a 10 -day oxytocin trial in older 
adults on health and well -being. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 2013;21(2):85 -92. 
 
Battelli L, Pascual -Leone A, Cavanagh P. Th e ‘when’ pathway of the right parietal lobe. Trends Cognit Sci 
2007; 11: 204 –10.  
Battelli L, Walsh V, Pascual -Leone A, Cavanagh P. The ‘when’ parietal pathway explored by [CONTACT_700335]. 
Curr Opin Neurobiol 2008; 18: 120 –6.  
Bielsky IF, Young LJ. Oxytocin, vasopressin, and social recognition in mammals. Peptides. 2004;25(9):[ADDRESS_950595] RJ. Innate and conditioned reactions to threat in rats with amygdaloid lesions. J 
Comp Physiol Psychol. 1972;81(2):281 -90. 
 
Bodfish JW, Symons FJ, Parker DE, Lewis MH. Varieties of repetitive behavior in autism: comparisons to men - 
tal retardation. J Autism Dev Disord. 2000 Jun;30(3):237 -43. 
 
Boeckers, TM, The postsynaptic density. Cell Tissue Res., 2006. 362: p. 409 -22. 
 
Bonaglia MC, Giorda R, Borgatti R, Felisari G, Gagliardi C, Selicorni A, Zuffardi O. Disruption of the ProSAP2 
gene in a t(12;22)(q24.1;q13.3) is associated with the 22q13.3 deletion syndrome. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 
Aug;69(2):261 -8. Epub 2001 Jun 18.  
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/2016   
Bonaglia, MC, Giorda, R, Mani, E, Aceti, G, Anderlid, BM, Barconcini, A, Pramparo, T, and Zuffardi, O, Identifi - 
catio n of a recurrent breakpoint within the SHANK3 gene in the 22q13.3 deletion syndrome. J Med Genet., 
2006. 10: p. 822 -8. 
 
Bonaglia, M. C., R. Giorda, et al. (2011). "Molecular mechanisms generating and stabilizing terminal 22q13 
deletions in 44 subjects with  Phelan/McDermid Syndrome." PLoS Genet 7(7): e1002173.  
 
Bozdagi, O, Sakurai, T, Papapetrou, D, Wang, X, Dickstein, DL, Takahashi, N, Kajiwara, Y, Yang, M, Katz, 
AM, Scattoni, ML, Harris, MJ, Saxena, R, Silverman, JL, Crawley, JN, Zhou, Q, Hof, PR, and Buxb aum, JD, 
Halpoinsufficiency of the autism -associated SHANK3 gene leads to deficits in synaptic function, social interac - 
tion, and social communication. Mol Autism., 2010: 1 -15 
 
Bradshaw J, Shic F, Chawarska K. Brief report: face -specific recognition defic its in young children with autism 
spectrum disorders. J Autism Dev Disord. 2011;41(10):1429 -35. 
 
Brannan AM, Heflinger CA, Bickman L. The caregiver strain questionnaire: Measuring the impact of the family 
of living with a child with serious emotional disor ders. Journal of Emotional and Behavioral Disorders. 
1997;5:212 –222. 
 
Brown EC, Aman MG, Havercamp SM. Factor analysis and norms for parent ratings on the Aberrant Behavior 
Checklist -Community for young people in special education. Res Dev Disabil. 2002 Ja n-Feb;23(1):45 -60. 
 
Bryson S, Landry R, Czapi[INVESTIGATOR_61222] P, McConnell B, Rombough V, Wainwright A. Autistic spectrum disorders: 
Causal mechanisms and recent findings on attention and emotion. International Journal of Special Education. 
2004; 19:1: 14 -22. 
 
Bussey TJ, Holmes A, Lyon L, et al. New translational assays for preclinical modelling of cognition in 
schizophrenia: the touchscreen testing method for mice and rats. Neuropharmacology. 2012;62(3):1191 -203. 
 
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Soc ial cognition, joint attention, and communicative compe - 
tence from 9 to 15 months of age. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 63(4,  
Serial No. 255), 1 –143. 
 
Charman, T, Drew, A, Baird, C, and Baird, G, Measuring early language dev elopment in preschool children 
with autism spectrum disorder using the MacArthur Communicative Development Inventory. Journal of Child 
Language., 2003. 30: p. 213 -36. 
 
Chawarska K, Volkmar F. Impairments in monkey and human face recognition in 2 -year-old toddlers with 
Autism Spectrum Disorder and Developmental Delay. Dev Sci. 2007;10(2):266 -79. 
 
Choleris E, Clipperton -allen AE, Phan A, Kavaliers M. Neuroendocrinology of social information processing in 
rats and mice. Front Neuroendocrinol. 2009;30(4):442 -59. 
 
Condouris, K, Meyer E, Tager -Flusberg H. (2003)The relationship between standardized measures of lan - 
guage and measures of spontaneous speech in children with autism. American Journal of Speech -Language 
Pathology, 12: 349 -358. 
 
Constantino JN. (2002). The Social Responsiveness Scale. Los Angeles: Western Psychological Services.  
 
Creutzfeldt OD, Kuhnt U. 1973. Electrophysiology and topographical distribution of visual evoked potentials in 
animals.  In Handbook of Sensory Physiology , ed. R Jung. Berlin: S pringer Verlag.  
 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/2016  Dadds MR, Macdonald E, Cauchi A, Williams K, Levy F, Brennan J. Nasal oxytocin for social deficits in 
childhood autism: a randomized controlled trial. J Autism Dev Disord. 2014;44(3):521 -31. 
 
Dawson, G, Rogers, S, Munson, J, Smith, M, Wint er, J, Greenson, J, Donaldson, A, Varley, J, Randomized 
controlled trial of an intervention for toddlers with autism: the early start denver model. Pediatricts., 2009. 125: 
p. 17 -23. 
 
Dawson G, Toth K, Abbott R, Osterling J, Munson J, Estes A, Liaw J. Earl y social attention impairments in aut - 
ism: social orienting, joint attention, and attention to distress. Dev Psychol. 2004 Mar;40(2):271 -83. 
 
Dawson, G., Meltzoff, A. N., Osterling, J., Rinaldi, J., & Brown, E. (1998). Children with autism fail to orient to 
naturally occurring social stimuli. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders, 28, 479 –485. 
 
Domes G, Heinrichs M, Kumbier E, Grossmann A, Hauenstein K, Herpertz SC. Effects of intranasal oxytocin 
on the neural basis of face processing in autism spe ctrum disorder. Biol Psychiatry. 2013;74(3):164 -71. 
 
Durand, CM, Betancur, C, Boeckers, TM, Bockmann, J, Chaste, P, Fauchereau, F, Nygren, G, Rastam, M, 
Gillberg, IC, Anckars �ter, H, Sponheim, E, Goubran -Botros, H, Delorme, R, Chabane, N, Mouren -Simeoni, 
MC, deMas, P, Bieth, E, Rog �, B, H�ron, D, Burglen,  L, Gillberg, C, Leboyer, M, and Bourgeron, T, Mutations 
in the gene encoding the synaptic scaffolding protein SHANK3 are associated with autism spectrum disorders. 
Nature Genetics., 2007. 39: p. 25 -7. 
 
Dunn, W. 1999. Sensory Profile, The Psychological Cor poration  
 
Eccles JC. 1951. Interpretation of action potentials evoked in the cerebral cortex. Electroencephalogr Clin  
Neurophysiol  3: 449 -64  
 
Elison JT, Paterson SJ, Wolff JJ, et al. White matter microstructure and atypi[INVESTIGATOR_700302] 7 -month -
olds at risk for autism. Am J Psychiatry. 2013;170(8):899 -908. 
 
Elsabbagh M, Fernandes J, Jane webb S, et al. Disengagement of visual attention in infancy is associated with 
emerging autism in toddlerhood. Biol Psychiatry. 2013;74(3):189 -94. 
 
Fagan JF, Hollan d CR, Wheeler K. The prediction, from infancy, of adult IQ and achievement. Intelligence 
2007; 35: 225 –31.  
 
Farzin F, Rivera SM. Dynamic Object Representations in Infants with and without Fragile X Syndrome. Front 
Hum Neurosci. 2010;4:12.  
 
Farzin F, River a SM, Whitney D. Resolution of spatial and temporal visual attention in infants with fragile X 
syndrome. Brain. 2011;134(Pt 11):3355 -68. 
 
Farzin F, Rivera SM, Whitney D. Time crawls: the temporal resolution of infants' visual attention. Psychol Sci. 
2011;2 2(8):1004 -10. 
 
Fenson, L, Dale, PS, Reznick, JS, Thal, DJ, Bates, E, Hartung, JP, Pethick, S, Reilly, JS, (1993) MacArthur 
communicative development inventories: user’s guide and technical manual. Baltimore: Paul H. Brokes Pub - 
lishing Co.  
 
Fenson, L, Marc hman, VA, Thal, DJ, Dale, PS, Reznick, JS, Bates, E, (2007) MacArthur -Bates communicative 
development inventories: user’s guide and technical manual (2nd ed.) Baltimore: Paul H. Brooks Publishing 
Co. 
 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/[ADDRESS_950596] -Onge, J, Lapointe, L, Hamdan, FF, Cos - 
sette, P, Mottron, L, Fombonne, E, Joober, R, Marineau, C, Drapeau, P, and Rouleau, GA, Novel de novo 
SHANK3 mutation in autistic patients. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet., 2009. 150: 421 -4. 
 
Goldberg MC, Lasker AG, Zee DS, Garth E, Tien A, Landa RJ. Deficits in the initiation of eye movements in 
the absence of a visual target in adolescents with high functioning autism. Neuropsychologia. 
2002;40(12):2039 -49. 
 
 
Guastella AJ, Gray KM, Rinehart NJ, et al. The effects of a course of intranasal oxytocin on social behaviors in 
youth diagnosed with autism spectrum disorders: a randomized controlled trial. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 
2014;  
 
Guastella AJ, Einfeld SL, Gray KM, et al. Intranasal oxytocin imp roves emotion recognition for youth with 
autism spectrum disorders. Biol Psychiatry. 2010;67(7):692 -4. 
 
Gillberg, C, Steffenburg, S, and Jakobsson, G, Neurobiological findings in 20 relatively gifted children with 
kanner -type autism or asperger syndrome. D evelopmental Medicine and Child Neurology., 1987. 5: p. [ADDRESS_950597], G. and F. Fahrenholz (2001). "The Oxytocin Receptor System: Structure, Function, and Regulation." 
Physiological Reviews 81(2): 629 -683. 
 
Guilmatre, A., C. Dubourg, et al. (2009). "Recu rrent rearrangements in synaptic and neurodevelopmental 
genes and shared biologic pathways in schizophrenia, autism, and mental retardation." Arch Gen Psychiatry 
66(9): 947 -956. 
 
Gur R, Tendler A, Wagner S. Long -term social recognition memory is mediated b y oxytocin -dependent 
synaptic plasticity in the medial amygdala. Biol Psychiatry. 2014;76(5):377 -86. 
 
Guy W: ECDEU Assessment Manual for Psychopharmacology —Revised (DHEW Publ No ADM 76 -338). 
Rockville, MD, U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare , Public Health Service, Alcohol, Drug 
Abuse, and Mental Health Administration, NIMH Psychopharmacology Research Branch, Division of Extra - 
mural Research Programs, 1976, pp 218 –222 
 
Hall SS, Lightbody AA, Mccarthy BE, Parker KJ, Reiss AL. Effects of intra nasal oxytocin on social anxiety in 
males with fragile X syndrome. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2012;37(4):509 -18. 
 
Hollander E, Bartz J, Chaplin W, et al. Oxytocin increases retention of social cognition in autism. Biol 
Psychiatry. 2007;61(4):498 -503. 
 
Holla nder E, Novotny S, Hanratty M, et al. Oxytocin infusion reduces repetitive behaviors in adults with autistic 
and Asperger's disorders. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2003;28(1):193 -8. 
 
Insel TR. The challenge of translation in social neuroscience: a review of ox ytocin, vasopressin, and affiliative 
behavior. Neuron. 2010;65(6):768 -79. 
 
King BH, Hollander E, Sikich L, McCracken JT, Scahill L, Bregman JD, Donnelly CL, Anagnostou E, Dukes K, 
Sullivan L, Hirtz D, Wagner A, Ritz L; STAART Psychopharmacology Network. La ck of efficacy of citalopram in 
children with autism spectrum disorders and high levels of repetitive behavior: citalopram ineffective in children 
with autism. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2009, Jun;66(6):583 -90. 
 
Landry R, Bryson SE. Impaired disengagement of att ention in young children with autism. J Child Psychol 
Psychiatry. 2004;45(6):1115 -22. 
 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/2016  Lam KS, Aman MG. The Repetitive Behavior Scale -Revised: independent validation in individuals with autism 
spectrum disorders. J Autism Dev Disord. 2007 May;37(5):[ADDRESS_950598] C, Rutter M, Goode S, Heemsbergen J, Jordan H, Mawhood L, Schopler E. Autism diagnostic observa - 
tion schedule: a standardized observation of communicative and social behavior. J Autism Dev Disord. 1989 
Jun;19(2):[ADDRESS_950599] C, Risi S, Lambrecht L, Cook EH Jr, Leventhal BL, DiLavore PC, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_1321] A, Rutter M. The autism diag - 
nostic observation schedule -generic: a standard measure of social and communication deficits associated with 
References Cited Page [ADDRESS_950600] C, Rutter M, Le Couteur A. Autism Di agnostic Interview -Revised: a revised version of a diagnostic inter - 
view for caregivers of individuals with possible pervasive developmental disorders. J Autism Dev Disord. [ADDRESS_950601];24(5):[ADDRESS_950602], C, Characterizing communic ative development in children referred for autism 
spectrum disorder using the MacArthur -Bates Communicative Development Inventory (CDI). J Child Lang., 
2007. 34(3): p. 623 -54. 
 
Marchetto MC, Carromeu C, Acab A, Yu D, Yeo GW, Mu Y, Chen G, Gage FH, Muotri A R. A model for neural 
development and treatment of Rett syndrome using human induced pluripotent stem cells. Cell. 2010 Nov 
12;143(4):[ADDRESS_950603] J, 
McDougle CJ,  Posey D, Swiezy N, Kohn A, Scahill L, Martin A, Koenig K, Volkmar F, Carroll D, Lancor A, 
Tierney E, Ghuman J, Gonzalez NM, Grados M, Vitiello B, Ritz L, Davies M, Robinson J, McMahon D; Re - 
search Units on Pediatric Psychopharmacology Autism Network. Ris peridone in children with autism and 
serious behavioral problems. N Engl J Med. 2002 Aug 1;347(5):314 -21. 
 
Meyer -lindenberg A, Domes G, Kirsch P, Heinrichs M. Oxytocin and vasopressin in the human brain: social 
neuropeptides for translational medicine. Nat  Rev Neurosci. 2011;12(9):524 -38. 
 
Miller J. and Chapman R. (2008). Systematic Analysis of Language Transcripts (SALT) [Computer software]. 
Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin -Madison, Waisman Center.  
 
Moessner, R, Marshall, CR, Sutcliffe, JS, Skaug, J, P into, D, Vincent, J, Zwaigenbaum, L, Fernandez, B, Ro - 
berts, W, Szatmari, P, and Scherer, SW, Contribution of SHANK3 mutations to autism spectrum disorder. Am J 
Hum Genet., 2007. 81: p. 1289 -97 
 
Mullen, E. (1989). Mullen Scales of Early Learning. Circle P ines, MN: American Guidance Service.  
 
Mundy, P., & Neal, R. (2001). Neural plasticity, joint attention and a transactional social -orienting model of aut - 
ism. In L. Glidden (Ed.), International review of research in mental retardation: Vol. 23. Autism (pp.  139–168). 
[LOCATION_001]: Academic Press.  
 
Nishijima T, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700303] J, Duflot S, Fernandez AM, Gaitan G, Gomez -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_210533] U, Verdugo JM, Leroy F, Soya H, 
Nu�ez A, Torres -Aleman I. Neuronal activity drives localized blood -brain -barrier transport of serum insulin -like 
growth factor -I into the CNS. Neuron. 2010 Sep 9;67(5):834 -46. 
 
O'Kusky JR, Ye P, D'Ercole AJ. Insulin -like growth factor -I promotes neurogenesis and synaptogenesis in the 
hippocampal dentate gyrus during postnatal development. J Neurosci. 2000 Nov 15;20(22): 8435 -42. 
 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/2016  Oller, DK, Niyogi, P, Gray, S, Richards, JA, Gilkerson, J, Xu, D, Yapanel, U, Warren, SF, Automated vocal 
analysis of naturalistic recordings from children with autism, language delay, and typi[INVESTIGATOR_146386]. Pro - 
ceedings of the National Academ y of Sciences of the [LOCATION_002] of America., 2010. 27: p. [ZIP_CODE] -[ZIP_CODE].  
 
Oomen CA, Hvoslef -eide M, Heath CJ, et al. The touchscreen operant platform for testing working memory 
and pattern separation in rats and mice. Nat Protoc. 2013;8(10):[ADDRESS_950604], R, Hansen, R, Hertz -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_32570], I, The onset of autism: patterns of symptom emer - 
gence in the first years of life. Autism Research., 2008. 1(6): p. 320 -28. 
 
Pant D, Vohra VK, Pandey SS, Sood J. Pulseless electrical activity during c aesarean delivery under spi[INVESTIGATOR_700304]: a case report of severe anaphylactic reaction to Syntocinon. Int J Obstet Anesth. 2009;18(1):85 -
8. 
 
Phelan MC, Thomas GR, Saul RA, Rogers RC, Taylor HA, Wenger DA, McDermid HE. Cytogenetic, biochemi - 
cal, and mol ecular analyses of a 22q13 deletion. Am J Med Genet. 1992 Jul 15;43(5):872 -6. 
 
Phelan MC, Rogers RC, Saul RA, Stapleton GA, Sweet K, McDermid H, Shaw SR, Claytor J, Willis J, Kelly 
DP. 22q13 deletion syndrome. Am J Med Genet. 2001 Jun 15;101(2):91 -9. 
 
Phelan, MC, Deletion 22q13.3 syndrome. Orphanet J Rare Dis., 2008. 3: p. [ADDRESS_950605] Later Communication and Intellectual Functioning i n ASD? J Autism Dev Disord. 
[ADDRESS_950606]. Effects of parietal injury on covert orienting of attention. J 
Neurosci. 1984;4(7):1863 -74. 
 
Purpura DP, Chatfield PO. 1953. Changes in action potentials of single phre nic motor neurons during activity.  
Journal of neurophysiology  16: 85 -92 
 
Research Units on Pediatric Psychopharmacology Autism Network. Randomized, controlled, crossover trial of 
methylphenidate in pervasive developmental disorders with hyperactivity. Arc h Gen Psychiatry. 2005a 
Nov;62(11):1266 -74. 
 
Research Units on Pediatric Psychopharmacology Autism Network. Risperidone treatment of autistic disorder: 
longer -term benefits and blinded discontinuation after 6 months. Am J Psychiatry. 2005b Jul;162(7):1361 -9. 
 
Rinehart NJ, Bradshaw JL, Moss SA, Brereton AV, Tonge BJ. A deficit in shifting attention present in high -
functioning autism but not Asperger's disorder. Autism. 2001;5(1):67 -80. 
 
Rogers, SJ, Vismara, LA, Evidence -based comprehensive treatments for ear ly autism. Journal of Clinical Child 
and Adolescent Psychology., 2008. 37(1): p. 8 -38. 
 
Rose SA, Djukic A, Jankowski JJ, Feldman JF, Fishman I, Valicenti -mcdermott M. Rett syndrome: an eye -
tracking study of attention and recognition memory. Dev Med Child N eurol. 2013;55(4):[ADDRESS_950607] year of life: a longitudinal 
study of preterm and full -term infants. Dev Psychol. 2001;37(1):135 -51. 
 
Rose SA, Feldman JF, Jankowski JJ. Infant visual  recognition memory: independent contributions of speed 
and attention. Dev Psychol. 2003;39(3):563 -71. 
 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/2016  Rose SA, Feldman JF, Jankowski JJ. Information processing in toddlers: continuity from infancy and 
persistence of preterm deficits. Intelligence 2009; 37: 311 –20.  
 
Rose SA, Feldman JF, Jankowski JJ, Van Rossem R. Basic information processing abilities at 11 years 
account for deficits in IQ associated with preterm birth. Intelligence 2011; 39: 198 –209.  
 
Rosenfeld, J. A., B. C. Ballif, et al. (2010). "Copy number variations associated with autism spectrum disorders 
contribute to a spectrum of neurodevelopme ntal disorders." Genet Med 12(11): 694 -702. 
 
Roussignol, G, Ango, F, Romorini, S, Tu, JC, Sala, C, Worley, PF, Bockaert, J, and F, L, Shank expression is 
sufficient to induce functional dendritic spi[INVESTIGATOR_700305]. The Journal of Neuroscienc e., 2005. 
25: p. 3560 -3570.  
 
Sacrey LA, Armstrong VL, Bryson SE, Zwaigenbaum L. Impairments to visual disengagement in autism 
spectrum disorder: a review of experimental studies from infancy to adulthood. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 
2014;47:559 -77. 
 
Schaaf, C. P., A. Sabo, et al. (2011). "Oligogenic heterozygosity in individuals with high functioning autism 
spectrum disorders." Hum Mol Genet 20(17): 3366 -3375.  
 
Sigafoos, J., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700306], N., & Pennell, D. (1997). Parent and teacher ratings of challenging behavi our in 
young children with developmental disabilities.British Journal of Learning Disabilities, 25, 13 -17. 
 
Sparrow, SS, Balla, DA, and Cicchetti, DV, Vineland adaptive behaviour scales: a revision of the vineland so - 
cial maturity scale by [CONTACT_700336] A. Doll. Circle -Pi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], MN: American Guidance Service., 1984.  
 
Swettenham, J., Baron -Cohen, S., Charman, T., Cox, A., Baird, G., Drew, A., et al. (1998). The frequency and 
distribution of spontaneous attention shifts between social and nonsocial stimuli in autistic,  typi[INVESTIGATOR_241830], 
and nonautistic developmentally delayed infants. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 39, 747 –753. 
 
Tachibana M, Kagitani -shimono K, Mohri I, et al. Long -term administration of intranasal oxytocin is a safe and 
promising thera py for early adolescent boys with autism spectrum disorders. J Child Adolesc 
Psychopharmacol. 2013;23(2):[ADDRESS_950608], C, Paul, R, Rice, M, Stoel -Gammon, C, Wetherby, 
A, Yoder, P, Defining spoken language benchmarks and selecting measures of expressive language develop - 
ment for young children with autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Speech Language and Hearing Research., 
2009. 52: p. [ADDRESS_950609], C, McCurry, C, Fu , DD, Flannery, R, Jaenisch, R, and Sur, M, 
Partial reversal of rett syndrome -like symptoms in MeCP2 mutant mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci [LOCATION_003]., 2009. 106: 
p. [ADDRESS_950610] JN, Kemner C, Camfferman G, Verbaten MN, Van engeland H. Eye movements, visual 
attention, and autism: a saccadic reaction time study using the gap and overlap paradigm. Biol Psychiatry. 
2001;50(8):[ADDRESS_950611]. 2007 Mar;37(3):425 -36. 
 
A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_700276] -McDermid Syndrome.                PI: [INVESTIGATOR_700277], A  
Version date: 4/20/2016  Warlaumont, AS, Lee, HC , Benayoun, M, Stevens, RL, Herald, M, Systematic comparison of the behaviors 
produced by [CONTACT_700337][INVESTIGATOR_700307]. Journal of Clinical Neurophysiology., 2010. 27(6): p. 
479-83. 
 
Warren SF, Gilkerson, J, Richards, JA, Oller, DK, Xu, D, Y apanel, U, Gray, S, What automated vocal analysis 
reveals about the vocal production and language learning environment of young children with autism. Journal 
of Autism and Developmental Disorders., 2010. 40: p. 555 -69. 
 
Wang X, McCoy PA, Rodriguiz RM, Pan Y, Je HS, Roberts AC, Kim CJ, Berrios J, Colvin JS, Bousquet -Moore 
D, Lorenzo I, Wu G, Weinberg RJ, Ehlers MD, Philpot BD, Beaudet AL, Wetsel WC, Jiang YH. Synaptic dys - 
function and abnormal behaviors in mice lacking major isoforms of Shank3. Hum Mol Gene t. 2011 Aug 
1;20(15):3093 -108. 
 
Watanabe T, Abe O, Kuwabara H, et al. Mitigation of sociocommunicational deficits of autism through oxytocin -
induced recovery of medial prefrontal activity: a randomized trial. JAMA Psychiatry. 2014;71(2):166 -75. 
 
The World Health Organization Quality of Life Assessment (WHOQOL): development and general 
psychometric properties. Soc Sci Med. 1998;46(12):1569 -85. 
 
Yang M, Bozdagi O, Scattoni ML, et al. Reduced excitatory neurotransmission and mild autism -relevant 
phenotypes in adolescent Shank3 null mutant mice. J Neurosci. 2012;32(19):[ADDRESS_950612] year of life. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2005;23(2 -3):143 -52. 
 
 
 