CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
1 
  
 
Study Title  Convection Enhanced Delivery of Autologous Cerebral Spi[INVESTIGATOR_456280] (globus pallidum or subthalamus) for treatment of  medication -
refractory  Parkinson’ s disease 
  
  
Protocol Version  5.0 
  
Development 
Phase of Study  Feasibility  
  
  
GCP Statement  This study is to be performed in full compliance with acceptable 
Good Clinical Practices (GCP) and regulations. All required study 
documentation will be archived as required by [CONTACT_12721].  
  
Confidentiality  This document is confidential and the property of the University of 
Virginia. No part of it may be transmitted, reproduced, published, or 
used by [CONTACT_456306].  
 
 
 
 
 
Principal  
Investigator  
 [INVESTIGATOR_124]. William Jeff rey Elias  
Department of Neurological Surgery  
University of Virginia  
Box 800212 
Charlottesville, VA  [ZIP_CODE] 
(434) 924- 0451    (434) 982- 3806 fax  
 
  
 
  
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
2 
  
SIGNATURE [CONTACT_456327]’S AGREEMENT  
 
I confirm that I have read this protocol and I agree to conduct the study as outlined herein.  I 
agree to conduct the study in accordance with the ethical principles that have their origin in the 
Declaration of Helsinki and that are consistent with Good Clinical Practices as outlined in ICH 
E6 and the applicable laws and regulations.   
 
     
Investigator:   Signature   [CONTACT_456328]’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
3 
  
 
SYNOPSIS 
Title of Study:  Convection Enhanced Delivery of Autologous Cerebral Spi[INVESTIGATOR_456281](s): W. Jeffrey Elias, MD  
Study center(s): University of Virginia Medical Center  
Phase of study: Feasibility  Planned Study Initiation:  January  2018  
Objectives: The proposed study will evaluate safety foremost but also the distribution and initial 
effectiveness of infusion- enhanced, MRI -guided DBS for patients with medication- refractory, 
Parkinson’s disease.  
Primary:  
• To evaluate the incidence and severity of adverse events (AEs) associated with convection 
enhanced delivery of autologous CSF into the internal segment of the globus pallidus or subthalamic 
nucleus in patients with advanced PD who are undergoing DBS surgery.  
Secondary:  
•  To determine the volume of dist ribution (Vd) relative to the volume of infusion (Vi) for a 
convective infusion of autologous CSF into a deep brain nuclear region in humans  
• To determine the level of effectiveness or symptom response of infusion- enhanced, MRI -guided 
DBS.   
Methodology: Open-label , single- arm, quantitative study  
Number of subjects (planned): 4  
Diagnosis and main criteria for inclusion: Patients with Parkinson’s disease and medically -
refractory motor symptoms, who are already planned for MRI -guided DBS electrodes under general 
anesthesia.  
Investigational intervention: Unilateral infusion of 0.5 ml autologous CSF before DBS electrode 
insertion with MRI monitoring.  
Other study intervention(s): None  
Criteria for evaluation (i.e. endpoints):  
Efficacy:   
The primary efficacy assessment will be measured with the unmedicated UPDRS, motor subsection 
(part III) at [ADDRESS_583216] clinical measures of PD will be 
obtained as per usual clinical protocol at pretreatment baseline and 6 months postoperatively.  
Safety:  
Safety will be assessed by [CONTACT_276940], changes in  phys ical examinations , 
neurological exams  and the number of dis continuations due to AEs.  
Distribution : 
Distribution will be assessed using MRI imaging t o calculate the volume of distribution of autologous 
CSF into the basal ganglia in relation to the volume infused.   
 
 
 
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/[ADDRESS_583217] ELIGIBILITY  ..................................................................................... 13 
4.1. Inclusion Criteria  ............................................................................................. 13 
4.2. Exclusion Criteria  ............................................................................................  13 
5. TREATMENT PLAN  ........................................................................................... 14 
5.1. Study Overview  ............................................................................................... 14 
5.2. Treatment Assignment  .................................................................................... 14 
5.3. DBS Surgery and Treatment Administration .................................................... 14 
5.4. Concomitant Medications/Treatments  ............................................................. 17 
5.5. Duration of Study Participation ........................................................................ 18 
5.6. Discontinuation/Withdrawal from Study  ........................................................... [ADDRESS_583218] (IRB) Approval and Consent  .................................  29 
10.2.  Adherence to the Protocol  ............................................................................... 29 
10.3.  Emergency Modifications  ................................................................................ 29 
10.4.  Other Protocol Deviations/Violations  ............................................................... [ADDRESS_583219] OF ABBREVIATIONS 
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/[ADDRESS_583220] Computed Tomography  
DBS Deep Brain Stimulation  
ECG  Electrocardiogram  
FDA Food And Drug Administration  
GCP  Good Clinical Practices  
GLP Good Laboratory Practices  
GPe External Globus Pallidum  
GPi [INVESTIGATOR_456282]-Human Chorionic Gonadotropin  
HR Heart Rate  
h Hour  
I/E Inclusion Exclusion Criteria  
ICF Informed Consent Form  
ICH International Conference On Harmonization  
IRB Institutional Review Board  
IV Intravenous  
MRI Magnetic Resonance Imaging  
min Minute  
PD Parkinson’s Disease  
PK Pharmacokinetic  
RR Respi[INVESTIGATOR_456283]’s Disease Rating Scale  
UVA University of Virginia  
Vd Volume of distribution  
Vi Volume of infusion  
WOCBP  Women of Childbearing Potential  
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
6 
  
2. BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
 
2.1. Study Synopsis  
 
This will be a small feasibility  study investigating the safety and feasibility of infusion-
enhanced, MRI -guided DBS electrode placement. We intend to enroll four  (4) patients, 
with Parkinson’s disease and medically -refractory motor symptoms, who are already 
planned for MRI -guided DBS el ectrodes under general anesthesia. O nly a single side 
(nondominant ) will be investigated with the research infusion when bilateral DBS 
electrodes are planned.  
2.2. Disease Background  
 
MRI-guided surgery was initially developed in the 1990s for a more precise brain 
biopsy.1,7  Recently, image- guided DBS has been proposed as an alternative to 
traditional electrophysiologically -guided DBS for medically -refractory Parkinson’s 
disease.2,11,13 -16,18  MRI -guided DBS can be performed under general anesthesia to avoid 
the discomfort of awake surgery and the need for prolonged unmedicated states. Clinical 
outcomes note improved off medication UPDRS motor scores by 60% and 49%, 
respectively which compares  similarly to a recent meta- analysis of 34 studies estimating 
52% in PD with STN DBS.[ADDRESS_583221] rophysiologic  localization.10 Unfortunately one can’t determine whether this is from 
frame placement error, image fusion, MRI distortion, or stereotactic positioning error.   
The assessment of DBS electrode placement relative to a selected target 
location in stereotactic space is relatively simple, requiring only postoperative imaging to 
compare with the preoperative plan. Real -time image- guided DBS placement has only 
recently been realized with compatible skull -mounted frames and high- field MRI. Radial 
vector error during DBS for PD has been measured at 1.2 ±  0.65 and 0.8 ± 0.[ADDRESS_583222], the 
risk/benefit ratio must be favorable to ultimately consider infusion- enhanced, MRI -guided 
surgery as a valid surgical option.  We perceive the addition of a small volume infusion 
(<0.5 ml) of autologous CSF to be associated with low morbidity. The increased risk of 
micro -catheter insertion should be similar or less than the current electrophysiological 
mappi[INVESTIGATOR_456284], sharp microelectrode penetrations. The safest 
infusate to test intuitively would be autologous CSF which is easily and safely obtained by 
[CONTACT_456307].  
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
7 
  Finally, the preclinical study described a proof -of-concept technique that mainly 
relies on the improved visualization of structures like the STN from T2 signal 
manipulation in the laboratory and clinic. Other str uctures like the internal segment of the 
globus pallidum or the ventral intermediate nucleus of the thalamus are better visualized 
with other MR sequences like inversion recovery or susceptibility -weighted images, 
respectively. In the future, we envision t hat infusion- enhanced MR imaging would be 
tailored to the desired brain target with target -specific sequences and infusates. For 
example, a choline- specific infusate could be designed to visualize the basal nucleus of 
Meynert if a neuroprotective or regenerative intervention were available for Alzheimer’s 
disease.  Imaging of all modalities will continue to improve with technology, but tailored 
intracerebral infusions may serve as an adjunct for improved visualization, not as a 
replacement for current imagi ng. 
 
2.3. Case Study  
 
A 59-year-old retired psychologist with Parkinsons disease presented for consideration of 
deep brain stimulation surgery. He underwent successful surgery consisting of bilateral 
subthalamic nucleus DBS with micro- electrode mappi[INVESTIGATOR_6926] a st aged pulse generator 
implantation. Unfortunately, he developed a pseudomonas infection involving the pulse 
generator, which required explantation of the pulse generator and the distal portion of the 
lead extensions. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_456285], he presented again two months later with 
evidence of infection at the cranial incision. Cerebral MRI with gadolinium revealed no 
intracranial abscess, however, there was hyperintense signal on T2 weighted images 
around the right DBS electrode tract to the subthalam us (Figure 1). The remainder of the 
DBS system was explanted, and the infection was cleared after several weeks of 
intravenous aztreonam therapy. A second bilateral subthalamic DBS system was 
eventually re- implanted one year after the first.  
 
Figure 1: (A ) Patient who had a 
unilateral infection of a DBS electrode 
which led to increased signal 
differentiation between the 
surrounding white matter tracts and 
visualization of the STN nucleus 
which is not visible on the 
contralateral side. (B) Enlarged view 
of infected side.  STN: Subthalamic 
nucleus, GPi/GPe: internal and 
external globus pallidum.   
 
 
 
 
The presumed vasogenic edema around the infected electrode highlighted the 
boundaries of the right subthalamic nucleus and adjacent deep brain anatomy in contrast 
to the unaffected, contralateral, left side (Figure 1). This observation led to the premise of 
this study, where we believe that the extracellular space could be manipulated 
experimentally to improve MRI visualization.  
 
  

CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
8 
 2.4. Part 1  Preclinical Animal Studies  
 
2.4.1.  Methods  
 
Following UVA Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee approval (ACUC # 3843- 08-
10), Sus  Scrofa  Domestica (YorkShire)  female pi[INVESTIGATOR_456286] [ADDRESS_583223] human head coil.  
 Before surgery, the infusion apparatus was prepared. A PHD Ultra syringe pump 
(Harvard Apparatus , Holliston, MA, [LOCATION_003]) was used with a 500 microliter, airtight, glass 
syringe. The syringe was connected to a series of four 60- inch extension sets ( Medex 
Micro Bore,  Product Code 536020, Smiths Medical, Dublin, OH, [LOCATION_003]), each of which had 
0.4 ml priming volume. The extension sets were then connected to an EViTAR 
microcathet er.  (NexGen Medical Systems, Inc. , Reno, NV, [LOCATION_003]). In experiments where 
normal saline was infused, the system was primed with normal saline via a 3- way valve 
at an extension set connection point. Care was taken to ensure there were no air 
bubbles.  When C SF was infused, the priming was performed in the same manner after 
CSF had been obtained by [CONTACT_456308].  
On the day of surgery anesthesia was induced, and a T2 3T MRI was obtained in 
three orthogonal directions ( Siemens Trio with Numaris 4 B17 software, TR 6000, TE 93, 
2mm slice width, no gap, resolution 320x320). The mid- thalamic targets were identified 
on these pre- surgical MR images and then compared to a published swine stereotactic 
atlas.6,17 The coordinates for cannula placement were calculated and ranged in relation to 
the bregma: 0- [ADDRESS_583224]. The 
scalp was then shaved and prepped with betadine, opened in linear fashion with a 
scalpel, and a small burr hole was created in the skull. After the dura was opened, the 
outer cannula of the infusion catheter, with a stylet, was then connected to the 
stereotactic manipulator and advanced to the target minus 1 cm in vector length (the 
infus ion cannula is 1cm longer than the outer cannula). The outer cannula was then 
affixed to the skull.  After removal of the stylet, the inner infusion microcatheter was then 
advanced through the outer cannula to the target.  The PHD Ultra syringe pump was kept 
in the MRI control room and the tubing was passed through the wall. Sagittal, axial, and 
coronal T2 images were then obtained to verify the placement of the micro- catheter.  
After MRI confirmation of the micro- catheter position, the infusion was instituted 
with rates between 1-  6 µL/min so that convective distribution would be achieved. MRI 
monitoring was obtained at consistent 15 minute intervals for a total of 90- 120 minutes 
depending on the rate of infusion. The volume of distribution (Vd) was obtaine d by [CONTACT_456309] T2 signal changes.  
Following completion of micro- infusion experiments and MR imaging, the infusion 
catheter was removed and the scalp was sutured closed. Animals were recovered with 
direct observation for evidence of behavioral, neurologic, or gait dysfunction.   Necropsy 
was performed at either early (48 hours), subacute (1 week), or late (1 month) time 
points. The brains were formalin fixed for sectioning, gross inspection, and histolo gy with 
immunohistochemistry by a certified neuropathologist. A total of seven animals were 
infused: five with normal saline and two with CSF.  The summary is shown below in Table 
1.  
 
 
  
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
9 
 Table 1: Summary of Swine CED Experiments  
 
# Infusate  Rate  Observation/ Histology 
(Days)  
1 NS 1µl/min x 45min, then 
3 µ l/min for 45 min, 
then 6 µ l/min for 30 
min 2 
2 NS 3 µl/min x 90 min  28 
3 NS 5 µl/min x 90min  7 
4 NS 5 µl/min x 90min  28 
5 NS 5 µl/min x 90min  7 
6 CSF 5 µl/min x 90min  28 
7 CSF 5 µl/min x 90min  7 
 
NS: Normal Saline, CSF: Cerebrospi[INVESTIGATOR_17106]  
 
 
2.4.2.  Results  
 
Volume of Distribution  
 
The Vd/Vi, measured from T2 weighted MRI sequences varied from 2 to 4.5 regardless of 
the infusate. The rate for CED (as opposed to diffusion) is generally accepted as greater 
than 0.05 µ L per minute. These experiments infused between 1 to 6 µL  per minute without 
noticeable differences in the Vd/Vi. Total volume of infusion was bounded by [CONTACT_456310] (limited to 90 minutes), or by [CONTACT_456311] a pi[INVESTIGATOR_456287], and this ranged from 90 to 
360 µL. 
 
MR Imaging  
 
All MRI assessments were made from T2 weighted sequences. The CED infusions of 
normal saline or CSF became apparent with increased T2 hyperintensity after 30- 45 µL as 
infused.  By 90 µ L, clear definition of nuclear structures began to develop. MRI changes in 
the infusion ceased when the infusion front reached the pi[INVESTIGATOR_456288]. CED infusions 
into the thalamus delineated the dorsomedial, ventral anterior, reticular, and centromedian 
nuclei – all of which  were not apparent before the infusion (Figure 2 ). The enhanced 
appearance of the nuclear structures was consistent across animals with the ventral 
anterior and then the dorsomedial nucleus becoming the most apparent. Animal #[ADDRESS_583225] infusion scan per formed 30 min after the completion of the infusion and the infusion 
effects persisted. Long term imaging was not performed.  
  
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
10 
  
Figure 2: (A) axial view of animal #1 after 
360 µL infusion of saline demonstrating 
the reticular nucleus is lateral to the VA 
nucleus, (B) axial view of animal #4 after 
450 µL of saline, (C) coronal view of 
animal #6 after 450 µL CSF, and (D) axial 
time lapsed infusion of animal #3 at a rate 
5 µL / min.   The white matter tract medial 
to the VA nucleus, lateral to DM, and 
anterior  to CM is readily apparent after 
infusion.   
 
 
 
Histology  
 
Histology was examined at either early (within 2 days), subacute (7 days), or late (28 days) 
time points for evidence of acute or latent infusion toxicity. All specimens were analyzed 
with Hematoxy lin and Eosin stains. Animals infused with normal saline demonstrated mild 
neuronal effects with pyknotic neurons and axonal retractions – possibly attributed to the 
tonicity of the infusate (Figure 3 ).  Those infused with autologous CSF had no evidence 
of neuronal change at either time point: 7 and 28 days.  
 
Figure 3: Hematoxylin and Eosin stains 
after convective infusion with normal 
saline identifying pyknotic neuron ( dashed 
arrow ) and axonal retraction figures ( solid 
arrow ) in a saline infused thalamus.   
These findings were not present when 
CSF infusion was performed.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
11 
 2.5. Part 2  Preclinical Animal Studies  
 
2.5.1.  Purpose  
 
Following the Part 1 preclinical animal studies, and FDA review, further infusions were 
performed to validate that there was no toxicity related to the infusion of CSF .  A control 
site was included for comparison.  The infusion catheter planned for the human trials was 
used in the Part  2 preclinical animal studies ( SmartFlowTM K123605).  
 
2.5.2.  Methods  
 
Following UVA Instituti onal Animal Care and Use Committee approval (ACUC # 3843- 08-
16), Sus  Scrofa  Domestica (YorkShire)  female pi[INVESTIGATOR_456286] [ADDRESS_583226]. The scalp was then 
shaved and prepped with betadine, opened in linear fashion with a scalpel, and a small 
burr hole was created in the skull  bilaterally 6mm lateral to the bregma. After the dura 
was opened, the infusion catheter ( SmartFlowTM K123605) was advanced into the brain 
30mm in the right thalamus then retracted  (control site) .  It was then advanced 30mm in 
the left thalamus for the CSF infusion.   
The previously acquired CSF was used to prime the infusion system.  A Harvard 
Apparatus PHD Ultra infusion pump was used with a pi[INVESTIGATOR_456289] ( Medex 
Micro Bore,  Product Code 536020, Smiths Medical, Dublin, OH, [LOCATION_003])  and a 500 
microliter airtight gas syringe.  The CSF was filtered with a 0.1 micron in- line filter while 
priming the system. CSF was then infused in the left thalamus at a rate of 5 microliters / 
min for a total volume of 450 microliters.  The infusion catheter was then withdrawn, the 
wound was closed, and the animal was taken to recovery.  
Nine animals in total were inf used with autologous CSF.  Five animals underwent 
necropsy at 24 hours and 4 animals underwent necropsy at 28 days.   Necropsy was 
performed by [CONTACT_456312] a craniectomy and 
placing the whole brain in 10% buffered formaldehyde.  
After a minimum of 2 weeks the formalin fixed brains were cut, H&E stained, and 
analyzed by a n independent  neuropathologist . 
 
2.5.3.  Results  
 
Histology results are summarized below.  None of the CSF infusion sites had evidence of  
toxicity.  Distinct tracts were identified in eight of the nine brains.  In the brain where a 
tract was not identified, the thalamus was sectioned forty times in 5- micron thicknesses.  
After sectioning, slides were H&E stained then reviewed.  All tracts showed typi[INVESTIGATOR_456290] (microhemorrhage at 24 hours; gliosis and 
hemosiderin deposition at 1 month).  There was evidence of axonal injury in one acute 
animal control tract, consistent with severing of axons from the insertion of the CE D 
catheter. The neuropathology report is attached as attachment 2.0.  
 
  
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
12 
  
 Animal #  CSF Infusion  Control  
Acute  
(24 hours)  [ADDRESS_583227] track identified  
    
Chronic  
(1 month)  [ADDRESS_583228] but also the distribution and initial effectiveness 
of infusion- enhanced, MRI -guided DBS for patients with medication- refractory, Parkinson’s 
disease.  
 
3.1. Primary Objectives  
 
Safety:   
 
Safety of the CSF infusion will be evaluated using a common description of clinical 
complications for patients treated in this study. Safety will be determined by [CONTACT_456313]- related side effects and complications from the 
first treatment day visit through the 6-month post –treatment time point. All AEs will be 
reported and categorized by [CONTACT_147719], probably, possibly, unlikely, or 
unrelated to the CSF infusion, and/or Parkinson’s diseas e progression.    Safety will be 
assessed by [CONTACT_276940], changes in physical examinations,  
neurological exams , and the number of discontinuations due to AEs  
 
3.2. Secondary Objectives  
 
Distribution:   
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
13 
  
The volume of distribution (Vd) will be determined immediately following the infusion (Vi) 
with intraoperative 1.5T MRI, T2- weighted sequences.  The distribution of the infusion by 
[CONTACT_456314] a deep brain human nucleus (GPi [INVESTIGATOR_456291]) will be de termined by 
[CONTACT_456315]/Vi ratio.   
 
Efficacy:   
 
The primary efficacy assessment will be measured with the unmedicated UPDRS, motor 
subsection (part III) at [ADDRESS_583229] 
clinical measures of PD will be obtained as per usual clinical protocol at pretreatment 
baseline and 6 months postoperatively.  These DBS -related assessments include:  
 
• UPDRS in the off and on medi cation state  
• Levodopa medication equivalents (milligrams)  
• Neuropsychological assessment  
• PDQ -[ADDRESS_583230]  ELIGIBILITY  
 
Patients with medically -refractory Parkinson’s disease who are planned for MRI -guided 
DBS surgery under general anesthesia are candidates for this protocol. They will be 
invited to participate in this study if they decide to have DBS surgery in the intraoperative 
MRI suite under general anesthesia. Patients who decide to have awake DBS surgery 
with clinical and electrophysiologic testing will not be eligible. The consenting process will 
occur in the outpatient clinic setting, and patients will have the opportunity to review the 
consent document at home with their families. A total of eight patients will be enrolled.  
 
4.1. Inclusion Crit eria 
 
1. Men and women, age [ADDRESS_583231] 30 days  
6. Any illness that in the investigator's opi[INVESTIGATOR_335009].  
7. Subjects who are prisoner s. 
8. Women who are pregnant . 
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
14 
 9. Subjects who do not speak English. (Questionnaires are validated in English and no 
other language.)  
5. TREATMENT PLAN   
 
5.1. Study Overview  
This will be an open- label , single- arm, pi[INVESTIGATOR_456292]- enhanced, 
MRI-guided DBS electrode placement. We intend to enroll patients, with Parkinson’s disease and medically -
refractory motor symptoms, who are already planned for MRI -guided DBS electrodes under general 
anesthesia.  The hypothesis  of the study is that a convective micro- infusion of autologous CSF will enhance 
the T2- weighted MRI visualization of the targeted nucleus during image- guided DBS surgery for Parkinson’s 
disease. We will record standard clinical measures of PD at baseline and [ADDRESS_583232] pre- surgical evaluations in preparation for surgery at the same time as their 
baseline assessment .  This will include preoperative visits with the neurosurgeon and anesthesia team  at the 
Preanesthesia Evaluation and Testing Center (PETC) . Patient history will be taken with regards to any recent 
changes in medical status and a review of current medications both prescription and over -the-counter will be 
obtained by a qualified sub- investigator . Patients taking aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248], other non- steroidal anti -inflammatory 
medications and vitamin supplements that include vitamin E will have been counseled to stop taking these at 
least [ADDRESS_583233] clinical practice for DBS surgery . Routine labs, including 
complete blood count with platelets, blood chemistries , PT/PTT, pregnancy test for women of childbearing age 
and urinalysis will be obtained, as well as [ADDRESS_583234] radiograph when 
indicated. Additional studies specific to certain medical conditions and/or to ensure patient safety may also be 
obtained.  The results of this detailed assessment will be recorded in written form on case report forms and 
recorded in the patients electronic medical record. Subjects will be instructed to be NPO and hold their PD 
medications after midnight prior to the surgery.  
  
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
15 
 Table 2: Treatment day procedures  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.3.2.  Initial DBS surgery  DBS 
surgery  Presurgical admission   
 
 
Clinical practice  
 General anesthesia  
Reference MRI for stereotactic planning  
Surgery for frontal burr hole      
Stereotactic insertion of guide  cannula  Infusion 
 Lumbar puncture for 10 ml CSF   
 
Research  
 Insertion of microcatheter to unilateral GPi [INVESTIGATOR_456293] (<0.5 ml)  
MRI monitoring of infusion  Completion  
DBS Replacement of microcatheter with DBS electrode   
Clinical practice  
 Wound closure  
Implantation of pulse generator  
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/[ADDRESS_583235] of care.  After meeting with the anesthetic and surgical teams, 
the patient will be taken back to the operating room for general anesthesia and intubation. A lumbar puncture 
will be performed to obtain up to 10 ml of autologous CSF. This will be passed through a sterile 0. 1 micron  
filter and maintained sterile.   
 Patients will then undergo MRI -guided DBS sur gery in the intraoperative MRI suite (IMRIS) according 
to standard practice.   Clinically, we utilize frameless stereotaxy ( ClearPoint , MRI Interventions ) for the surgery.  
A 1.5T reference MPRAGE MRI is acquired and then fused with preoperative 3T MRI of the designated target. 
GPi [INVESTIGATOR_456294] a T2 sequence.  
(The choice of stereotactic target, either globus pallidum or subthalamus, is a predetermined clinical decision 
made by a multidisciplinary team of neurology, neurosurgery, and neuropsychology.) The stereotactic 
trajectory is planned on a neuronavigation workstation by [CONTACT_456316]: GPi [INVESTIGATOR_456295].    
 The scalp is prepped and draped and local anesthetic is infiltrated into the frontal incision. The incision 
is opened and a pre- coronal, frontal burr hole is drilled corresponding to the designated entry point from the 
stereotactic coordinates. A closed- dura technique is utilized to minimize loss of CSF and brain shift. A scalp 
mounted stereotactic frame ( MRI Interventions ) is attached to the burr hole. The bore of the magnet is draped 
with sterile technique, and the patient is moved into the bore of the magnet for the stereotactic portion of the 
surgery that is MRI guided and monitored.  
  
5.3.3.  Infusion Procedure  
 
Once the patient is positioned within the MRI, the dura is sharply punctured with a sharp, ceramic stylet, and 
the MR -compatible infusion catheter is inserted. A second MRI is obtained to confirm the catheter position.  
 The research infusion of autologous CSF is initiated at 5 microliters/minute.  Serial MRI monitoring of 
the infusion is obtained with T2 weighted images at approximately 15 minute interv als until the target nucleus 
can be visualized or until a total of 5 00 microliters is administered. T he research infusion could add up to an 
additional 100 minutes to the patient’s DBS surgery.  MR imaging of the research infusion and then clinical 
assessme nt of the DBS electrode placement will be conducted on a 1.5T Siemens Espree system with 
continuous monitoring of both SAR and B1+rms values.   
 
A Medfusion 3500 syringe infusion pump with a 1.0 milliliter BD glass  syringe will be used with 
extension tubing ( Medex Micro Bore,  Product Code 536020, Smiths Medical, Dublin, OH, [LOCATION_003]) . The infusion 
catheter will be the SmartFlowTM K123605 (MRI Interventions).   
   
5.3.4.  Completion of DBS procedure  
 
The microcatheter is removed, and replaced with the DBS electrode. There is no intraoperative, 
macrostimulation testing of the DBS electrode as the patient is asleep and electrode position is based on MRI 
targeting. The electrode is anchored in place, and the wound is closed.  For bi lateral cases, the contralateral  
(dominant side)  DBS electrode will be inserted as per standard practice without the research infusion protocol.  
 The second stage of the DBS procedure is then performed on the same day and under the same 
general anesthetic for placement of the implanted pulse generator. For this, the patient is repositi oned in a 
supi[INVESTIGATOR_456296]. The ipsilateral scalp, neck, 
and chest are prepped and draped. The cranial incisi on is reopened and a small counter incision is made 
behind the ear. A subcutaneous pocket is made at the clavicular level. The DBS lead extension is tunneled 
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/[ADDRESS_583236] of care, and the DBS system is maintained off until programming in the clinic.  At the 
University of Virginia, we routinely perform a postoperative MRI after DBS surgery to assess the final position 
of the electrode.  The imaging is conducted within the conditional limits set forth by [CONTACT_456317].   
The final DBS system implanted will be assessed with MRI in one of two scenarios:  
 
DBS systems that are full -body eligible:  
 Neurostimulator models [ZIP_CODE] Activa RC, [ZIP_CODE] Activa SC, [ZIP_CODE] Activa PC  
 No pocket adaptor can be implanted with the DBS system.  
 Fully -implanted leads (ie, leads that are internalized and capped)  
 No open or short circuits  
 
DBS systems that are head -only eligible:  
 Neurostimulator models [ZIP_CODE] Activa SC, 7428 Kinetra, 7426 Soletra  
 Any DBS system that is implanted with a pocket adaptor  
 Partially -implanted leads (ie, leads that are externalized)  
 No open or short circuits  
 
 
 
5.3.5.  DBS programming and outpatient follow -up 
 
The following is the standard clinical protocol for DBS programming in the outpatient setting:  The wound is 
assessed at seven to ten days and surgical clips are removed. The DBS pulse generator is turned on at one 
month. For this first programming session, all patients present without having taken their PD medications since 
midnight. Each of the four DBS contacts is tested by [CONTACT_456318]- induced side effects. High frequency stimulation is used at either [ADDRESS_583237] programming visit 
and each subsequent visit.   
 
5.4. Concomitant Medications/Treatments  
 
Prohibited Medications  
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/[ADDRESS_583238]’s participation in the study will be recorded on the Concomitant Medication CRF. 
Thereafter, Concomitant Medications  information will not be collected or recorded in the eCRFs. The 
information documented will include the medication name, indication, dosage, and the dates of start and 
discontinuation.  
 At each visit, the site will obtain a complete listing of all medications currently being taken by [CONTACT_1560]. Any changes, additions or deletions in the administration of concomitant medications will be recorded 
on the Prior and Concomitant Medications C RF. This information will also be documented in the subjects 
electronic medical record. Subjects may receive medications to treat safety events and routine treatment for 
underlying medical conditions as deemed necessary by [CONTACT_737].  
 
5.5. Duration of S tudy Participation 
 
Subjects who are enrolled will be followed for six months after their DBS surgery . The Screening and Baseline 
period is a maximum of [ADDRESS_583239] DBS clinic follow up and 
does not include additional visits specific to this research.   
5.6. Discontinuation/Withdrawal  from Study  
 
Subjects may withdraw or be discontinued from the study at any time for any of the following reasons:  
• Disease progression  
• Inter-current illness that prevents further treatment  
• Unacceptable adverse event(s)  
• Subject decides to withdraw from the study  
• Subject does not comply with study procedures ( i.e. missed follow -up visits)  
• At the discretion of the investigator  
• Death  
5.7. Subject Status Definitions  
 
Enrolled : All subjects who sign an informed consent will be considered enrolled in the study. All subjects 
consented on the study will be assigned to the research study in EPIC . 
Screen Failure : A subject who is withdrawn or discontinues from the study prior to receiving DBS is considered 
a screen fail. Screen failures  are not considered a study accrual and will be replaced.  Note: The IRB defines 
any individual that has signed an informed consent as an enrollment in this study and so screen failures should 
be reported to the IRB with enrollment numbers.  
On-Study : A subject is considered on- study on the date when the study team has confirmed the subject has 
met all of the inclusion and none of the exclusion criteria, and the treating physician/surgeon or study PI [INVESTIGATOR_456297].  
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
19 
 On-Treatment : A subject is considered on- treatment on the date that the DBS surg ery is initiated.  A subject 
who is withdrawn or discontinues from the study after receiving DBS surgery  is considered a discontinuation 
and will not be replaced.  
On Follow -up: A subject is considered on follow -up on the date that the DBS surgery  is completed.    
Off-Study: A subject is considered off -study if they are removed from the study for any of the reasons listed in 
Section 4.6, or if they have completed all study assessments through follow -up (6 Month follow -up visit) . 
6. DEVICE INFORMATION  
 
 
Description  
 
The agent under  investigation is an intracerebral infusion of autologous CSF .  The autologous CSF will be 
obtained via lumbar puncture and administered during the same procedure, so there is no need for storage of 
the CSF.   
 
Agent Preparati on and Administration 
 
A lumbar puncture will be performed to obtain 10 ml of autologous CSF. This will be passed through a sterile 
0.1 micron  filter and maintained sterile. A disposable, MRI -compatible frameless stereotactic system that is 
employed for MRI -guided DBS surgery under general anesthesia will be secured to the patient’s skull.  Once 
the patient is positioned within the MRI, the dura is sharply punctured with a sharp, ceramic stylet, and the MR -
compatible infusion catheter is inserted.   
 The r esearch infusion of autologous CSF is initiated at 5 microliters/minute. Serial MRI monitoring of 
the infusion is obtained with T2 weighted images at 15 minute intervals until the target nucleus can be 
visualized or until a total of 500 microliters is administered. Any remaining CSF will be disposed of at the end 
of the procedure.  
 A Medfusion 3500 syringe infusion pump with a 1.0 milliliter BD glass syringe will be used with 
extension tubing ( Medex Micro Bore,  Product Code 536020, Smiths Medical, Dublin, OH, [LOCATION_003]) . The infusion 
catheter will be the SmartFlowTM K123605 (MRI Interventions).   
 
 
7. EVALUATION AND ASSESSMENTS 
 
7.1. Schedule of Events  
 
The following table shows the standard of care and research assessments that will be performed throughout 
the study.  
 
 
  
Screening  and 
Baseline*  
 DBS 
Surgery  One 
Month  
(± 
2weeks)  6 
Months  
(± 1 
month ) 
Informed Consent  X    
Review study 
eligibility  X    
Medical History  X    
MRI  X X   
Vital signs  X X   
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
20 
 PDQ-39* X   X 
Physical Exam  X    
Neurological Exam  X  X X 
Clinical Labs   X    
Lumbar Puncture 
and CED infusion   X   
Neuropsychological 
Evaluation  X   X 
UPDRS  X   X 
Review of PD 
medications  X   X 
Adverse Event 
assessment   X X X 
 
*Screening and Baseline assessments will  be performed up to [ADDRESS_583240] of care 
procedures completed within this period but prior to consent may be used for the purposes of the study.  The order of 
screening/baseline procedures will vary, but all test s required for eligibility must be complete prior to confirmation of 
eligibility.   
 
Please note that any assessments done as part of the patient’s standard care need not  be performed by [CONTACT_98225], as long as the assessor is qualified and regularly performs this type of assessment  as part of their regular 
medical center duties.  The results of the standard tests and any abnormal findings will be reported back to the 
principal investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_456298].  
 
7.2. Study Assessmen ts 
 
7.2.1.  Medical History  
 
A medical history should be obtained during the screening/baseline visit to establish baseline medical condition 
for evaluation of AEs. Medical history includes clinically significant diseases, surgeries, history of cancer, brain 
injuries, and heart condit ions. A start date (year), end date (year) and any medications or surgeries to treat the 
condition will be recorded. In addition, all medications (e.g., prescription drugs, over -the-counter drugs, 
herbal/homeopathic remedies, nutritional supplements) used by [CONTACT_456319].  
7.2.2.  MRI 
 
For the purpose of this study, MR Exams without contrast will be performed. The MR Imaging should include 
T1, T2, and DTI sequences. In addition,  MR Images: D WI (including ADC maps, which allows differentiation 
between lesion cytotoxic edema- low ADC and vasogenic edema around the lesion -high ADC) will be obtained 
at baseline.  
 
7.2.3.  Vital Signs  
 
Vital signs including respi[INVESTIGATOR_697], pulse rate, systolic blood press ure [SBP], and diastolic blood pressure 
[DBP] and body temperature, will be collected at Screening/Baseline assessment and during CED infusion . 
Vital signs will be continuously monitored during the DBS surgery.  At the Screening/Baseline visit, i t is 
recommended that vital signs be assessed in subjects who have been in a seated resting position for at least [ADDRESS_583241] has symptoms that appear to be 
related to changes in BP, HR, or RR, all  changes deemed by [CONTACT_456320].  
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
21 
 7.2.4.  PDQ -39 Questionnaire  
 
A self reported Parkinson’s Disease Questionaire ( PDQ -39) will be completed at Screening/Baseline as well as 
6 Months FU as a secondary meas ure of effectiveness .  
7.2.5.  Physical Exam  
 
A full physical examination will be performed at the Screening/Baseline visit only . Physical examinations will 
include examination of the following body systems: general appearance (including height and body weight), 
skin, neck, HEENT (head, ears, eyes, nose and throat), heart (auscultation of heart sounds), lungs 
(auscultation of lung fields),  abdomen palpation and auscultation of bowel sounds, lymph nodes, extremities, 
and nervous system.  
 An abbreviated, symptom -directed physical exam will be performed at all other assessments. Any 
abnormal findings which were not noted at the baseline assessment must be reported as an AE.  
 
7.2.6.  Neurological Exam  
 
A full neurological exam will be performed at the Screening/Baseline visit and at the 1 and 6 Month f ollow up 
visits for adverse event determination.  Neurological examinations will include orientation, sensory (pain, 
position, vibration, and light touch), reflexes (biceps, triceps, knees, ankles and pathological). Coordination an d 
balance will be tested by [CONTACT_456321], Heel to Shin, Rapid Alternating Movements, Heel -to-toe 
walking, and Romberg’s test assessments. In addition, motor, strength and gait testing will be performed.  
 
7.2.7.  Laboratory Parameters  
Blood samples for clinical labs will be obtained at the Screening/Baseline visit to determine eligibility for DBS 
surgery.  The following clinical laboratory tests should be performed as per standard of care:  
Hematology  
• Hemoglobin  
• Hematocrit  
• Total leukocyte count and differential  
• Platelet count  
 
Serum Chemistry  
• Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)  
• Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)  
• Gamma -glutamyl transferase (GGT)  
• Total bilirubin  
• Direct bilirubin  
• Alkaline phosphatase  
• Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)  
• Creatinine  
• Blood urea nitrogen (BUN)  
• Blood glucose  
• Sodium  
• Potassium  
• Chloride  
• Bicarbonate  
• Calcium  
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
22 
 • Phosphorus  
 
Clotting Time  
• Prothrombin time ( PT) 
• Partial Thromboplastin Time ( PTT)  
 
Pregnancy Test  
 
7.2.8.  Neuropsychological Assessment  
 
A standard neuropsychological assessment will be conducted prior to DBS surgery  and will be repeated at the 
6 month follow up visit for potential cognitive and psychological effects of the surgery .  
 
 
7.2.9.  Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale  
 
The Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale ( UPDRS) will be performed at Screening/Baseline, and at the 6 
Month Follow Up visit  to assess the patient’s motor symptoms. Each treated subject will be examined “off  
medication” and “on medication” by a qualified movement disorders specialist.  
 
7.3. Final Study Visit  
 
The final study visit will occur at the [ADDRESS_583242] will continue to be monitored on an annual 
basis as part of routine clinical care.  
8. DATA ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
For this study, the Safety and Effectiveness assessment will be descriptive with no statistical endpoints.  The 
results will be examined and analyzed and used as a basis for determining the nature of future studies.  Formal 
hypothesis testing for efficacy is not proposed for this initial safety and preliminary efficacy trial.   
 
8.1. Safety  
 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_456299]'s that occur throughout the study and provide his assessment of the study safety 
profile as well as his recommendations for the study continuation.  All AEs will be communicated to the FDA as 
part of the annual reporting for this proposed IDE study.   
All AEs will be reported and categorized by [CONTACT_147719], probably, possibly, unlikely, or 
unrelated to the CSF infusion, and/or Parkinson’s disease progression. Standard Code of Federal Regulation 
definitions for Serious Adverse Events (SAE s) and Unanticipated Adverse Device Effects (UADEs) will be used 
in assessment of AEs.  
Primary safety endpoint for this study is the adverse event profile generated during the CED  procedure 
through Month 6.   
 
8.2. Efficacy  
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
23 
  
The primary efficacy endpoint will b e focused on determining the degree of change in motor symptoms as 
measured from the un- medicated ( off), UPDRS motor subsection (Part III) at [ADDRESS_583243] -treatment which are compared to a baseline assessment.  These measures include:  
• Neuropsychological assessment for cognition, depression, and behavioral changes at scheduled visits   
• Adverse events  
• Physical exam 
• Neurological exam  
 
Secondary efficacy endpoints will include comparison of Baseline to post -treatment assessments for:  
• Levodopa equivalent medication usage (milligrams)  
• Quality of life assessment with PDQ -39 
 
8.4. Statistical Considerations and Sample Size  
 
This is an open- label feasiblity  study of 4 subjects to be recruited from a single center.  In order to find 4  
eligible subjects suitable for treatment, up to 20  subjects may be consented and screened.  For this study, a 
statistical sample size analysis is not proposed.  All those subjects that were consented and then found not 
meeting study requirements will be considered screen failures .  
The Safety and Effectiveness assessment will be descriptive with no statistical endpoints.  The results 
will be examined and analyzed and used as a basis for determining the nature of future studies.  
 
9. ADVERSE EVENT AND REPORTING   
 
The adverse event  collec tion interval for this study begins at the time of the lumbar puncture (start of 
investigational procedure)  and ends at the 6 Month Follow up visit.   
 After informed consent has been obtained , and prior to initiation of investigational intervention, only 
serious adverse events caused by a protocol -mandated intervention should be reported (e.g., serious adverse 
events related to invasive procedures such as blood draw ). AEs reported between the time the patient signed 
the informed consent and the DBS surgery will be captured as concurrent medical history unless due to a 
protocol -related procedure.  
 After initiation of investigational  intervention , all adverse events  will be reported according to the 
guidelines in the followi ng sections . After this period, investigators should report any deaths, serious adverse 
events, or other adverse events of concern that are believed to be related to the investigational intervention.  
 All adverse events, whether reported by [CONTACT_25743], should be recorded in 
the patient’s medical record. Adverse events should be assessed for seriousness, severity, attribute and 
expectedness by [CONTACT_079] , or designee.  
AEs should be followed to resolution or stabi lization, and reported as SAEs if they become serious. This also 
applies to subjects experiencing AEs that cause interruption or discontinuation of study intervention, or those 
experiencing AEs that are present at the end of their participation in the stud y. Such subjects should receive 
post-treatment follow -up as appropriate.  
 If an ongoing AE changes in its severity or in its perceived relationship to study intervention, a new AE 
entry for the event should be completed.  
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
24 
  AE and SAE recording will continue until the End of Treatment visit is performed. SAEs considered 
related to the interventional procedure  may be reported at any time, even after the patient’s final visit.  
 
9.1. Definitions  
 
Adverse Event  
 
An adverse event is an y untoward medical occurrence in a subject who has received an investigational 
intervention, whether or not related to the investigational intervention(s). Medical conditions present before 
starting the investigational intervention will be considered adver se events only if they worsen after starting 
study treatment. Adverse events include unfavorable, harmful or pathological changes in the general condition 
of a subject ; subjective or objective symptoms (spontaneously offered by [CONTACT_127205]/or observed by [CONTACT_456322]); i ntercurrent events or exacerbation of pre- existing diseases which occurred 
after the a dministration of the study drug; c linically significant chan ges in laboratory abnormalities; or  any 
undesirable and unintended effect of research occurring in human subjects as a result of the collection of 
identifiable private information under the research.  
Persistent or Recurrent Adverse Events  
 
A persistent  adverse event is an event which extends continuously, without resoluti on, between assessments. 
This event should only be recorded once with the initial severity grade. If the severity of the event worsens, 
then the original event ends and a separate event is recorded at the greater grade.  
 
A recurrent  adverse event is an event which resolves between assessments and subsequently recurs. This 
should be recorded as a separate event for each recurrence.  
Secondary Adverse Events  
 
In general, events occurring secondary to other events (e.g., cascade events or clinical sequelae) should be 
considered a single event identified by [CONTACT_86187]. However, a secondary event should be listed as an 
independent event if it meets one of the following criteria:  
• severe  
• serious  
• separated in time from the primary eve nt 
 
If it is not clear as to whether events are dependent, then record as separate adverse events.  
Abnormal Laboratory Values/Clinical Assessments  
 
It is the responsibility of the investigator , or designee,  to review and document all laboratory findings an d 
clinical assessments, which may include vital signs, physical exams and ECGs. Medical and scientific 
judgment should be exercised in deciding whether a laboratory abnormality or clinical finding should be 
classified as an adverse event. In general, an abnormal laboratory test result or clinical finding should be 
considered as an adverse event if it meets at least one  of the following criteria:  
• Is associated with clinical symptoms  
• Results in a change in study treatment (e.g., treatment modification, interr uption or discontinuation)  
• Requires a medical intervention or change in concomitant therapy  
• Clinically significant in the investigator’s judgment  
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
25 
  
Note that if a clinically significant laboratory abnormality or clinical finding is a sign of a disease or syndrome 
(e.g. elevated ALT) then this should be recorded as a single event identified by [CONTACT_456323] (hepatic failure).  
 
If a clinically signific ant laboratory abnormality is not a sign/symptom of another primary event, the abnormality 
itself should be recorded as an adverse event. The event should be described using a specific clinical term 
(“hyperkalemia”), if possible, or as test result above or  below the normal range (e.g., "elevated Vitamin D," as 
opposed to "abnormal Vitamin D").  
Death 
 
Death should be considered an outcome  of an adverse event and not an independent adverse event. The 
event or condition that caused the death should be recorded as the adverse event with the outcome of death. If 
the cause of death is unknown and cannot be ascertained at the time of reporting, then the event should be 
reported as an “unexplained death” . If the cause of death later becomes available (e.g., after autopsy), 
“unexplained death” should be updated by [CONTACT_25749].  
Preexisting Medical Conditions  
 
A preexisting medical condition is one that is present during the pre- study screening assessments. These 
conditions should be noted on the Medical History form. Preexisting medical conditions are not considered 
adverse events unless any of the following characteristics worsen following initiation of any study -related 
procedure:  
• frequency  
• severity  
• character  
If any of the above conditions apply, then this should be recorded as an adverse event. Remember to 
convey that this is a change in a preexisting condition when describing the event (e.g., “increased 
frequency of kidney stones”).  
Adverse Device Effect (ADE)  
 
An adverse device effect (ADE) is any untoward and unintended response to a medical device. This definition 
includes:  
• - any event resulting from insufficiencies or inadequacies in the instructions for use   or the deployment 
of the device,  
• - any event that is a result of a user error  
Serious Adverse Device Effect (SADE)  
 
A serious adverse device effect (SADE)  is an adverse device effect that has resulted in any of the 
consequences characteristic of a serious adverse event  or that might have led to any of these consequences if 
suitable action had not been taken or intervention had not been made or if circumstances had been less 
opportune.  
Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect (UADE)  
 
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/[ADDRESS_583244] (UADE) is any serious adverse event on health or safety or any life-
threatening problem or death caused by, or associated with, a device, if that effect, problem, or death was not 
previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence in the investigational plan or application 
(including a supplementary plan or app lication), or any other unanticipated serious problem associated with a 
device that relates to the rights, safety, or welfare of subjects.  
Serious Adverse Event  
 
A serious adverse event or experience (SAE)  is any adverse event temporally associated with t he subject’s 
participation in research that meets any of the following criteria:  
• Fatal ; 
• Life-threatening (places the subject at immediate risk of death from the event as it occurred);  
• Requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_64005];*  
• Results in congenital anomaly/birth defect;  
• Results in a persistent or significant disability/incapacity;  
• Important medical events that may not result in death, be life- threatening, or require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_45790] a serious adverse dr ug experience when, based upon appropriate medical 
judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical or surgical intervention 
to prevent one of the outcomes listed in the definition.  For reporting purposes, also consider the 
occurrences of pregnancy as an event which must be reported as an important medical event.  
*Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_66301] a serious adverse 
event, except if the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_440524]:  
 
• The hospi[INVESTIGATOR_440525] 24 hours without an admission 
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_25678] 
• Planned hospi[INVESTIGATOR_33402] (e.g., for anticipated or protocol specified procedures 
such as administration of chemotherapy, central line insertion, metastasis interventional therapy, 
resection of primary tumor, or elective surgery ) 
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_272] a preexisting condition, provided that all of the following criteria are met:  
 The hospi[INVESTIGATOR_456300].  
 The patient has not suffered an adverse event.  
 
If the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_440527], then it is not considered a serious adverse event.  
9.2. Attribution Assessment  
 
The Principal Investigator , or designee, will evaluate all AEs and assess their toxicity and attribution, if any, to 
study drug.  The following criteria will define the attribution:  
Definit e:  The AE is clearly in relation to the investigational intervention.  
Probable:  The AE is likely related to the investigational intervention.  
Possible:  The AE may be related to the investigational intervention.  
Unlikely : The AE is doubtfully related to th e investigational intervention.  
Unrelated : The AE is NOT related to the investigational intervention.  
 
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/[ADDRESS_583245] according to 
the participating  site institutional policies.  
 
For the University of Virginia clinical site, the Principal Investigator (PI) or designee is responsible for reporting 
AEs and unanticipated problems to the UVA HSR -IRB according to the following guidelines.   
 
Table 1. IRB Reporting Requirements  
Type of Event  To whom will it be 
reported:  Time Frame for 
Reporting  How reported?  
Any internal event resulting in 
death that is deemed 
DEFINITELY related to (caused 
by) study participation 
An internal event is  one that 
occurs in a subject enrolled in a 
UVa protocol  IRB-HSR  Within 24 hours  IRB Online and phone call  
 
www.irb.virginia.edu/  
 
Internal, Serious, Unexpected 
adverse event  
 
See Oncore reporting 
requirement (sponsor's protocol 
section 10.5).  
 IRB-HSR  Within 7 calendar days 
from the time the study 
team received 
knowledge of the event.  
 
Timeline includes 
submission of signed 
hardcopy of AE form.  IRB Online  
 
www.irb.virginia.edu/  
 
Unanticipated Problems that are 
not adverse events or protocol 
violations  
This would include a Data 
Breach.   IRB-HSR  
 
 Within 7 calendar days 
from the time the study 
team received 
knowledge of the event.   Unanticipated Problem report form.  
 
http://www.virginia.edu/vprgs/irb/HSR
_docs/Forms/Reporting_Requiremen
ts-Unanticipated_Problems.doc  ) 
 
  
Protocol Violations  
 (The IRB -HSR only requires that 
MAJOR violation be reported, 
unless otherwise required by [CONTACT_456324], if applicable.)  
 
Or  
 
Enrollment Exceptions  IRB-HSR  
 
 Within 7 calendar days 
from the time the study 
team received 
knowledge of the event.   
 Protocol Violation and Enrollment 
Exception Reporting Form  
 
 
http://www.virginia.edu/vprgs/irb/hsr_
forms.html  
 
Go to 3rd bullet from the bottom.   
Data Breach  The UVa Corporate 
Compliance and 
Privacy Office, a  
 
 
ITC:  if breach 
involves  electronic 
data-   
 
 
UVa Police if 
breach includes 
such things as 
stolen computers.  As soon as possible and 
no later than 24 hours 
from the time the 
incident is identified.  
 
As soon as possible and 
no later than 24 hours 
from the time the 
incident is identified.  
IMMEDIATELY.   
 
 UVa Corporate Compliance and 
Privacy Office - Phone 924- 9741 
 
 
 
ITC:  Information Security Incident 
Reporting procedure ,  
http://www.itc.virginia.edu/security/re
porting.html  
 
Phone-  (434) 924- 7166 
 
 
9.4. Additional Reporting Requirements  
 
9.4.1.  Reporting to the FDA  
 
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
28 
 The Sponsor for the study (the UVA PI [INVESTIGATOR_1461]) is responsible for providing safety updates to the FDA  per 
the following guidelines.  The reporting times refer to the time the study team received knowledge of the AE.  
Table 2. FDA Reporting Requirements  
Type of Event  To whom 
will it be 
reported:  Time Frame for 
Reporting  How reported?  
Life-threatening and/or fatal unexpected 
events related or  
possibly related to the use of the 
investigational agent.  FDA Within 7 calendar days of 
the study team learning of 
the event  Form FDA 3500A (MedWatch) or 
narrative 
Serious, unexpected and related or possib  
related adverse events  FDA Within 15 calendar days 
after the study team 
receives knowledge of 
the event  Form FDA 3500A (MedWatch) or 
narrative 
All adverse events  FDA Annually  IND annual report  
 
 
9.4.2.  Data Safety Monitoring Plan 
 
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_456301].  
9.5. Expected adverse events  
 
All events that are commonly seen in this patient population or in patients who have DBS may be reported as 
expected.  The patient will undergo two procedures during the course of this study that differ from the standard 
clinical practice of MRI -guided placement of DBS electrodes under general anesthesia. They are a lumbar 
puncture and an intracerebral infusion of autologous CSF.  Adverse events described here and in the informed 
consent may also be considered expected.  
  
Lumbar puncture 
 
Obtaining a lumbar puncture leads to the risk of complications of the lumber puncture which include bleeding, 
infection, nerve root damage, CSF leak, bowel or bladder incontinence, weakness, sensory loss, need for 
operation to repair CSF leak or evacuate hematoma.  Lumbar punctures are a standard procedure used for 
many indications; the risk of a complication is minimal.  Discomfort from the procedure should be minimal as 
the procedure is being performed while the patient is under general anesthesia.  Patie nts with known spi[INVESTIGATOR_456302].  In the 
event that CSF cannot be obtained or the fluid obtained is excessively bloody, then the infusion procedure will 
be aborted and the DBS electrodes will be placed using standard techniques.  Patients will be fully informed of 
the risks of lumbar punctures during the consenting process.   
 
Intracerebral infusion 
 
The primary risk of the intracerebral infusion is that the infusion of autologous CSF will lead to neuronal 
damage. This risk is assessed to be minimal based on our preclinical animal studies demonstrating no acute 
and chronic histologic effects as a result of the infusion of CSF in swine. Our results are similar to other results 
in a rat model where albumin was infused and no damage was noted.3 In order to mitigate the risk for toxicity, 
we plan to limit the infusion to a maximum volume of 500 microliters of autologous CSF.  However, if 
unforeseen neuronal damage were to occur, there could be damage t o the target structures and the 
surrounding structures leading to loss of sensation, worsening of movement disorders, and weakness. Patients 
will be fully informed of the risks of the CSF infusion during the consenting process.       
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/2018  
29 
  
Catheter insertion 
 
The insertion of the infusion catheter into the brain could also lead to brain injury from intracerebral bleeding or 
stroke. This risk should not be increased beyond that for routine DBS surgery as the microcatheter will be 
inserted through a guide cannula that is already positioned for the DBS electrode. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897], the risk of a 
hemorrhagic complication from stereotactic insertion of an electrode is ~1%.[ADDRESS_583246] (IRB) Approval and Consent  
 
It is expected that the IRB will have the proper representation and function in accordance with federally 
mandated regulations.  The IRB should approve the consent form and protocol.  
 In obtaining and documenting informed consent, the investigator should comply with the applicable 
regulatory requirement(s), and should adhere to all ICH E6 principles and Good Clinical Practice (GCP) , to 
ethical principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki.  
 Before recruitment and enrollment onto this study, the subject  will be given a full explanation of the 
study and will be given the opportunity to review the consent form. Each consent form must include all the 
relevant elements currently required by [CONTACT_44316]. Once this essential 
information has been provided to the subject  and the investigator is assured that the subject  understands the 
implications of participating in the study, the subject  will be asked to give consent to participate in the study by 
[CONTACT_10001] -approved consent form.  
 Prior to a subject ’s participation in the trial, the written informed consent form should be signed and 
personally dated by [CONTACT_456325].  
10.2.  Adherence to the Protocol  
 
Except for an emergency situation in which proper care for the protection, safety, and well -being of the study 
subject  requires alternative treatment, the study sha ll be conducted exactly as described in the approved 
protocol.   
10.3.  Emergency Modifications  
 
Investigators may implement a deviation from, or a change of, the protocol to eliminate an immediate hazard(s) 
to trial subjects without prior IRB -HSR approval/favora ble opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649].   
 For any such emergency modification implemented, a UVA IRB modification form must be completed 
by [CONTACT_440565] (5) business days of making the change.   
 
10.4.  Other Protocol Deviations/Violations  
 
Protocol Deviations: A protocol deviation is any unplanned variance from an IRB approved protocol that:  
 
• Is generally noted or recognized after it occurs  
• Has no substantive effect on the risks to research participants  
• Has no substantive effect on the scientific integrity of the research plan or the value of the data 
collected  
• Did not result from willful or knowing misconduct on the part of the investigator(s).  
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/[ADDRESS_583247] the deviation, and report to any sponsor or data and safety monitoring committee 
in accordance with their policies.  Deviations should be summarized and reported to the IRB at the time of 
continuing review.  
Protocol Violations: An unplanned protocol variance is considered a violation  if the variance:  
 
• Has harmed or increased the risk of harm to one or m ore research participants.  
• Has damaged the scientific integrity of the data collected for the study.  
• Results from willful or knowing misconduct on the part of the investigator(s).  
• Demonstrates serious or continuing noncompliance with federal regulations, State laws, or 
University policies.  
Violations should be reported by [CONTACT_456326] (1) week of the investigator becoming 
aware of the event.  
10.5.  Record Retention  
 
Study documentation includes all Case Report Forms, data correction form s or queries, source documents, 
Sponsor -Investigator correspondence, monitoring logs/letters, and regulatory documents (e.g., protocol and 
amendments, IRB correspondence and approval, signed subject  consent forms).  
Source documents include all recordings of observations or notations of clinical activities and all reports and 
records necessary for the evaluation and reconstruction of the clinical research study.  
 Government agency regulations and directives require that all study documentation pertaining to the 
conduct of a clinical trial must be retained by [CONTACT_1704].  In the case of a study with a drug seeking 
regulatory approval and marketing, these documents shall be retained for at least two years after the last 
approval of marketing application in an International Conference on Harmonization (ICH) region.  In all other 
cases, study documents should be kept on file until six  years after the completion and final study report of this 
investigational study.  
 
10.6.  Obligations of Investigators  
 
The Pri ncipal Investigator is responsible for the conduct of the clinical trial at the site in accordance with Title 
21 of the Code of Federal Regulations , all applicable local regulatory laws and regulations  and/or the 
Declaration of Helsinki.  The Principal Inv estigator is responsible for personally overseeing the treatment of all 
study subject s.  The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_9979], including sub- investigators 
and other study staff members, adhere to the study protocol and all F DA/GCP/NCI regulations and guidelines 
regarding clinical trials both during and after study completion.  It is the responsibility of the Principal 
Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_456303] (with the exception of local and national regulatory 
bodies which require access for oversight purposes ).  
 The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_456304]. Periodically, monitoring visits will be conducted and the Principal 
Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_65448]/her original records to permit verification of proper entry of data. At the 
completion of the study, all case report forms will be reviewed by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_9982]/her final signature [CONTACT_10015].  
  
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/[ADDRESS_583248], et al: Development and 
implementation of intraoperative magnetic resonance imaging and its neurosurgical applications. 
Neurosurgery 41: 831-842; discussion 842- 835, 1997 
2. Burchiel KJ , McCartney S, Lee A, Raslan AM: Accuracy of deep brain stimulation electrode 
placement using intraoperative computed tomography without microelectrode recording. J 
Neurosurg 119: 301-306, 2013  
3. Ding D, Kanaly CW, Cummings TJ, Herndon JE, 2nd, Raghavan R,  Sampson JH: Long -term safety 
of combined intracerebral delivery of free gadolinium and targeted chemotherapeutic agent PRX321. 
Neurol Res 32: 810-815, 2010  
4. Elias WJ, Fu KM, Frysinger RC: Cortical and subcortical brain shift during stereotactic procedures. J 
Neurosurg 107: 983-988, 2007  
5. Elias WJ, Sansur CA, Frysinger RC: Sulcal and ventricular trajectories in stereotactic surgery. J 
Neurosurg 110: 201-207, [ADDRESS_583249] JP: Stereotaxic atlas o f the 
pig brain. Brain Res Bull 49: 1-137, 1999  
7. Hall WA, Martin AJ, Liu H, Nussbaum ES, Maxwell RE, Truwit CL: Brain biopsy using high- field 
strength interventional magnetic resonance imaging. Neurosurgery 44: 807-813; discussion 813 -
804, 1999 
8. Ivan ME,  Yarlagadda J, Saxena AP, Martin AJ, Starr PA, Sootsman WK, et al: Brain shift during bur 
hole- based procedures using interventional MRI. J Neurosurg 121: 149-160, 2014  
9. Kleiner -Fisman G, Herzog J, Fisman DN, Tamma F, Lyons KE, Pahwa R, et al: Subthalamic  nucleus 
deep brain stimulation: summary and meta -analysis of outcomes. Mov Disord [ADDRESS_583250] 14: S290-
304, [ADDRESS_583251] B, Senatus PB, Winfield LM, Du YE, Pullman SL, et al: Subthalamic 
stimulation for Parkinson disease: determination of electrode location necessary for clinical efficacy. 
Neurosurg Focus 19: E12, 2005  
11. Mirzadeh Z, Chapple K, Lambert M, Evidente VG, Mahant P, Ospi[INVESTIGATOR_456305], et al: Parkinson's disease 
outcomes after intraoperative CT -guided "asleep" deep brain stimulation in t he globus pallidus 
internus. J Neurosurg 124: 902-907, 2016  
12. Ostrem JL, Galifianakis NB, Markun LC, Grace JK, Martin AJ, Starr PA, et al: Clinical outcomes of 
PD patients having bilateral STN DBS using high- field interventional MR -imaging for lead placem ent. 
Clin Neurol Neurosurg 115: 708-712, 2013  
13. Patel NK, Plaha P, Gill SS: Magnetic resonance imaging- directed method for functional 
neurosurgery using implantable guide tubes. Neurosurgery 61: 358-365; discussion 365 -356, 2007 
14. Sillay KA, Rusy D, Buya n-Dent L, Ninman NL, Vigen KK: Wide -bore 1.5 T MRI -guided deep brain 
stimulation surgery: initial experience and technique comparison. Clin Neurol Neurosurg 127: 79-
85, 2014 
15. Starr PA, Markun LC, Larson PS, Volz MM, Martin AJ, Ostrem JL: Interventional M RI-guided deep 
brain stimulation in pediatric dystonia: first experience with the ClearPoint system. J Neurosurg 
Pediatr 14: 400-408, 2014 
16. Starr PA, Martin AJ, Ostrem JL, Talke P, Levesque N, Larson PS: Subthalamic nucleus deep brain 
stimulator placement using high -field interventional magnetic resonance imaging and a skull -
mounted aiming device: technique and application accuracy. J Neurosurg 112: 479-490, 2010  
17. Sudhyadhom A, Okun MS, Foote KD, Rahman M, Bova FJ: A Three- dimensional Deformable Brain 
Atlas for DBS Targeting. I. Methodology for Atlas Creation and Artifact Reduction. Open Neuroimag 
J 6:92-98, 2012 
CED of CSF in DBS  for Parkinson’s  
PI: W. Jeffrey Elias MD  
Version/Date: Version 5.0, 10/08/[ADDRESS_583252] KL, Larson PS: Image -guided deep brain stimulation. Neurosurg Clin N Am 
25:159-172, 2014 
 
 