 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
HealthyMe Online Weight Management  
Education/HealthyMe at Home (HOME ) 
 
Protocol  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
IRB Protocol #: [PHONE_17994]  
       Principal Investigator [CONTACT_5627]: Clark, Daniel  
8/13/2015  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5.5.2. Specific Aims  
08/13/2015  
The Institute of Medicine report on comparative effectiveness research priorities notes that “Identifying effective 
methods for treating obese populations could significantly improve health in this country” and gives particular 
emphasis to high risk populations such as the urban poor.[ADDRESS_1212467] limited space thus mitigating their 
potential effectiveness.10  Alternative weight loss solutions are needed.11-13  In an editorial on obesity , James 
Hill and Holly W yatt wrote “we need research with social networks and need to embrace new technology.”[ADDRESS_1212468] demands of traveling to 
and from group meetings conducted at a central location.  Using this approach a single staff person can  serve 
patients of multiple community health center s and patients can be located anywhere with broadba nd Internet . 
 
For the proposed efficacy trial we will randomize 210 adult community health center  patients with body -mass 
index ≥30 and <50 to either an i n-person weight loss program, a video -conference  delivered weight loss 
program, or to a usual care control group.  Both active intervention arms will use the same protocol of the 
same services delivere d by [CONTACT_868730] a treatment 
fidelity checklist5 developed from an NIH workgroup’s recomm endations.4  In-person sessions will be held at 
community health centers , and in public community spaces such as the public library conference and meeting 
rooms and church class rooms;  and video -conference  sessions will be conducted by [CONTACT_868731] y health centers  or at Regenstrief Institute  with participants accessing the program from home using 
project supplied hardware and Internet connection.  Both active interventions will include nutrition education, 
support group discussion, and exercise clas ses tailored to the needs of obese community health center  
patients.  These intervention programs were developed using principals of social cognitive theory, and have 
been modified for a participant population with a range of literacy and numeracy skills.  All participants will 
receive their usual community health center medical care .   
 
Primary aims  are to compare weight loss in the two active treatment arms to the control condition at 6 - and 12 -
months.  We hypothesize  that, compared to usual care, 30% more persons in each of the active arms wil l have 
a clinically significant weight loss (≥2 kg) at 6 -months, and will maintain this weight loss at 12 -months.  We 
consider 2 kg a minimally clinically significant weight loss  based on sound evidence that a 2 kg weight loss is 
associated with a 20% reduction in the 3yr risk of hypertension15 and a 32%  reduction in the 3yr risk of type 2 
diabetes.16  
 
Secondary aims  are: 1) to compare the costs of the two active treatment arms a nd their cost -effectiveness to 
usual care, 2) to compare the two active treatment arms to the usual care arm in health outcomes (health -
related quality of life, blood pressu re, waist circumference) and 3) to assess processes of change (social 
support, enjoyment, attendance, nutrition lit eracy, self-efficacy, energy expenditure, and energy intake) .  
 
Summary of Impact : 1) Multiparty  video -conferencing has the potential to become a new, more effective way 
of delivering behavioral interventions to a much wider base than is possible with in -person sessions.  Access to 
video -conference weight loss resources could substantially reduce the  opportunity costs of weight loss 
participation for all persons .  2) Our proposed work could form the foundation for a longer term trial in a more 
geographically and socially diverse sample.  3) This work could result in a cost -effective weight loss 
interv ention that could be widely disseminated through either or both community health center s and broadband 
Internet.  Our study will be conducted in community health center s operated by [CONTACT_941] 3rd largest safety -net health 
system in the U.S.  Through the National  Association of Public Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_868713] -net 
system has the capacity to facilitate dissemination of model programs throughout t he country and is currently 
doing so with  recently developed care models .17 
 
5.5.3 (a). Significance  
a.1. Obesity disparities may be related to unequal access to resources .  Obesity rates are higher among l ower 
socioeconomic status and minority groups13, [ADDRESS_1212469], it has been hypothesized that attention to  information and counseling without attention to 
resource  disparities will lead to even greater socioeconomic and ethnic disparities in obesity .11-12   
 
a.2. Attendance and physical activity are critical to weight loss suc cess.  Both the Pounds of f with 
Empowerment (POWER ) trial 25 and the Weight Wise  trial26 adapted the core of the Diabetes Prevention 
Program ( DPP) for delivery to lower income persons.  Mean weight loss was 2.7kg to 3.7kg at 6 months but 
63% (Weight Wise) and 27% (POWER) of participants attended one -half or fewer intervention sessions.  In 
both studies, a strong relationship between attendance and weight loss was observed.  Similarly, in the 
ongoing multi -site Look AHEAD trial, individuals in the highest quartile of program attendance were five times 
more likely than those in the lowest quartile to meet the 12 -month, 7% weight loss goal .[ADDRESS_1212470] .30-31  Currently 42% of lower income households,32 
52% of African -American , and 47% of Hispanic households  (English and Spanish speaking)  have a home 
broadband Internet connection.33  Internet access  rates  for low income people and minorities  are growing by 
10% per year  34 and the federal government has dedicated billions to broadband growth.  On March 17, 2010, 
the FCC delivered a National Broadband P lan to Congress to bring greater high -speed Internet availability to 
improve  education,  energy , and health care .  The FCC plan calls for Internet broadband to become a universal 
service like the telephone system of old.  FCC objectives include: 1) broader adoption and innovation in e -care 
technologies, 2)  assigning airwaves for reduced cost or free broadband service, and 3)  service in 90% of U.S. 
homes .  Thus, the proposed intervention will become increasingly relevant and applicable over time.  
 
a.4. Importance of keepi[INVESTIGATOR_868714] .  The number of food records (diaries) kept is often correlate d with  
weight loss  23, 26, [ADDRESS_1212471] the capacity to obtain, process, and 
understand health information36 and is closely related to more general forms of literacy.37  Among lower literacy 
populations, food records can be difficult to keep due to linguistic, graphic, and particularly numeric skills 
required for reading, measuring, calculating, and recording.  A translation of the DPP in medically underserved 
urban locations found considerable resistance to an d inaccuracy in recording fat grams and calories .38  Among 
obese community health center patients in one of our prior studies, 81% tested inadequate in health literacy 
based on the New Vital Sign (NVS).39,40  In reviewing audio -tapes of the administration of the NVS, it was clear 
that numeracy was a limiting factor —enough so that m any subjects would not attempt the math required to 
answer the questions.  There i s emerging evidence that numeracy contributes to racial disparities in health 
behaviors41-42 and D r. Rothman , our consultant, has  found a strong correlation between literacy and numeracy 
skills  and the estimation and measurement of portion si ze.43,44  The proposed protocol provides image -based 
education and portion control tools . 
 
5.5.3 (b ). Innovation  
b.1. Simplified, tool -based nutrition protocol .  Prior trials have taught nutrition label reading and reviewed food 
records with participant s21, 23, [ADDRESS_1212472] nutrition concepts.   The Diabetes Literacy and Numeracy Toolkit (DLNET) developed 
by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Rothman contains education modules  and tools with  image -based and color -coded information  for 
persons with a 4th -6th grade reading ability .[ADDRESS_1212473] not had live 
communication or social interaction .  Multiparty v ideo-conference enables live, interactive communication, 
group interaction, supervision, and behavior modeling without travel .  A trial of multiparty video -conference for 
exercise in older adults showed greater attendance and better outcomes when compared to individual 
exercise.60  And, a  2009 rando mized trial showed that satisfaction with primary care visits was similar across 
face-to-face and video -conference visits .61   
 
b.3. Conceptual emphasis on costs of attendance, social support, and enjoyment .  Social cognitive theory  
(SCT) is known best for its attention to internal factors such as self -efficacy (i.e., confidence), which has been 
the basis for the majority of behavior change interventions.[ADDRESS_1212474].  A recent study showed  that friends of an individual who had become 
obese were 57% more lik ely to become obese themselves.67  Another  study showed through a path analysis 
that 40% of the variance in [ADDRESS_1212475] VC delivery to reduce the costs of  attendance.  We will explore 
theoretically guided hypo theses regarding intervention mediators  (see section c.22 ).     
 
In sum, our proposed intervention is innovative  in its use of: 1) literacy/numeracy sensitive nutrition materials 
and tools, 2) twice w eekly social interaction, physical activity, and education , and 3) multiparty video -
conference.  Multiparty video -conference is  an innovative and potentially cost -effective strategy that may 
overcome many barriers to weight loss participation for urban poor adults cared for in community health 
centers wh ile also potentially preserving the critical elements of social interaction and support.  
 
5.5.3 (c).  Approach  
c.1. Overview.   Obese community health center  patients will be randomly assigned to either in-person or VC 
weight loss program, or to a usual car e control condition .  The content and staff will be identical across active 
treatment arms .  The primary aim is to compare weight loss outcomes in VC and  in-person arms to usual care .   
 Weig
ht 
loss Social 
suppor
t, 
enjoy
ment, 
nutriti
on 
literac
y Energy 
expend
iture 
and 
energy 
intake  Session 
attenda
nce Costs of 
attenda
nce VC vs. 
In-
person 
deliver
y Self-
efficac
y 
Before presenting details of the proposed trial, we present our trial  experience , recruitment of minority and 
socioeconomic ally disadvantaged persons, intervention development and implementation  experience  in 
community health center s, and video -conference pi[INVESTIGATOR_20732] .  We have organized a team with complementary 
expertise.  Drs. Clark, Weiner, Marrero, Miller, and Stevens all have experience directing large study teams.  
Drs. Clark, Weiner, Marrero, Morrison, Keith, and Li all have office space in the Health Information and 
Technology Sciences building on the Indiana Universi ty School of Medicine campus.  Drs. Stevens, Rothman, 
and Mauskopf will participate in study meetings via teleconference and will travel to Indianapolis multiple times 
throughout the study.  Drs. Rothman and Mauskopf  have an ongoing working relationship through another 
project and the Indiana faculty has ongoing working relationships that span from four to [ADDRESS_1212476]. Marrero  has decades of experience in 
behavioral interventions and  was the Indi ana University (IU) site PI [INVESTIGATOR_868715].  The I U DPP site recruited 192 
subjects (second largest cohort among 27 participating centers) with 58 assigned to the intensive lifestyle 
condition.  For the follow -up DPP Outcomes Study, IU kept over 89% of subject s and continue s to study them 
after [ADDRESS_1212477] -effectiveness in randomized trials.   
 
c.3. Recruitment of Disadvantaged Persons .  Our research team has  recruited and retained socioeconomically 
disadvantaged participants in a number of recent trials with careful attention to the protection of human 
subjects .74, 76 -77  The GRACE  trial randomized 951 , low income  older adults to usual care or collaborative care .  
We completed 850 out of 951 24-month assessments.74  The mean Rapid Estimate of Adults Literacy in 
Medicine -revise d (REALM -R) score was 4.7.24,[ADDRESS_1212478] difficulty understanding written instruction.78  A majority (58%) of 
the sample was African -American.   [CONTACT_10017]’s African -American Health (AAH) project is a population -based 
cohort study of non -institutionalized African -Americans born between [ADDRESS_1212479]. Louis, 
Missouri.  There were 998 subjects enrolled in 2000 -2001, with an overall enrollme nt rate of 76%.  The AAH 
has completed six assessments  in eight years;  only [ADDRESS_1212480]  refused further participation  ([ADDRESS_1212481] died) .     
 
c.4. Evaluation an d Needs Assessments of Obese Community Health Center  Patients.  In an eff ort to further 
improve the reach and effectiveness of our weight loss program, our team r ecently  completed in -depth home 
interviews with  community health center  women  (n=10 African -American; n=9 Mexican -American interviews 
conducted in Spanish; n=11 non -Hispanic white) who were eligible but did not participate in the TCL weight 
loss program .  Negative themes that emerged included: 1) exercise is pain,  2) frustration wit h a primary focus 
on education, particularly repetitious education based on food guide pyramids, and 3) strong dislike of food 
diaries  and monitoring .  As we mentioned, women had great difficulty interpreting nutrition label information 
as indicated by [CONTACT_868732].   
We also learned that, for varied reasons, it is  very difficult for most  of these women  to get to  central meeting 
location s.  Strong positive themes were that  patients  wanted:  1) more discussion  with community health 
center  providers  about their weight , 2) more support at home for weight management, 3) exercise options , 
and 4) help with portion size control.   
 
A survey assessment of 141 obese female, Englis h speaking community health center  patients aged 40 to 64 
who were non -Hispanic white (n=77) or African -Ameri can (N=64) showed that 71% have 12 or fewer years of 
education, 43% have inadequate health literacy, and 76% have  annual household  incomes of less than 
$25,00 0.  In  health  behavior, 39% smoke, 49% have v ery high fat diets, and 48% have v ery low fruit and 
vegetable consumption.     
   
c.5. Community Health Center  Weight Management Program: Take Charge Lite (TCL).  [CONTACT_102779] is PI [INVESTIGATOR_868716], 
a weight management progr am for obese English and Spanish speaking adult s that was implemented in five  
community health centers  operated by [CONTACT_868733] .40, [ADDRESS_1212482] .  To date, TCL 
has provided weight loss services to over  4,700 obese patients.  TCL is based on the five ‘ A’s of behavior 
change counseling  (for more  details see http://medicine.iupui.edu/IUCAR/roybal/dissemination.asp ).  Our team 
of patient advisors, clinicians, and scientists completed multiple plan -do-study -act (PDSA) cycles in the 
process of adapting established protocols for local implementation of each ‘A’ (assess, advise, agree, assist, 
arrange).  Written materials are simple and kept to a minimum  to address low health literacy.  This program 
has provided crucial insights for the trial proposed in this applicat ion, particularly the need to address health 
literacy and numeracy and the critical importance of and barriers to physical activity and program attendance.[ADDRESS_1212483]  now pi[INVESTIGATOR_868717] -
conference for home -based exercise  and weight loss education and discussion .   
 
Our experience with five  separate video -conference pi[INVESTIGATOR_48409] —three exercise only pi[INVESTIGATOR_868718] —demonstrates:  1) ability of users wi th no prior computer experience  to 
participate fully , 2) exercise,  education,  and discussion feasibility, 3) no adverse events related to the protocol, 
4) high satisfaction  (3.5 out of 4.0) , 5) high attendance (85% to 94 %), and 6 ) highly reliable  technology .  
 
Communication via video -conference can be described as live, interactive television.  Multiple persons can be 
in the same conference creating a group or m ultiparty conference.  A conference “call” is answered in a way 
similar to a telephone in that one hears an incoming call and “clicks ” the answer button on the screen at which 
time one joins the conference.  Everyone in the conference can hear and be heard , and see and be seen.  O ff-
the-shelf  equipment  is set up wherever the participant  prefers in their home.  We have used several different 
base desktop computer models (Compaq Presario or HP 500B; $325) .  We attach a webcam (we used 
Logitech c200; $23) to t he top of a 19” monitor (Asus VH192D; $109) and we use external speakers with 
volume control (Logitech s120; $11).  The speakers can be turne d up so adults who can hear a  television can 
hear the conference session.  The instructor’s unit is similar but wit h a larger screen; we use a 40" LED model.  
A basic DSL or cable broadband Internet service is used for all participants (just [ADDRESS_1212484] DSL or cable modem speeds).  There are many options for pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103] -in-pi[INVESTIGATOR_868719].  We use a view where each subject sees a larger image of the interventionist and slightly smaller 
images of the other participants.  Each person’s name [CONTACT_868748]/her  pi[INVESTIGATOR_1103] -in-pi[INVESTIGATOR_868720].  We have tested several off -the-shelf video -conference software products, including Skype, Oovoo, 
Polycom, and Movi.  These all work for multiparty video -conference.  We will use Movi for this trial because in 
our experience the audio quality with Movi is a little better than with the other  products.  Our most recent pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] 
(n=6) had no technical difficulties across four weeks of twice weekly multiparty video -conference sessions; all 
participants used the system error free and reported high satisfaction with  the exercise, education, and 
discussion content,  audio and video quality , and usability.  Our pi[INVESTIGATOR_868721].   
 
In our first three pi[INVESTIGATOR_868722] -conference among obese community health center  patients, we conducted 
exercise classes only  to establish  the exercise and safety protocols .  No dietary or  weight loss education or 
discussion was completed .  The number of class participants ranged from 4 to 8.  All three pi [INVESTIGATOR_868723] -
Hispanic white and African -American participants.  This was a 2 -day per week progressive exercise program 
as described in Section c.16.  We ran these classes for 2 months each —16 total classes in each pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] .  There 
were no adverse events.  Overall attendance was 85%.  Nine subjects completed 15 or more of 16 sessions .  
Table 2.  Two month physical performance outcomes in exercise via video -conference pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  
Measure  Baseline  2-month  Change  
Chair stands in  30 seconds, mean (n=16)*  11.4 14.1 24% 
Steps in 2 minutes, mean (n=16)*  74.7 97.7 31% 
*Baseline values carried forward for one subject.   
 
In a fourth  pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] (n=6; 2 African -American and 4 white ) and a fifth pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] ( n=6; 5 African -American and 1 white ), 
we conducted exercise (45min) followed by [CONTACT_868734] (30min)  twice weekly for one 
month .  The purpose of these two pi[INVESTIGATOR_868724] y of the  technology.  The details of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_61623], enrollment, 
baseline assessment, and intervention protocol were the same as the proposed trial and are presented in 
Sections c.11, c.12, c.16, c.17 and c.18 below.  We consented and enrolled 1 in 4 eligible patients .  
Attendance in both pi[INVESTIGATOR_868725] 94% (90/96 person -sessions attended).  Education sessions and discussion 
were completed to the high satisfaction of participants.   At the completion of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] , participants were asked 
what they liked o r didn’t like about the program in an open -ended question.  The negative comments were : 
“better time”, “earlier in the day”, “more education”, “increase intensity”, and “include a session about support 
group.”  Positive comments were:  “I love it --the girls  are very detaile d”, “very educational and helpful ”, “it is at 
home but still other people to do it with” , “community like aspect ; comfortable in home and still have group in 
home ; feel safe in home ; no self -image insecurities at home” , “convenience” , “fellowship.”  Satisfaction with th e 
program was also assessed using questions on a Likert -type scale ranging from (4) very  satisfied to (1) very 
dissatisfied.  Mean satisfaction was 3.55 .  No one reported that the system affected their doctor -patient 
relation ship.   All reported ease of use and total  satisfaction with answering the “call” and audio and visual 
quality.   In the fourth pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], an electrical storm disrupted service for one class session.  In the fifth pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], there 
were no technical errors or difficulties.   
 
c.8. Weight Loss In-Person .  Through TCL we have conducted hundreds of  in-person weight loss, nutrition, 
exercise and discussion groups  over [ADDRESS_1212485] the infrastructure and experience for: 1) recruiting and retaining low 
socioeconomic status and ethnic minority adults , 2) running behavioral weight loss randomized trials  using 
both the DLNET and the DPP protocols , 3) developi[INVESTIGATOR_868726] s, and 4) designing and operating video -conference interventions.  
 
PROPOSED  Design  
 
c.10. Study Setting and Population .  The setting will be community health center s located around 
Indianapolis —an area consisting of mainly African -American and lower income non-Hispanic white persons.    
We have full support of Wishard Health Services (see letter of support from [CONTACT_19230], CEO).  The targe t 
population is English speaking  patients aged 40 to 6 9 years without type 2 diabetes and  a BMI  ≥30<50.  The 
age range is where obesity is most prevalent.  We exclude persons with diabetes to avoid multiple nutrition 
messages for the same class (Drs. Rothman and Marrero have evolving protocols and projects for persons 
with diabetes that could serve as video -conference models for this subgroup).  Less than 5% of the Wishard 
population has a BMI of [ADDRESS_1212486] at this time .10, 47 -48  Changing location of 
residence will be ok; we had one pi[INVESTIGATOR_868727] t his. However, persons will need a physical space with 
utility services available.   
Inclusion Criteria  Exclusion Criteria  
EMR/Physician report:  
1. Aged [ADDRESS_1212487] 12 months  
3. Body -mass index of ≥30< 50. 
 
Self-report:  
4. English speaking.  
5. Access to telephone.  
6. A residence.  
7. Willingness to be randomized.  
8. Willingness to have computer installed in 
home.  
 EMR/Physician report:  
1. Current diagnosis of type 2 diabetes.  
2. Any serious medical condition likely to hinder accurate weight measurement, or for 
which weight loss is contraindicated or could cause weight loss (e.g., cancer).  
3. Cognitive Impairment based on the 6 item screener.  
4. Current diagnosis of  psychosis or bipolar disorder.  
5. Unstable or recent onset of cardiovascular disease within 6 months or presence of 
congestive heart failure.  
6. Illness that might be associated with weight change, such as asthma (because of 
treatment with corticosteroids), psychosis  
7. Use of medications that might cause weight gain such as hypoglycemic oral 
medicines or insulin, anti -depressants, and weight loss medications.  
8. One no show to a pri mary care visit in the past 12 months . 
 
Self-report:  
9. Unwilling or unable to provide informed consent.  
10. Receiving  or plans to obtain  disability insurance  at enrollment . 
11. Pregnant or nursing in past 6 months, or plans to become so within 12 months.  
12. Enrolled in a weight loss program or member of household enrolled in study.  
13. Residence outside of Marion County, Indiana ( a PO box will not be counted as a 
Marion County address.  
14. Residence relocation plans within 12 months.  
15. Planned or prior bariatric surgery.  
16. Substance abuse.  
17. History of treatment for eating disorder.  
18. Unstable weight with loss or gain of ≥ 10% in last [ADDRESS_1212488], potentially eligible patients will  be met in person before a clinic visit or  receive a 
telephone call from the Practice -Based Research Network (PBRN) research assistant (RA)inviting the patient’s 
participation in the study.  Those indicating interest will receive further screening at this time. 
 
c.12. Enrollment, Baseline Assessment, and Randomization . Final screen, consent, baseline assessment, and 
randomization will follow the telephone screen.  Baseline assessments will be completed in patients’ homes , 
community centers, or community health cent ers prior to randomization.    Random assignment to study arms  
will occur  after at least three assessments  have been completed .  We will stratify randomization by [CONTACT_545] (we 
expect that all Hispanics in our sample will be white) .  We will also stratify randomization by [CONTACT_868735] (PHQ) scores (a score of 10 or higher indicates major depression).   The biostatistician ([CONTACT_55209]) 
will provide one stack of sealed envelopes for each of the strata and the research assistants will take the next 
available envelope from the appropriate stack.   Each of the planned recruitment, enrollment, assessment, and 
randomization steps were used successfully in our VC pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602].  Subjects in all arms will receive a $[ADDRESS_1212489] for completi on of the baseli ne and 6 month assessment.  A research assistant will travel to participants’ 
homes, inform them of their arm assignment, give them the materials, if needed, for their assignment, and take 
an additional weight measurement.  If the first assessment occurs in community center, health center or similar 
location, randomization  may occur at the same time as the assessment if space and sta ffing allows.  
Arrangements may  be made at that time for the computer to be installed for those randomized into the video 
confer ence arm.  
 
c.13. Final Assessment and Close -out. The follow -up assessment s will be completed in patients’ home s, 
community center , health center , or similar location  6 and 12 months after the start of the intervention .  To 
achieve blinded final assessments, the 12 -month assessment will be completed by [CONTACT_868736] -out 6 -month assessments and only  after equipment has been retrieved from the VC arm participants’ 
homes  by [CONTACT_21171].   Every effort will be made  to retrieve equ ipment within 2 days of the final 
meeting.  Compensation for completing the 12-month assessment  will be a $[ADDRESS_1212490] access to weight loss services at set 
times in  community health center meeting room s or in nearby [CONTACT_868737] , community 
centers , SoBeFit or other similar exercise facilities  and public libraries .  The structure, size, goals,  and content 
of the sessions will be the same as that for the VC group.   
 
c.15. Video -Conference ( VC) Arm .  Participants assigned to VC  treatment will have a windows -based desktop 
computer with broadband Inte rnet installed in their home.  C omputers will b e setup  in kiosk mode and Internet 
brow sing will not be possible .  Participants are shown what they will see and need to “click” to answer the 
video -conference call.    
 
c.16. Treatment Fidelity Strategies .  The study will use two interventio nists and each will deliver  in-person and 
VC sessions.  Detailed protocols exist and allow consist ent delivery and replication of  DPP sessions, modified 
DLNET  sessions , and physical activity movements and progression.  Treatment fidelity and monitoring 
strategies follow the NIH Behavior Change Consortium Strategies4 and checklist5 as detailed in the table 
below.  
 Five Treatment Fidelity Categories and 
Associated Strategies  Active Arms (video -conference arm and in -person)  
1. Treatment design   
a) specify theory, content, and dose  See sections b.1, b.3, and c.17  
b) specify provider credentials  Bachelor’s degree in exercise science or nutrition  
2. Training providers   
a) describe and standardize provider training  Trained according to revised DPP ([CONTACT_868749]) and DLNET ([CONTACT_868750]) protocols and 
physical activity ([CONTACT_860002]) protocol; Listed investigators are very experienced in training 
interventionists according to their respective protocols.   
b) conduct posttraining evaluations  Each interventionist will lead and be rated in 2 practice sessions ( one session in -person and 
video -conference) with investigators as participants; investigators will independently rate and 
critique on dietary and behavioral recommendations and physical activity instruction; 
retraining as needed; rating measure based on pr otocol fidelity across delivery modes  
3. Treatment delivery   
a) provide delivery manual and checklists  Manuals established for DPP and DLNET sessions, and physical activity protocol; procedural 
and safety checklists created and approved by [CONTACT_868738]  
b) assess provider adherence to treatment plan  Ratings of protocol compliance following method described under “posttraining evaluations” 
based on random, approximately biweekly evaluations of audio and video recorded sessions 
(digital recording of video -confere nce sessions is an option in Movi that we have tested; for 
in-person sessions we will have a digital video -camera setup for all sessions — research 
shows that recording -induced effects disappear after three data -gathering sessions82-83) 
4. Receipt of treatment   
a) assess subject understanding  Discussion and review of prior session lesson and homework; practice nutrition label reading  
b) assess subject ability to use skills taught in 
the treatment  Observation of physical activity movements; nutrition and ph ysical activity logs; New Vital 
Sign (NVS) test for nutrition literacy  
5. Skill enactment   
a) assess subject performance of intervention 
outside of treatment setting  2-week accelerometry  for energy expenditure and 24 -hour dietary recall for energy intake 
(see section 5.5.3.c.19)  
 
c.17. Weight Loss Session  Content: Both  In-Person and VC Treatment  Arms .  A weight loss goal of 1lb per 
week will be suggested however we will not prescribe specific goals.  Lasting motivation is more likely to 
develop when individuals set their own goals and receive support for their goals.84-[ADDRESS_1212491] 25% of their sessions.  Participants will have completed at least 50% of the study. The 
focus group will be a conversation style asking questions pertaining to what could make the classes more 
enjoyable and ways to increase the participant’s attendance.  
 
  Each week as has two sessions; first weekly session introduces a topic and second weekly session is a discussion of that topi c 
 Every session starts with 45 minutes of supervised, group exercise ; progressing to 60 minutes  
  Week  Session 1 Lesson Topic  Source  Session 2 Discussion Topic  
 Notes  
 1 Tip the calorie balance  DPP Tip the calorie balance  
   2 Use your plate (Dry food)  Revised DLNet  Use your plate (Dry food)  
   3 Use your cup (Liquid food)  " Use your cup (Liquid food)  
   4 Being Active: A way of life  DPP Being Active: A way of life  
 Add PA minutes  
5 Carbohydrates  Revised DLNet  Carbohydrates  
 outside of class  
6 Protein  " Protein  
   7 Fats and oils  " Fats and oils  
   8 Nutrition label -how to count calories  " Nutrition label -how to count calories         Progress to 1/2  
 9 Nutrition label -how to count fat  " Nutrition label -how to count fat         standing exercise  
10 Nutrition label -how to count fiber  " Nutrition label -how to count fiber  
  11 Nutrition label -how to count sodium  " Nutrition label -how to count sodium  
  12 Eating out                DPP Eating out                
 Progress to all  
 13 Snack ideas  Revised DLNet  Snack ideas  
 standing exercise  
14 Budget shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_868728]  
   15 Take Charge of What’s Around You  DPP Take Charge of What’s Around You  
  16 Social cues  DPP Social cues  
   17 Slippery Slope  DPP Exercise/brief discussion  
 Progress to 60 minute  
18 Stay motivated  DPP Exercise/brief discussion  
 exercise class  
 19 Nutrition label -booster session  Revised DLNet  Exercise/brief discussion  
 [ADDRESS_1212492] led support/exercise  
 Maintenance information  
  
Exercise .  Physical activity is critical to weight loss maintenance but obese adults often report functional 
limitations and discomfort with traditional exercise.88  Thus, t he initial exercise training session includes a 
series  of movements for whic h the participants remain seated .  The Ratings of Perceived Exertion scale will be 
introduced and subjects will receive a copy.  Subjects will be advised to exer cise at the intensity level of five  to 
six on a 10 point scale.  For adults over the age of 40 years, moderate -intensity is five to six on a 10 -point 
exertion scale .89  The session include s flexibility  but emphasizes  muscular and cardiovascular fitness.  Each 
exercise is performed in sets of two or three  and the exercise leader counts out loud to maintain appropriate 
movement pace .  There is a focus on proper breathing techniques and good posture and the exercise leader 
gives feedback and encouragement to the participants during the session.   Brief interactive games woven into 
the exercise sessions give an opportunity for  exertion checks (e.g., “talk test” ).[ADDRESS_1212493] 60 additional (i.e., outside of class)  minutes of moderate -intensity (e.g., 
brisk walking) physical activity per week for a total of 150 minutes.  We will give subjects maps and details of 
exercise program s that operate  throughout the city, including walking trials.   In addition, t he seated exercise 
progress es in pace each week as participants become familiar with the routine.  At the end of six  weeks, the 
exercise session s will progress to  ½ seated and ½ standing  althoug h the movements stay the same —seated 
movements are repeated in the standing position .  At the end of 10 weeks, the exercise sessions will be 
standing aerobic movements (any subject who wishes to remain seated can do so).  Starting in week [ADDRESS_1212494] Officer ex officio.   
 
DPP/DLNET Lessons and Look AHEAD Discussion Group . In weeks [ADDRESS_1212495] session of the week and a 30 -minute discussion  of that lesson will 
be held in the second session of the week .  This format was met with high satisfaction in our pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251].   
Subjects will receive a binder that has participant h andouts clearly  marked by [CONTACT_868739].  The education 
lesson content will follow core DPP sessions  excluding nutrition lessons that will follow modified DLNET 
content as shown in the box above.  Nutrition lessons incorporate the use of portion size tools —plate, bowl, 
and tumbler.  Each lesson handout presents subject s with a take home message and action plans related to 
the content.  The DPP and DLNET artwork and content have been extensively reworked to coordinate with one 
another, as well as self -monitoring forms and  portion size tools.  The coordinated DLNET, DPP and portion 
size tools can be viewed at http://medicine.iupui.edu/IUCAR/roybal/ tools .asp.   
 
Discussion s will be carried out following the support group structure and rules of the Look AHEAD study 
(https://w ww.lookaheadtrial.org/public/dspMaterials.cfm).  Action plans and take home messages  from the prior 
session will be used in the discussion group session as a way of providing review and support, and discussion 
of barriers and solutions.  The interventionis ts will lead the discussion with the goal of creating peer interaction 
and support.  Look AHEAD  training materials state that “rather than lecturing the group or interviewing 
individual participants, you should encourage participants to interact freely wit h each other; participants should 
pose questions to each other, offer suggestions, and share experiences. ”  
 
Self-Monitoring .  Many lower literacy subjects desire simplified food consumption and activity monitoring.  
From the first session, subjects will receive portion size tools and instruction in their use as well as supervised 
exercise.  Self -monitoring forms will be include d with the program binder but subjects will not be asked to use 
the activity log until after the DPP Being Active a Way of Life lesson in week [ADDRESS_1212496]  with the opening script “I missed you, is 
everything okay?” and the closing script “I look forward to seeing you (day and time of next session).”  If 
persons in the VC group receive calls or visits for technical assistance, the same number of rand omly selected 
persons in the in -person group will receive a brief telephone call with the script “I am just calling to check that 
everything is going okay for you in the program.”  All calls will be documented for subject, length, and reason.    
 
c.18. Data  Collection Procedures .  Our team has decades of experience collecting field data from vulnerable 
middle and older aged adults.  The assessors will have laptop computers with a database that is distinct fr om 
that used for monitoring  safety.  They will each  have a scale, blood pressure cuff, and any other necessary 
equipment.  Regenstrief Institute, Inc has two separate sets of office buildings on opposite ends of the IU 
School of Medicine campus.  We will house assessors and interventionists  in different lo cations.  We will 
schedule the retrieval of study computers prior to final assessment.  We will check assessor blinding by [CONTACT_868740].  This will allow a reporting of the extent to which assessors remained 
masked to assignme nt.  [CONTACT_10017] will lead the training of assessors.  [CONTACT_10017] will accompany each assessor  
to at least the ir first three assessments to observe procedures and review safety protocols.   
 
c.19. Measures .  All measures will be taken at baseline , 6, and 12  months.   Age, gender, ethnicity, health 
literacy, chronic disease diagnoses, height, goals, activity plans, telephone contacts, and attendance are all 
recorded and captured in web tracking and electronic medical records.  We will include questions about 
tobacco use at the baseline and follow -up assessments.  At baseline, persons will also be asked to report  their 
marital status, household size, and  their weight history including frequency of weight cyc ling (change of 20 lbs 
or more)  and number of previous weight loss attempts .  The baseline assessment for the exercise plus 
nutrition education and discussion via video -conference pi[INVESTIGATOR_868729] 40 
minutes .  To address literacy issues, all survey measures are interviewer -administer ed.   At the start of the 
intervention an additional weight measurement will be taken.  
 
Primary Measure: Body Weight . We will measure body weight to the nearest 0.1 lb using the Scale -Tronix  
5125 portable scale that has a capacity of 660lbs.  It is accurate to within 0.1lbs.  Subjects will stand flat footed, 
shoes removed, and light clothing.   We will take two separate measurements and average the two; if they differ 
by [CONTACT_726] 0.2lbs, a th ird measurement will be taken and the least congruent measurement dropped.     
 
Secondary Measures: ACTIVE ARMS ONLY:  
Attendance.   Session a ttendance  will be documented by [CONTACT_868741] -conference attendance ( VC arm ) or 
physical presence (in -person  arm).  Research staff will keep a record of the time, date, and study subject for 
each session.  Partial sessions will be counted based on the proportion of the session time completed.   
 
Program Costs and Cost -Effectiveness .  The one year cost of the first year of the individual -based DPP 
intervention was $[ADDRESS_1212497] of the group -based Weight Wise intervention was 
$242 over 5 months.95  We are propo sing meeting twice as frequently  for 2.4 times as long .  We estimate the 
fixed personnel and material intervention costs, whether in -person or VC, would be around $[ADDRESS_1212498] 5 months and $[ADDRESS_1212499] patients’ costs to participate in the weight loss interventions  (i.e., attendance costs) .  These costs 
include transportation costs, travel time, time off of work, and dependent care.  Cost of participation will be 
estimated by [CONTACT_868742]’ reported time by [CONTACT_654] -appropriate national wages f rom the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics ( BLS).  Intervention costs consist of non -research fixed and variable costs of administering the 
intervention.  Personnel costs will be calculated from interventionis t’s time logs and national median wages for 
registered dietitians or certified fitness instructors available online from the BLS.  Space cost charges will be 
prorated for size of space and time in use  from the clinic cost accounting system .  Actual compute r equipment 
and broadband service costs will be used.  All costs will be adjusted for inflati on, if necessary, using the 
Consumers’ Price Index (U.S. city average, all items) from the BLS.   The societal costs will be estimated by 
[CONTACT_868743], computer/broadband, and intervention staff costs to estimat e 
the incremental cost s from the societal perspective of VC vs. in -person interventions.  Average intervention 
costs will be the sum of intervention costs divided by [CONTACT_868744].   As was done 
in the cost -effectiveness analyses of the Weight Wise intervention,[ADDRESS_1212500]-effectiveness estimates w ill be generated; we will estimate the cost -
effectiveness of each active treatment arm compared to usual care and to one another.  For each comp arison, 
the cost -effectiveness estimates will be generated by [CONTACT_868745] —the difference between 
the costs associated with the intervention for the treatment arms —by [CONTACT_868746] [ADDRESS_1212501] not completing a 6 -month or 12 -month assessment.  Additional s ensitivity analyses will 
include 95% confidence limits for the estimated delivery and resource use costs and computer and broadband 
access costs.  For the latter, we will complete a n analysis in which the costs of computer and broadband 
access are discounted by [CONTACT_868747] e and ethnicity groups shown in the latest 
Pew Internet and American Life Project survey to have home computer and broadband Internet.   Finally, we 
will estimate duration of effectiveness assuming 1) one-half of weight regained by 24 months  and 2) all of 
weight regained by [ADDRESS_1212502] on health care use or costs over a one year time frame in a relatively small sample  
and so health care use and costs will not be compared for the two intervention groups or for the control group .   
 
Secondary Measures: ALL GROUPS:  
Energy Expenditure and  Energy Intake .  Total and  Physical Activity  Energy Expenditure  (via accelerometry) .  
We will estimate physical activity EE and total EE using the Actigraph Accelerometer  We will use a 2-week 
period  requiring at least [ADDRESS_1212503] and will be 
instructed not to remove the band for reasons other than showering/bathing/water immersion.  The assessor 
will call the next day to ask about any difficulties.  At [ADDRESS_1212504]  ongoing  experience with accelerometers in an 
ancillary study to the DPP Outcomes Study.  Energy Intake (via 24 -hour dietary recall).   At baseline, 6, and 12 
months, w e will complete  the 2010 National Cancer Institute (NCI) web -based 24 -hour dietary recall (ASA24)  
during the main assessment and again two weeks later when the a ssessor returns to recover the 
accelerometer (6 total dietary recalls).  The ASA24 uses v oice tutorial and navigation assistance for use in 
persons of all literacy levels that takes 20 minutes to complete online.  The ASA24 is based on the US 
Department of  Agriculture Automated Multiple Pass Method (AMPM) instrument currently used in the National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey.  The AMPM method is among the most valid approaches to dietary 
recall.102  A researcher web site allows researchers to register participants, set study parameters (e.g., number 
of recalls, time to complete a recall), and obta in analysis files.  NCI scientists have created algor ithms for 
combining recalls to estimate “usual intake” that we will use.103-[ADDRESS_1212505] database, blinded assessors will  document medical events a s part of the  assessments.  
 
Psychosocial.   Social support for dietary and exercise behavior  will be measured using the Social Support 
and Eating Habits Survey and the Social Support and Exercise Survey.110  Exercise Enjoyment will be captured 
using the physical activity enjoyment scale.111  This scale has 18 items that range from “I enjoy it” to “It’s no fun 
at all.”  Internal consistency has been around 0.[ADDRESS_1212506] reliability 0.60 to 0.90.  Self-efficacy .  The 
Weight Efficacy  Lifestyle (WEL) questionnaire asks participants to rate their confidence in their ability to control 
eating in different situations —negative emotions, availability, social pressure, physical discomfort, and positive 
activities.  WEL has Cronbach alpha coe fficients from 0.[ADDRESS_1212507] laptop  computers with Microsoft Access 
software carrying the da ta collection instruments.  Access programs allow data to be input once, response 
restrictions to be set, data checks that are re al time, and facilitate skip patterns.  The data are backed up onto 
the data manager’s computer at each day’s end.  Access data will be in SAS files for editing and analyses.  All 
computers are password -protected so they can be accessed only by [CONTACT_4144].  ASA24 data are 
stored on the NCI maintained site and will be merged into the local study dataset.  Assessors will give collected 
accelerometers to the data manager for data downloads within one business day of retrieval.  
 
c.21. Power and Sample  Size.   Based on evidence that a 2kg weight loss leads to a 20% reduction in 
hypertension15 and a 32% reduction in type [ADDRESS_1212508] 40% in the in -person and VC arms and 10% in the usual care arm to achieve a 2kg or greater weight 
loss.  The POWER trial obtained a 12 month weight measurement on 81% of randomized subjects but required 
a visit to the comm unity health center  for this measurement.  We have achieved 90% follow -up at [ADDRESS_1212509] conducted home assessments.  Assuming 90% follow -up, we need to randomize 
[ADDRESS_1212510] 80% power to detect a difference o f 30% in the proportion achieving 2kg or more 
weight loss at a two -sided alpha level 0.[ADDRESS_1212511] could serve patients of multiple 
community health center s located v irtually anywhere in the nation.   For persons with equipment and broadband 
service , we estimate that $400 per participant would cover the costs to run the proposed 5 -month core 
program with a group size of eight.  With health care costs for an obese adult averaging $1, [ADDRESS_1212512]. Stevens’ vast experience in weight loss 
maintenance will b e critical to these next steps.  