The Utility of Telemedicine in the Management Migraine: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_157870]:  Deborah I. Friedman, MD, MPH  
Co-Investigator:  Abraham Seidman n, PhD  (Simon School of Business University of 
[COMPANY_002]ster, [COMPANY_002]ster, [LOCATION_001])  
Sponsor:  [COMPANY_006] & Co.  
Version:  February 28 , 2012  
 
Introduction and Purpose:  
This is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], proof -of-concept, study assessing the utility of telemedicine for follow -up 
care in a headache medicine practice.  
 
Hypothesis: Telemedicine is a viable and effective method of deliver ing follow -up care to 
patients with migraine, leading to patient outcomes and patient satisfaction equivalent to 
in-person office visits.  
 
Specific aims:   
1. To pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] a telemedicine program in patients with migraine for one year as 
measured by [CONTACT_888420]  
2. Develop transferrable clinical protocols for migraine visits with Telemedicine  
3. Assess the impact of care (telemedicine vs. in -person visit) on migraine -related 
disability as assessed by [CONTACT_888421] (MID AS)  
4. Rate the subjects’ satisfaction with assigned care strategy using the modified 
Group Health Association of America’s Consumer Satisfaction  scale and a semi -
structured interview  
5. Assess the econ omic and competitive impact of t elemedicine  services for 
neurology  patients in our region   
Secondary outcomes:  
1. Number of supplementary encounters required (in -person visits, telephone calls, 
emergency department visits, unplanned hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602])   
2. Time missed from work or daily activities to receive care (inclu ding travel time)  
3. Patient scheduling, tardy visits, no shows, and physician productivity  
Background:  
Headache is a common disorder, affecting over [ADDRESS_1243386] 
cause of missed work days (absenteeism) in the U.S.  It affects 18% of women, 6% of 
men and 6% of children , touching one in four families .  Approximately 50% of individuals 
with migraine (2.5% of the US population) experience moderate to severe  headaches 
impacting their employment, home and leisure /family activities.    
 
Slightly less than half of  Americans with migraine have not been officially diagnosed, and 
self-medicate using over -the-counter products and non -pharmacological treatment.  
Most  patients who are diagnosed with migraine are managed by [CONTACT_888422].  While these practitioners may be able to successfully treat 
patients with relatively infrequent or mild migraines, those with complex or debilitating 
headache conditions often seek care from a neurologist.  Patients with the most 
challeng ing and difficult headaches may be  referred to a headache specialist.  
 
The University Council of Neurological Specialties (UCNS) has offered board 
certification for physi cians in the area of Headache Medicine since [ADDRESS_1243387] additional qual ifications in Headache 
Medicine; m ost are located in major urban areas.   The relatively small number of 
headache specialists is unabl e to keep pace with the number of patients seeking their 
help, and most have waiting times ranging from weeks to months f or a new patient 
appointment.  Appointment availability for follow -up visits is often limited as well.  
 
The complexity of  migraine  mana gement, including assessment of  the effectiveness and 
side-effects of multiple medications, providing education regarding the pathophysiology 
and management strategies of migraine, managing co -morbid conditions (e.g ., other co -
existing headache conditions,  depression, anxiety, fibromyalgia, other chronic pain 
syndromes), monitoring patient adherence to therapy, reviewing headache diaries, 
prescribing  controlled substances when appropriate, and urgent management of acute 
headache epi[INVESTIGATOR_888417]-consuming.  Thus, follow -up care of migraine 
patients generally requires visits at relatively frequent intervals (weeks to 2 -3 months) in 
order to provide optimal care.   From the patient’s perspective, this requires a 
commitment of time and resources fa r exceeding the duration of the office visit.  The 
hidden person costs for the patient for in -person office visits may include time missed 
from work or scho ol, child care costs, the need f or an accompanying person i n cases of 
long distance travel  or the in ability to drive while suffering from a migraine, transportation 
and parking costs.  The hidden costs disproportionately affect patients who live long 
distances from the physician’s office , often those living in rural areas .  The provider’ s 
office  (particu larly in the university setting) may require the navigation of a complex 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_888418], aggravation associated with parking  in a busy environment , fluorescent 
lighting and noise, all stressors that may contribute to the development or worsening of a 
migraine.  Lastly, missed visits occurring because of illness or inclement weather may be 
difficult to reschedule in a ti mely fashion in a busy practice, leading to lapses in care.  
 
Telemedicine is a medium that has potential benefits in a headache medicine practice.  
In particular, it lends itself to the follow -up management of patients once they have been 
evaluated in person at the initial visit.  The initial evaluation of a patient with migraine 
includes a detailed history and physical examination to exclude  a secondary cause of 
headache, such as tumor, intracranial hypertension, infection, inflammation or 
malignancy.  The initial examination includes a neurological examination, with emphasis 
on the examination of the ocular fundi.  The technology exists to p erform the ophthalmic 
examination remotely from a centralized location using a technician or physician 
extender, but does not lend itself to use in non -medical settings.  
 
The follow -up visit generally requires very little in the way of  physical examination , as 
most time is spent in conversation reviewing the interim history, assessing response to 
treatment, discussing the need for additional testing, suggesting additional 
pharmacological and non -pharmacological therapeutic options, counseling  and 
educating  the patient, and prescribing the decided course of action.  The average 
duration of a follow -up visit is 15 -30 minutes.  If the initial evaluation failed to disclose an 
abnormality on the examination, it is highly unlikely that the neurological examination  in 
a subsequent encounter would demonstrate new findings in the absence of a change in 
the patients’ symptoms.  With supplementation of vital signs, which could be obtained 
and recorded by [CONTACT_888423]  (or electronically at the time of t he visit) , 
telemedicine offers the opportunity for remote face -to-face contact [CONTACT_888424], eliminating almost all of the patient’s hidden costs associated with an 
in-person office visit, and avoiding delays and missed visits rela ted to tra nsportation  and 
inclement wea ther.  The additional anxiety often associated with an office visit may be 
reduced as patients will be able to interact with  the physician from a con venient and 
comfortable setting while maintaining the “face -to-face”  dynamic that is so important to  
the doctor -patient therapeutic alliance . 
 
This is a  pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], proof -of-concept, study assessing the utility of telemedicine for follow -up 
care in a headache medicine practice.   
 
Concise Summary of Project:  
Consecutive p atients  undergoing  their initial  evaluation for headache at the Headache 
and Facial Pain Program at UT Southwestern, and meeting ICHD -2 criteria for migraine 
will be a sked to  participat e in the  study  to achieve a total of 40 evaluable subjects  (20 
per group) .  All subjects will have their initial evaluation in person and those who agree 
to participate will be randomly assigned to either the telemedicine group or in -office 
group.  Treatment will be determined by [CONTACT_941] P.I. on an individual basis as per usual 
standard s of practice.  All subjects will have the same number of follow -up encounters 
during the course of a year, and complete the same questionnaires throughout the 
study.   
 
Study Procedure s: 
After obtaining informed consent, patients will be randomly assigned  to receive their 
follow -up care via telemedicine or in -office visits.  All subjects will complete a MIDAS 
questionnaire  and allodynia questionnaire  at their initial visit.  Follow -up visits will be 
scheduled at [ADDRESS_1243388] fashion of the current physician’s practice, with the initial 
intake conducted by [CONTACT_888425], followed by [CONTACT_888426].  
Telemedicine visits will be conducted by [CONTACT_888427] .  
Similar information will be gathered in both groups including: current medications, interim 
medical and headache history (including visit s to the ED or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_888419]), description of headache, response to  treatment (including adverse 
reactions), allergies, blood pressure and weight.  Subjects randomized to telemedicine 
will be asked to have their blood pressure and weight measured within [ADDRESS_1243389] the length of each 
visit.  Subjects in  the in -person group, w ill be queried  about travel time , and the total 
amount of time  for the visit,  and any activities missed to attend the visit.  We will also ask 
about other costs associated with attending the office visit, such as child  care.  
 
At the one -year follow -up visit, subjects will complete the MIDAS, allodynia 
questionnaire, Modified Group Health Association of America’s Consumer Satisfaction  
scale,  and have the opportunity to express the ir views  on the aspect of care received in 
a semi -structured interview.   The follow -up questionnaires may be completed on line 
(telemedicine group, optional for in -person group) or on paper (in -person group).  
Headache diaries will be provided on line or m ay be done on paper , a smartphone,  or a 
computer program of the subject’s choosing.  
 
All subjects will be able to access the physician by [CONTACT_756] , using MyChart,  or with 
additional non -study visits as needed.   
 
Subjects will be responsible for the cost  of the medications , treatments prescribed , and 
laboratory monitoring needed  for their condition.    
 
Support staff will be available to help set up the video system for subjects assigned to 
the telemedicine group who are in need of assistance.  
 
In order t o obtain [ADDRESS_1243390] compensation.  We anticipate that they 
telemedicine option will be perceived as more convenient that the in -person visit.   The 
study will supply the web camera (approximate value $25) and any software support 
needed for accessing the telemedicine system.  The study will pay the co -payments for 
the in -person group so they will not have any out -of-pocket expenses re lated to the visit 
charge  for their follow -up visits .  We will cover travel and parking expenses for the in -
person group.  
 
Criteria for Inclusion of Subjects:  
 Ages 18 – 89 years  
 Diagnosis of migraine with or without aura, menstrual migraine, hemiplegic 
migraine  
 Able to provide informed consent  
 Able, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], to reliably perform all aspects of the study  
 Ownership  of or access to a computer and high speed internet  
 
Criteria for Exclusion of Subjects : 
 Age less than 18 years  
 Headache type is not migraine  
 No ownership or access to a comput er or high speed internet  
 Unfamiliar with basic computer operations or uncomfortable using a computer  
 Unwilling to participate  
 Unable to read English (because of assessment tools)  
 History of another me dical, psychiatric, social or behavioral problem that, in the 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], makes it unlikely that they will be able to complete the 
study activities .  Questions regarding mood and anxiety are asked of all patients 
as part of their initial e valuation for headache.  
  
Sources for Research Material : 
Information will be used from the questionnaires mentioned, post -study interviews, and 
the subjects’ medical records.  The medical record, accessed for the one year period of 
participation, will prim arily be used to determine interim ED visits and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_888419]. The telemedicine visits will be recorded and information from those 
recordings may be used for research purposes.  
 
Recruitment and Consenting Process:  
Potential subjects will be approached  during  or immediately after  their initial 
examination for migraine treatment.  Potential subjects will be identified from referral 
information to the Head ache and Facial Pain Program.  The consent process will occur 
during or shortly after their initial clinic vis it, after it is determined that they meet ICHD -2 
criteria for migraine.  All eligible patients will be asked to participate.  
 
Potential Risks and Benefits:  
This is a minimal risk study as the risk is no greater than that associated w ith a routine 
visit to the physician  or standard treatment for migraine .   
 
Psychological Stress  
Subjects may be asked questions that are personal and may make them feel 
uncomfortable or upset. Subjects may refuse to answer any of the questions, take a 
break or stop their participation in this study at any time.  
 
If Subjects are assigned to telemedicine visits, there is a risk to their privacy as the 
information is sent over a high -speed computer connection.  We will do our best to 
protect their privacy by  [CONTACT_888428].  
  
Loss of Confidentiality  
Any time information is collected; there is a potential risk of loss of confidentiality.  Every 
effort will be made to keep subject information confidential; however,  this cannot be 
guaranteed .  
 
Subject Safety and Data Monitoring:  
Any adverse events related to treatments prescribed as part of routine care will be 
handled by [CONTACT_941] P.I., her colleagues and staff at the Headache and Facial Pain Program 
in a timely manner.  The P.I. will receive communication regarding any adverse events 
through Epic, and is responsible for safety and data monitoring.  
 
Procedure to Maintain Confidentiality:  
Subjects will be assigned a study number which will be used for study data collection  
and analysis. Medical records are stored in the Epic system.  Case report forms (paper) 
will be kept in a locked and secure cabinet. No identifying data will be entered into the 
data set used for analysis.  All information obtained on line  and video recor dings will be 
stored using encryption and password protection.  Videotapes will not be obtained or 
used without the subject’s permission. The subject’s address will be used to calculate 
the distance from their home to UTSW and will not be retained in the s tudy materials.   
 
Potential Benefits:  
All subjects may benefit from participation as they will be evaluated by [CONTACT_888429].  There may or may not be a benefit from 
telemedicine participation as compared to in -person care.   
 
We hope the information learned from this study will benefit others with migraine in the 
future.  Information gained from this research could lead to better care and treatment of 
migraine, especially for people who live in a remote area or hav e limited access to a 
headache specialist.   
 
Biostatistics:  
 
Excel 2016 and R (version 3.5.2) were used to perform the statistical analysis. The 
primary outcome measure was the percentage of visits using telemedicine completed as 
scheduled ; the sample size was chosen to provide evidence for this proof of concept.5 
Secondary outcome measures included clinical outcomes related to headache disability 
(MIDAS , number of headache days  in the last 3 months , and severity  on a scale of 0 -10 
with 10=pain which is as bad as it can be ), visit time, and perceptions of telemedicine.  
The average change from baseline to 12 months for the in -office group  was compared 
with the average change for those in the telemedicine group  (difference  in average 
difference). The McNemar 
  test was used to examine differences in the pro portion of 
participants reporting moderate to severe disability  (MIDAS ≥ 11) between the baseline 
and [ADDRESS_1243391] whether membership  in the in-
office  group  was associated with experiencing a 50% or greater  improvement in clinical 
outcomes. The logistic regression was also controlled for baseline values.  Two sample t -
tests were  used to estimate whether participants in different group s differed in their 
survey responses.   
 
 
REFERENCES:   
1.  Biglan KM, Voss TS, Deuel LM, et al.  Telemedicine for care of nursing home 
residents with  Parkinson’s disease.  Movement Disorders 2009;24(7):1073 -1075.  
2.  Hersh WR, Hickam DH, Severance SM, et al. Diagnosis, access and outcomes: 
Update of a systematic review of telemedicine services. J  Telemed Telecare 2006;[ADDRESS_1243392] 2:S3 -31. 
3.  García -Lizana F, Muñoz -Mayorga I.  Telemedicine for depression: a systematic 
review.  Perpect Psychiatr Care 2010 Apr;46(2):119 -26. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 