 
1   
 Official Title: The [LOCATION_002] Health Living Study  
 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  
 
Document Date:  10/03/2018 
  
 
2   
  
UFIRB 02 – Social & Behavioral Research  
Protocol Submission  Form  
THIS FORM MUST BE TYPED .  DO NOT  STAPLE .  Send this form and the supporting documents to 
IRB02, [PO_BOX], Gainesville, FL [ZIP_CODE].  Should you have questions about completing 
this form, call 352 -392-0433.  
Title of Protocol:   The [LOCATION_002] Health Living Study (IRB201801473)   
 
Principal 
Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_789965] #: 3729 -6173  
             (Last Name)          (First Name)  
Degree / 
Title:  
 
  
Ph.D. / [CONTACT_789973]: (If 
on campus provide PO 
Box address):  
College of Journalism 
and Communications  
University of [LOCATION_012]  
2024 Weimer Hall  
[PO_BOX]  
Gainesville, FL [ZIP_CODE] -
8400  
 Email:  
[EMAIL_15046]  
Department:  Advertising  Telephone #:  
(352) 273 -0240  
 
 
Co-Investigator(s):  
Coordinator:  
Research Asst.   
Neil  
Jordan   
             (Last Name)            (First Name)  
 
Degree/Title  Ph.D. /Postdoctoral 
Fellow  Mailing Address:  (If 
on campus provide PO 
Box address):  
 Email:  
 
Department:   Telephone #:  
 
 
Supervisor (If PI [INVESTIGATOR_789966]) :   UFID#  
             (Last Name)            (First Name)  
 
 
3   
 Degree / 
Title:  
 
  Mailing Address: (If 
on campus provide PO 
Box address):  
 
 
 Email :  
 
Department:  
  Telephone #:  
 
Dates of Proposed 
Research:  TBD 
 
Source of Funding (A copy of the grant 
proposal must be submitted with this protocol if 
funding is involved):  
  
N/A 
Describe the Scientific Purpose of the Study:  
The purpose of this study  is to pi[INVESTIGATOR_789967] a patient -centered, tailored message 
intervention delivered via virtual  human  technology for increasing  colorectal cancer (CRC)  screening 
within guidelines . Although we are not limiting participation to these groups, we are particularly 
interested in the feasibility of the intervention for reaching racial/ethnic minority and rural patients.    
 
Background  
In an attempt to  reduce colorectal cancer (CRC) mortality by [CONTACT_47071] 50%, as well as reduc e incidence 
by [CONTACT_47071] 80%, Healthy People [ADDRESS_1088217] examined the benefits of delivering  such  patient -tailored  CRC screening  
messages highlighting fecal immunochemical testing (FIT) for average -risk patients. Screening using 
FIT (as opposed to colonoscopy) provides both patient and healthcare system benefits . For patients, it 
is less expensive, non -invasive, and can be done at home. This reduces barriers associated with CRC 
screening such as cost, travel time  (which can be particularly burdensome for rural patients) , the 
necessit y of undergoing anesthesia, and discomfort and embarrassment. For healthcare systems, it 
reduces costs and helps prioritize patients at higher risk for CRC (those with family history of CRC, 
history of cancer, positive FIT results, etc.)  for colonoscopy.   
Additionally, prior research suggests that demographic concordance (i.e. a patient is seen by a 
provider his or her same race and gender) increases positive outcomes in healthcare across a variety 
of measures. Patients are more satisfied with their care wh en their provider shares their demographic 
characteristics and are more likely to follow recommendations. This study aims to reduce racial 
disparities in CRC screening by [CONTACT_789968] (VHT) that ca n be matched with them to provide demographic concordance.  
In addition to the ability to be demogra phically customized, studies suggest that VHT is useful in 
discussing stigmatized issues with patients, who may be more likely to reveal information with a virtual 
 
4   
 character than with a human doctor. VHT is well -suited for this type of intervention, then, because of 
the embarrassment often associated with CRC screening.  
As such, using tailored messaging to encourage patients to screen for CRC with FIT has multiple 
potential benefits. However, there remains a dearth of research on the theoretical and practical 
implications of providing personalized messages to supplement and improve upon the goals of tailor ed 
messaging interventions to increase screening for FIT among patients who are at average risk and out -
of-guidelines. This study aims to address this problem .  
 
Study Aims  
The primary goal of the study is to reduce colorectal cancer (CRC) morbidity and mortality by 
[CONTACT_789969]-risk patient community  and to reduce racial and 
geographic (rural vs. urban) disparities in CRC screening and mortality rates . To accomplish this long-
term goal, this study aims to  develop and test precision messaging tailored to target audience s through 
development and evaluation of culturally sensitive, interactive messages  about CRC screening 
delivered using VHT. The study will investigate whether interactive, tailored messages contribute to an 
overall enhancement of knowledge of CRC  and screening options by [CONTACT_789970] .  
 
Specifically, t his study focuses on the effectiveness of messages employing visual field  (close vs. far),  
racial concordance  (demographically matching or mismatching), and modality (visual vs. text)  to 
develop strategic messages about CRC screening.  
 
To date, there is no other study that has looked to partner specific message strategies and colorectal 
cancer screening with an emphasis on racial concordance and modality. As such, the researchers 
hope to shed new light on how, as health communicators, we  can more successfully engage target 
audiences to change attitudes and/or behaviors towards getting screened for colorectal cancer.  
 
 
Describe the Research Methodology in Non -Technical Language:  (Explain what will be done with 
or to the research participant. ) 
 
The pi[INVESTIGATOR_360249] 1 ,500 participants . All participants will be between the ages of 50 and 73 
and will be out -of-guidelines for CRC screening (>10 years for colonoscopy, >[ADDRESS_1088218], 
>1 year for FIT).   
 
Patients will either see a racially concordant virtual human message, a racially discordant virtual 
human message, a racially concordant text -based message, a racially discordant text -based message, 
or an attention control message. All patients exposed to a VHT  or text -based message  will be matched 
to the character based on gender (as per their response to a screener question). The patients seeing 
virtual human messages will either see a near or far visual field image of the virtual character. The 
patients s eeing the control message will receive information about nutrition and cancer delivered by a 
cartoon computer without an identifiable race or gender.  
 
After completing informed consent and passing initial screening questions (appropriate age range, out -
of-guidelines for CRC screening, etc.), p atients will be instructed to view the message as if they were a 
patient at UF Health. Following an attention check to ensure they viewed the message, patients fill out 
 
5   
 a questionnaire containing items designed to measure attitudes towards CRC and screening, attitudes 
towards the intervention, health literacy, and other factors suggested to influence screening behaviors. 
Finally, participants will be given the option to l earn more about CRC screening and to click a link to 
Amazon.com where they can view home stool tests (outcome measures).  
 
Planned Analyses  
The primary outcome of the study is intentions of the patients to talk to their doctor about CRC 
screening. Intentions w ill be measured using a 5 -point  Likert scale . Analyses will be  conducted using 
R, version 4.0.1. The model will contain the main effects of the attention control condition, animated 
VHA intervention, and static VHA intervention. For pairwise testing,  p-values w ill be corrected for 
multiple comparisons testing using the multivariate  t-distribution method. Sociodemographic variables 
will be included as controls .  
Describe Potential Benefits:  
There are no direct benefits from participating in this study. However, participants may garner valuable 
information on their individual risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_9954] . They will also learn how to screen 
for colorectal cancer.  
Describe Potential Risks: (If risk of physical, psychological  or economic harm may be involved, 
describe the steps taken to protect participant.)  
As with any behavioral intervention that tests the efficacy of specific communication strategies, there is 
the possibility of minimal emotional discomfort from being presented with individual risk factors for a 
disease . However , the probability of any physical, psychological, or social harm is minimal to none.  
 
Describe How Participant(s) Will Be Recruited:  
Participants will be recruited via online Qualtrics recruitment panels. Qualtrics maintains a proprietary opt -
in online panel comprised of U.S. residents who have agreed to participate in its web surveys. When 
people are recruited into the panel, age and g eographic information are collected to aid in constructing 
samples. I am paying Qualtrics to have access to their web panel, in the same manner if we were 
purchasing a list of phone numbers to conduct a phone survey. Subjects will be randomly selected and 
notified of the opportunity to participate in the study  through an invitation email (included as first page of 
questionnaire).   
Eligibility Criteria  
Patients are eligible for this study  if they  meet the demographic characteristics : age between [ADDRESS_1088219]  be out of guideline s for colorectal cancer  screening . 
Date safety:  The subject’s  participation is completely voluntary. There is a minimal risk that security of 
any online data may be breached, but since no identifying information will be collected, and the online 
host (Qualtrics) uses several forms of encryption and other protections, it is unlikely that a security 
breach of the online data will result in any adverse consequence s for participants . For further 
information, please see Qualtrics Privacy Policy: http://www.qualtrics.com/privacy -statement/  
 
6   
 Maximum 
Number of 
Participants 
(to be 
approached 
with consent)  1500 Age Range of 
Participants:  50-73 Amount of  
Compensation/ 
course credit:  Qualtrics will 
reward the 
participants for 
their survey 
participation. 
They will receive 
a cash value 
reward for 
completing the 
survey that will 
be credited to 
their member 
account on the 
site. Once their 
account value 
exceeds $10, 
they may redeem 
their credit for 
either  an 
Amazon.com gift 
certificate , a 
Payoneer 
prepaid debit 
card, or a gift 
certificate for a 
local restaurant 
through 
Restaurants.com.  
Describe the Informed Consent Process.  ( See Following Page for  Informed Consent Document)  
Participants receive an email from Qualtrics inviting them to participate in the study. When they click 
the link, they are taken to a Qualtrics survey. The first page of the survey is the informed consent form.  
Participants are informed of their rights as research participants and asked whether they consent to 
take part in the study. Participants who agree enter the study; participants who do not agree are 
thanked and the study terminated for them.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7   
 Informed Consent  
 
Please read this consent document carefully before you decide to participate in this study.  
  
Welcome to a health and wellness survey. We are conducting a brief survey to understand how people 
make decisions about their health.  
  
Time required:  15-20 minutes.  
  
Risks and Benefits:  There are no direct benefits to you for participating in the study. There will be no 
potential risk for physical, psychological or economic harm.  
  
Compensation:  You will receive compensation for your participation. The panel company you are 
working with will arrange payment once you have finished the survey.  
  
Confidentiality:  There is a minimal risk that security of any online data may be breached, but since no 
identifying information will be collected, and the online host (Qualtrics) uses several forms of 
encryption and other protections, it is unlikely that a security breach  of the online data will result in any 
adverse consequence for you. For further information, please see Qualtrics Privacy Policy: 
http://www.qualtrics.com/privacy -statement/  
  
Voluntary participation:  Your participation in this study is completely voluntary. There is no penalty 
for not participating, and you do not have to answer any question you do not wish to answer.  
  
Right to withdraw from the study:  You have the right to withdraw from the study at any time without 
consequence.  
  
Whom to contact [CONTACT_789971]:  
Janice L. Krieger, PhD   
Director, STEM Translational Communication Center   
2024 Weimer Hall, University of [LOCATION_012]   
[PO_BOX]   
Gainesville, FL [ZIP_CODE] -8400   
(352) 273 -0240  
[EMAIL_15046]  
  
Whom to contact [CONTACT_789972] a research participant in the study:   
IRB02 Office   
Box 112250   
University of [LOCATION_012]   
Gainesville, FL [ZIP_CODE] -2250  
[PHONE_16452]  
 
QUESTION : Do you consent to participate in this study?  
 
Yes (clicking this option allows participate to continue to questionnaire)  
No (terminates questionnaire ) 