 
 
In-Home Study of Intraoral Device for Reducing Snoring 
among Habitual Snorers  
 
Protocol Number: Z -01 
Jan 1, 2017  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sponsor: Zyppah  
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_380809], DDS  
Address:  [ADDRESS_477026] Calabasas, Suite 303 , Calabasas, CA [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone:  (818) 414 -4817  
Email: [EMAIL_7377]  
Study Coordinator:  Colette Cozean, Ph.D.  
Address:  [ADDRESS_477027], CA  [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone: (949) 855 -2885  
Email:  [EMAIL_7378]   
II. Purpose and Background  
The purpose of this study is to eva luate the safety and efficacy of an over -the-counter (OTC) intraoral 
mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_380810].  A secondary objective is to evaluate the behavior of patients at high risk 
for sleep apnea to determine whether they will seek a conclusive diagnosis with a  sleep study.  
 
Background  
Snoring is a common condition which negatively affects the quality of sleep for both snorers and their 
partners.  It is estimated that nearly 30% of men and 9% of women suffer from habitual snoring, with 
risk factors including obesity, age (>40), smoking, and alcohol consumption.  (Kara CO et al, The 
prevalence of snoring in the adult population , Kulak Buran Bogaz Ihtis, 2005, 14(1 -2), 18 -24). 
Poor sleep quality has been shown to be a health risk for many conditions, including  heart disease and 
hypertension , obesity, diabetes, mood disorders, reduces immune response and many others 
(http://healthysleep.med.harvard.edu/healthy/matters/consequences/sleep -and-disease -risk) 
Snoring is often caused by a narrowing of the airway.  As air is forced through this narr ow passage it 
vibrates the skin of the airway, causing the distinctive sound of snoring.  It is well established that slight 
changes in the positioning of the mouth, teeth, or tongue can significantly affect snoring.  
This study is evaluating the safety and  efficacy of an intraoral mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_380810].  A similar 
intraoral mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_13959], Zyppah Boil and Bite, is prescribed on  the internet to more than 100,[ADDRESS_477028].  The mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_380811], customizing the shape for each user.  
 
One concern in providing an OTC intraoral m outhpi[INVESTIGATOR_380812] a device intended to reduce 
snoring cannot reduce snoring associated with obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) and may cause patients 
not to enroll in a sleep study to diagnose (OSA).  However, it is estimated by [CONTACT_380820] 80% of moderate and severe sleep apnea remains undiagnosed.  Our theory is that 
most patients are not making appointments for sleep studies to diagnose their sleep apnea, but are 
willing to buy an OTC mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_380813] g.   
Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA)  
Obstructive Sleep Apnea (OSA) is a sleep disorder where breathing stops and restarts multiple times 
during the night, interrupting sleep and often abruptly awakening the patient with a feeling of 
suffocation.  There is si gnificant overlap between snoring and patients with obstructive sleep apnea, 
which is estimated to affect 3 -7% of men and 2 -5% of women  (Punjabi NM, The Epi[INVESTIGATOR_380814] , Proceedings of American Thoracic Society, 5:2, 2008) .   
The vast majority of those with sleep apnea also habitually snore, though the majority of habitual 
snorers do not  have sleep apnea.  From prevalence estimates, approximately 10% of male and 22% of 
female snorers may also have OSA.   Women are eight times mo re likely to have their OSA undiagnosed 
than men.  
The instructions for use of  the mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_380815], moderate or 
severe OSA and may encourage them to register for an inexpensive home sleep study.  It is hoped that 
this device may help some habitual snorers identify their risk of OSA and seek treatment.  This clinical 
trial will also monitor the behavior of these users, looking to see whether they i) seek a sleep study , ii) 
return the device for a refund  or iii) decide to use the snoring device.  In the first two cases, they will be 
dropped from the clinical trial.  

Study Design  
Patients will enroll in the study online.  The on -line experience has been carefully designed to mimic the 
experience of buying the device in a reta il store or on a website without consulting a sleep professional 
or dentist.  After filling out a short online questionnaire to determine their initial symptoms  and signing 
the informed consent , the product and instructions will be shipped to them.  The device is used for a 
period of [ADDRESS_477029] of the device will  be refunded to the patient, incentivizing completion of the study.  
The surveys will ask the patients to qualitatively and quantitatively compare their snoring before use of 
the device and after 10 days of using the device.  
As part of the follow -up survey,  users will be asked if they self -identified (on the basis of the product 
instructions) as being at risk for OSA.  If they answer positively, they will be asked about their response, 
including whether they sought medical care, enrolled in a sleep study, or discontinued use of the device.  
A two -sample t -test will be used to analyze the change from the initial survey to the follow -up survey, 
with patients serving as their own controls.  
Subject Selection  
When patients go on -line to investigate the cur rent Zypp ah boil and bite design, they will see one of the 
following buttons on the web page.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Subjects will be recruited online .  A total of 500 patients will be recruited to the trial.  Even assuming a 
30% drop -out rate  or failure to complete the study questionnaires , the remaining patients should be 
sufficient to generate statistically significant data if the device is effective.  
Gender  
No effor t will be made to differentiate users based on gender, and there are no gender -specific 
enrollment restrictions.  It is anticipated  that the enrollment in the study will reflect the prevalence  of 
the condition in the general population, with men comprising  a higher percentage of the study 
population.  Pregnant women will be allowed to enroll in the study, as this is a non -significant risk study 
and there is no rationale for any additional risk associated with pregnancy.  
Age of Subjects  Free clinical trial for snorers  Do you snore? Sign up for a free 
clinical trial.  
The only restriction on age is over the age of 18.  It is anticipated there will be a broad range of ages 
represented.  
Racial and Ethnic Enrollment  
There are no racial or ethnic limitations on enrollment, and it is anticipated the study population will 
match the patient popula tion at large.  No data will be collected on racial or ethnic identification.  
  
Inclusion Criteria  
• Over 18 years of age  
• Living in the [LOCATION_002]  
• Signing the Informed Consent Form  
Exclusion Criteria  
• Missing teeth (as the device won’t be properly fitted)  
• Any severe breathing or respi[INVESTIGATOR_44447], such as chronic asthma, emphysema, COPD, or a 
similar condition  
• Poor dental health, such as severe gum disease, loose teeth, an abscess, mouth sores, or 
bleeding gums  
• A dental implant placed within the last thr ee months  
• Diagnosed with a Temporomandibular joint condition (TMJ)  
• Actively experiencing any mouth or jaw pain, including clenching of the teeth, grinding, or any 
other physical injury to the jaw or teeth  
• Full dentures  
• Braces  
• Diagnosis of sleep apnea  
• Less than 18 years of age  
Vulnerable Subjects  
No vulnerable subjects will be recruited for this study.  
 
Methods and Procedures  
Methods and Procedures  
Subjects who are interested in reducing their snoring will be recruited online.  In order to participate in 
the trial, they will comp lete a pre -trial questionnaire , as well as review and sign the Informed Consent.   
Assuming they satisfy the Inclusion and Exclusion criteria and sign the Informed Consent  (includes the 
inclusion/exclusion criteria) , they will purchas e the device for $90.  The intraoral device and patient 
instructions will be mailed to them  (Attachment E ).   
Once the subject is able to participate in the study, th e device is placed in boiling water to soften it.  
While still warm, the device is placed in the mouth and molded to the individual patient.  This is the 
same procedure used with many intraoral mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_380816] . 
The subject  will be asked to use the intraoral device each night for ten consecutive nights.   After they 
have used the device for ten days, a follow -up survey will be emailed to the subject .  The patient will 
respond to the questions in the survey.  After they have completed the follow -up survey  and returned it , 
the subject  will receive a full refund for the cost of the device ($90) .  This is intended  to increase 
compliance with the protocol.  
This study will also evaluate the response of subjects who are at high risk of obstructive sleep apnea.  
The product instructions will contain a brief questi onnaire (Attachment D, STOP -BANG Survey) assessing 
the subject’s risk for OSA.  If they are determined to be high -risk by [CONTACT_193526] -administered questionnaire, 
they will be given the following options: 1) complete a full, overnight in -office sleep study, 2)  complete a 
discounted in -home sleep study, or 3) discontinue use of the device and return it for a full refund.  The 
response of these subjects will be monitored to see how they respond and whether they continue to use 
the device or seek medical attention  to evaluate their risk of sleep apnea.  
This is a non -significant risk study, and the only ‘extra’ requirements for this study are the completion of 
the pre -study and post -study questionnaires by [CONTACT_102].  
Data Collection  
• Attachment A  is the list of que stions to gather personal information about the subject, including 
age, gender, weight, height and contact [CONTACT_3031].   This will allow for the calculation of Body 
Mass Index (BMI), a well -known risk factor in both snoring and obstructive sleep apnea.   This 
attachment also contains the Inclusion/Exclusion criteria, where potential subjects will be asked 
to review and certify that they meet the requirements of the trial (they will also see this 
information later in the process at the Informed Consent).  
• Atta chment B  is the Visual -Analog Scale (VAS) asking potential subjects how much their snoring 
is bothering them and their partner (if applicable).  The VAS method is commonly used and has 
been validated for patient satisfaction (Brokelman et al, 2012).  
• Attach ment C  is the Snoring Severity Scale (SSS).  This validated, three -question survey has been 
shown to accurately assess the severity of snoring and the risk for obstructive sleep apnea 
(Morris L et al, 2008)  
• Attachment D  is the Stop -Bang Assessment, which i s the most frequent assessment used to 
determine the risk of sleep apnea.  This 8 -question survey has been validated as a risk 
assessment for moderate to severe sleep apnea (Nagappa et al, 2015).  
The pre -questionnaire will consist of Attachments A, B, and C to establish a baseline.  The post -
questionnaire  will consist of Attachments B, C, and D, also allowing the study to evaluate the response 
of subjects at high risk of OSA.  
Data Analysis and Monitoring  
The primary endpoints, a VAS assessment of snoring and the Snoring Severity Scale w ill be analyzed 
using a two -sample t-test comparing the pre -study and post -study questionnaire results.   The ANCOVA 
method may also be used to evaluate the impact of different variables , like age, weight, gender, or 
others, on the study results.  There are no potential serious risks to patients, and no stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_380817].  
In determining sample size, it was estimated that the device would produce a  15% improvement in 
snoring, as measured on the VAS.  With a level of significance of p < 0.05 and a power of 80%, 
approximately 350 subjects will need to complete the study to generate statistically significant data.  
Assuming a 30% dropout rate for non -compliance with the study or the discovery of moderate to severe 
sleep apnea, [ADDRESS_477030] -protected file .  This data will be available to the study coordinator  alone , as the principal 
investigator [INVESTIGATOR_175867] (a precaution since he has a financial interest in the device) .  Subject identifiers 
will be necessary, but only the study coordinator  will have access to the data with subject identifiers.  
These identifiers will be removed before any data or statistical analysis is conducted.   The principal 
investigator [INVESTIGATOR_380818].  
Transition from Research Participation  
As this research study only asks patients to use the product as they would normally , subjects will 
continue with their use according to the device instructions, and are free to stop use at any time 
following the post -study survey after [ADDRESS_477031] -trial questionnaires.  
Statistical significant will be set at a 95% confidence level (p < 0.05).   
Risk/Benefit Assessment  
Definition of Significant  Risk (SR) /Non -significant Risk (NSR) Study  
Under 21 CFR 812.3(m), an SR device means an investigational device that: i) Is intended as an implant 
and presents a potential for serious risk to the health, safety, or welfare of a subject; ii) Is purported or 
represent ed to be for use supporting or sustaining human life and presents a potential for serious risk to 
the health, safety, or welfare of a subject; iii) Is for a use of substantial importance in diagnosing, curing, 
mitigating, or treating disease, or otherwise preventing impairment of human health and presents a 
potential for serious risk to the health, safety, or welfare of a subject; or iv) Otherwise presents a 
potential for serious risk to the health, safety, or welfare of a subject. An NSR device study is on e that 
does not meet the definition for an SR device study  
Risk Category  
The risk the research presents is minimal.  The chance of harm or discomfort is not higher than subjects 
may experience in daily life.  There are many over -the-counter mouthguards and  intraoral devices on 
the market, with a safety profile that has been established for nearly 40 years.  The probability and 
magnitude of potential harm is well within the routine dental examination of healthy persons.  
In addition, this device has been used  on the market (for a different application) for several years, and 
more than 100,[ADDRESS_477032] demonstrated the low risk of this device.  Should any complications 
occur, use of the device can immediately be discontinued.  
There is a risk that the patient has undiagnosed OSA, but this risk is lowered by [CONTACT_380821] a survey to indicate the level of the risk.  No additional risk is incurred by a patient with OSA.  
Potential  Risks  
One potential risk is  overheating the moldable material when fitting.  The device is placed in boiling 
water to make it pliable and then molded to the individual user.  These ‘boil and bite’ mouthguards have 
been on the market for more than [ADDRESS_477033] in 
the study by [CONTACT_100820], they will be taken to a separate page where they will receive the 
following notice.  
“This clinical study is intended for patients [ADDRESS_477034] 
any of the following conditions, you cannot participate in the study:    
• Missing teeth (as the device won’t be properly fitted)  
• Any severe breathing or respi[INVESTIGATOR_44447], such as chronic asthma, emphysema, COPD, or a 
similar condition  
• Poor dental health, such as severe gum disease, loose teeth, an abscess, mouth sores, or 
bleeding gums  
• A dental implant placed within the last three months  
• Diagnosed with a Temporomandibular joint condition (TMJ)  
• Actively experiencing any mouth or jaw pain, i ncluding clenching of the teeth, grinding, or any 
other physical injury to the jaw or teeth  
• Full dentures  
• Braces  
• Diagnosis of sleep apnea  
If you do not have any of these conditions, you may participate in the study.  As a participant, you will be 
provided with a free dental mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_380819].  To participate in the study, you will also be required to fill out a pre -study and post -study 
survey that will take about 5 and 10 minutes respectivel y.  If you would like to participate in the study, 
you will be asked to pay $90 for the device, which will be refunded to you once you complete the 
surveys, fill out the pre -study survey and sign an informed consent, which provides you with all the 
details  of the study.  If you would like to participate, please click NEXT.”  
Process of Consent  
Consent will be obtained through online forms.  The respondent will read through and initial at the 
primary sections throughout the informed consent, ensuring they hav e reviewed the document, before 
providing an electronic signature [CONTACT_380824].   
There will be no coercion or undue influence, as these subjects are not being reimbursed for 
participating in the study (other than re ceiving the study materials free of cost) and are free to decline 
to participate at any point in the enrollment process.  
Subject Capacity  
All subjects will have the capacity to give informed consent.  
Subject Comprehension  
Comprehension will be addressed by  [CONTACT_380822], ensuring they have read and comprehend the material.  If they 
do have questions about the language or meaning of the document, they will be able to contact [CONTACT_380823].  
Consent Documentation  
Consent will be required before the subject can go forward with the ordering process of the study, 
ensuring that no subjects will be able to enter the study or receive  the product without having read and 
agreed to the informed consent.  This will be documented and stored using the same system described 
in the Data Storage section.  
Costs to the Subject  
The subject will not incur any costs as the result of participating in the study.  The subject will pay for the 
device upon enrollment, at a cost of $90, which will be refunded immediately after the completion of 
the follow -up survey.  Should the subject not complete the follow -up, the cost of the device would not 
be refun ded, encouraging compliance with the study protocol.   Should the subject have any costs 
related to complications of the device, that are not covered by [CONTACT_22241], they will be paid by [CONTACT_429].  
Payment for Participation  
No payments will be given for par ticipation, other than providing the study device at no cost (should the 
subject complete the trial).  
 
 