Page	1	of	29		PROTOCOL TITLE: Cerebellar transcranial magnetic stimulation (cTMS) in psychotic disorders: effect on time perception, executive function, and mood and psychotic symptoms  PROTOCOL DATE: Original October 4, 2016 Revised February 28, 2020  PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: [INVESTIGATOR_903338], MD, MPH  McLean Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], Admissions Building, Mailstop 108 Schizophrenia and Bipolar Disorder Program (SBDP) [ADDRESS_1267124] Belmont, MA [ZIP_CODE]  SITE RESPONSIBLE INVESTIGATOR:  Joan Camprodon, MD, MPH, PhD [LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_305944], Building 149, Charlestown Navy Yard Laboratory for Neuropsychiatry & Neuromodulation  13th Street, Charlestown, MA [ZIP_CODE]   SITE WHERE THE STUDY WILL BE PERFORMED Laboratory for Neuropsychiatry & Neuromodulation,  MGH East CNY-149, Suite [ADDRESS_1267125], Charlestown, MA [ZIP_CODE]  I. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE:   Psychotic disorders, such as schizophrenia (SZ), schizoaffective disorder (SZA), and bipolar disorder (BP) with psychotic features, are severe and disabling illnesses that exact a tremendous toll on patients, families, and society1-3. These disorders are characterized by [CONTACT_903387], hallucinations, delusions, thought disorder, disorganized behavior, negative symptoms (a decrease or absence of thoughts, feelings, or actions), and cognitive deficits (present in both SZ4, 5 and BP6-8) that impair individuals' ability to function. These wide-ranging symptoms appear at the outset to be highly heterogeneous in nature. It is unclear how some of these symptoms are related to one another, and this is reflected in the way we treat psychotic disorders. The majority of existing pharmacological agents are limited in that they improve some but not all of these diverse symptoms (e.g., antipsychotic medications reduce positive symptoms such as hallucinations and delusions, but are relatively ineffective in treating negative or cognitive symptoms). In addition, such treatments are associated with significant side effects. There is an urgent need to develop new and effective treatments. For this purpose, understanding disease pathophysiology is critical. In this proposal, we focus on the role of the cerebellum in psychotic disorders. A growing body of evidence suggests that the cerebellum plays a key role in organizing cognitive and emotional processing and that abnormalities in this brain region may be implicated in psychotic disorders. Based on this evidence, we propose a proof-of-concept study of cerebellar stimulation and inhibition using transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS). While this is not a definitive clinical trial, the sham-controlled double-crossover design of this study will provide valuable information about the focus on cerebellum as a potential treatment target in psychotic disorders and may pave the way for the development of this approach as a treatment intervention.  A major challenge is to determine whether a unitary pathophysiological model can cohesively explain the heterogeneous symptoms of SZ and other psychotic disorders, and what that model might be. According to Andreasen’s “cognitive dysmetria” hypothesis, the many diverse symptoms of SZ reflect “dysmetria,” or incoordination, of mental activity and may have in common misconnections within 
Page	2	of	29		cortico-cerebellar-thalamic-cortical circuits (CCTCC)9, 10. Independently, Schmahmann proposed a “dysmetria of thought” model, in which neuropsychiatric conditions, including psychosis, may result from impairments in the ability to properly “detect, prevent, and correct mismatches” between intended and perceived outcomes for mental processes, mediated by [CONTACT_903388]11, 12. Such impairments produce a cerebellar cognitive affective syndrome, characterized by [CONTACT_903389], spatial cognition, affective and behavioral regulation, and language processing13. At the center of both Andreasen's and Schmahmann's models is the idea of a dysfunctional cerebellum.  The cerebellum was traditionally thought to be involved exclusively in the planning and execution of motor activities. This classical view held that the cerebellum received inputs from widespread cortical areas, but projected solely to primary motor cortex; i.e., information from frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipi[INVESTIGATOR_903339] 14. However, it is now well recognized that the cerebellum is extensively connected to higher-level association cortices, and that it contributes to non-motor as well as motor functions 14-17. Viral trans-neuronal tracer studies, for example, have demonstrated that the cerebellum projects to the prefrontal18 and parietal cortices19. Histological and electrophysiological studies in animals have also shown that the cerebellar vermis and fastigial nuclei project to several temporal areas important in learning and memory, including hippocampus and amygdala20-22. In fact, the cerebellum is a complex structure comprised of multiple parallel loops organized into modular subregions responsible for many distinct functions23-25. For example, the anterior lobe, consisting of lobules I-V, and lobule VIII, modulates primarily sensorimotor processes, the posterior lobules VI, VII, and VIIB modulate cognitive functions, and the posterior vermis regulates affect26.  There is substantial evidence of cerebellar abnormalities in SZ. Postmortem studies report atrophy27, reduced Purkinje cell size28, and reduced Purkinje cell linear density (number of Purkinje cells per unit line length of Purkinje cell layer)[ADDRESS_1267126] also documented reduced expression of cerebellar synaptic proteins (i.e., synaptophysin and complexin II)30 and markedly altered expression of cerebellar serotonin 5-HT(2A) receptors31 in SZ, suggesting dysfunction of neural circuits and neurotransmission in the cerebellum of patients with SZ. Structural MRI studies in SZ report decreased volumes of the vermis32-39, cerebellar hemispheres40 (especially posterior lobes33, 41), and total cerebellum42-44. (Findings are inconsistent, however, with some groups reporting no volumetric differences in cerebellar structures45-50 or greater vermal volumes51-53 in SZ.) Functional MRI (fMRI) studies also reveal abnormalities of the cerebellum in SZ. According to a recent quantitative review54, of 234 fMRI SZ reporting abnormal activity in cerebellar regions, more than 80% were studies of cognitive, emotional, or executive processes in SZ. In this review, almost two-thirds of group comparisons showed hypoactivation of cerebellar regions in SZ, with the majority of hypoactivation foci in the medial aspects of the anterior lobe and lateral cerebellar hemispheres (lobules IV-V)54. Resting state fMRI studies have pointed to cerebellar dysconnectivity in SZ55-61. Most recently, our group found SZ patients to have decreased cerebro-cerebellar functional connectivity in higher level association networks (ventral attention, salience, control, and default mode networks) and increased cerebro-cerebellar connectivity in somatomotor and default mode networks relative to healthy individuals.  Cerebellar abnormalities are also implicated in BP. Though discrepancies exist62, the literature points to reduced cerebellar and vermal volume63, [ADDRESS_1267127] reported a trend for lower cerebellar blood volume in BP compared to SZ and healthy individuals68, and lower N-acetylaspartate levels in the cerebellar vermis in both BP and SZ69.  While a unified theory of cerebellar function has yet to be been firmly established, there is growing evidence for the role of the cerebellum in a common timing function for diverse tasks70-73. Keele and Ivry conceptualized the cerebellum as an ‘‘internal clock’’ that performs temporal computations in both the motor and non-motor domains, hypothesizing that the cerebellum's highly regular cellular organization allows it to produce precise temporal delays70. While the cerebellum is not the sole regulator of timing functions, the 74. Indeed, cerebellar lesion studies have found that patients with cerebellar 
Page	3	of	29		damage-- but not those with Parkinson's disease, cortical damage, or peripheral neuropathy-- are impaired at perceptual timing tasks that require maintaining a simple rhythm or discriminating between small differences in the duration of two intervals75. Precise computation of timing is critical for sensorimotor prediction76, [ADDRESS_1267128] shown that patients with SZ (see review78) and BP79 have impairments in time perception. There is no consensus on the tendency of the impairment, with patients demonstrating both overestimation and underestimation of time intervals in a variety of time estimation tasks. However, increased variability of time estimation has been observed in patients compared to healthy controls80. Such evidence has led researchers to suggest that such timing abnormalities might be intrinsically associated with these psychiatric disorders or even be part of the pathogenesis of other hallmark symptoms, such as hallucinations and delusions. For instance, Waters81 proposed that in SZ patients with auditory hallucinations, a common set of disruptions in neural circuitry may underlie both timing perception abnormalities and dysfunctions of other internal processes that are linked to hallucinations. Similarly, it has been suggested that that the cerebellum may play a role as an “emotional pacemaker”82.It is possible that the various symptoms in psychotic disorders-- e.g., affective symptoms, hallucinations, delusions, thought disorder, disorganized behavior, negative symptoms, and executive dysfunction-- are mediated by [CONTACT_903390].  Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is a noninvasive and well-tolerated method of neuromodulation in which magnetic fields applied over the surface of the skull generate electrical currents to stimulate or inhibit targeted brain regions83. TMS has a well-established safety profile and it is able modulate brain activity without surgery, anesthesia or the generation of a convulsion84. Single and paired-pulse TMS protocols have been used since the mid-1980s to study human neurophysiology, with a focus on the motor system, cortical excitability and neuroplasticity85. Diagnostic applications have been FDA-approved for years, allowing the use of these protocols by [CONTACT_903391] (i.e. motor conduction studies)86. Repetitive TMS (rTMS) refers to the application of multiple pulses of TMS, repeated over the course of a given session, with frequencies commonly varying between 1Hz and 50Hz83. Repetitive TMS has been used extensively in systems and cognitive neuroscience research, given its capacity to modulate (both up- and down-regulating) brain regions and networks. Importantly, the safe and well-tolerated yet interventional nature of TMS has allowed the establishment of causal relationships between brain activity and mental states in humans in vivo (e.g.,87), something that other observational noninvasive neuroscience tools (e.g., neuroimaging) are unable to do (these are limited to establishing correlations). Repetitive TMS (rTMS) has been suggested to induce changes in neural activity at the systems level, which may contribute to its therapeutic effects. In the motor cortex, high frequency rTMS (hf-rTMS) has been shown to increase cortical excitability, while low frequency rTMS (lf-rTMS) has been shown to decrease excitability88. Clinically, rTMS has been FDA approved for therapeutic indications and since 2008 it is used for the treatment of major depressive disorders89, 90. Of primary relevance to this study, TMS has been safely administered to the cerebellum in wide-ranging studies focusing on saccadic eye movements91-93, spi[INVESTIGATOR_117746]94, visual motion processing95, timing tasks96, 97, ataxia98, 99, motor learning100, Parkinson’s disease101, 102, and SZ103.   Theta burst stimulation (TBS) is a very efficient rTMS protocol that uses high frequency rTMS burst with lower stimulus intensity, smaller number of pulses and much shorter train duration, yet capable of facilitating longer-lasting post stimulation effects compared with traditional rTMS104, 105. TBS was developed in 2004, based on the physiologic pattern of neuronal firing found in the hippocampus of animal104. The basic element of TBS contains a three-pulse burst at 50 Hz given every 200 milliseconds (i.e. at 5 Hz). By [CONTACT_903392], two major TBS paradigms were developed: continuous theta burst stimulation (cTBS, inhibitory) and intermittent theta burst stimulation (iTBS, excitatory), as shown in Figure 1. The stimulus intensity required for TBS (80% of active motor threshold –AMT) is lower than that for traditional rTMS protocols, which use 100 to 120% of the resting motor threshold (RMT). Of 
Page	[ADDRESS_1267129] been safely administered in SZ103, 106-108 and in BP109-112.  Figure 1: Continuous and Intermittent TBS protocols (from Chung et al., 2015) 
   In this study, we will administer TBS to the cerebellum in psychosis patients (schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, and psychotic bipolar disorder) to investigate with causal explanatory power the role of the cerebellum in time perception abnormalities, executive dysfunction, and mood and psychotic symptoms, which are prevalent in these disorders. We will determine whether modulating (exciting or inhibiting) the cerebellum with TBS leads to changes in (1) time perception (measured by [CONTACT_903393][INVESTIGATOR_91993]) (2) executive function (measured by [CONTACT_941] N-back, flanker task and multi-source interference tasks), and (3) mood and psychotic symptoms (measured by [CONTACT_545675]). Finally, we will test the hypothesis that time-perception abnormalities mediate, at least partially, the myriad clinical manifestations (i.e., cognitive, mood, and psychotic symptoms) in these disorders. Testing the hypothesis that the cerebellum contributes to the diverse symptoms in psychotic disorders, possibly through a common impairment in time perception, will provide insights that will enable development of more effective therapi[INVESTIGATOR_903340], rather than select symptoms.  II. SPECIFIC	AIMS:		The	cerebellum	plays	a	major	role	in	information	processing	but	it	has	not	been	considered	a	treatment	target	for	studies	of	major	mental	illness.	The	goal	of	this	study	is	to	investigate	the	impact	of	modulating	cerebellar	activity	on	mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	in	patients	as	well	as	the	closely	related	domains	of	executive	function	and	time	perception.	We	will	study	up	to	100	healthy	subjects	and	up	to	100	psychosis	patients	(i.e.,	schizophrenia,	schizoaffective	disorder,	and	psychotic	bipolar	disorder).	In	sham-controlled	crossover	design,	we	will	present	validated	cognitive	paradigms	and	clinical	measures	to	subjects	before	and	after	TMS.	We	hypothesize	that	abnormally	reduced	activity	in	the	cerebellum	contributes	to	the	abnormalities	in	patients	and	therefore	cerebellar	stimulation	will	normalize	outcome	measures.	The	circuitry	of	the	cerebellum	is	complex	and	the	main	projection	neurons	in	this	brain	region	(Purkinje	cells)	are	inhibitory.	Therefore,	we	will	test	the	specificity	of	our	hypothesis	by	[CONTACT_903394]	"inhibition"	TMS	condition	which	we	hypothesize	will	worsen	the	outcome	measures.	The	specific	aims	are	to:		Aim	1:	Investigate	the	role	of	the	cerebellum	in	abnormalities	of	time	perception,	cognition,	and	mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	by	[CONTACT_903395],	inhibitory,	or	sham	TMS	applied	to	the	cerebellum	in	patients	with	psychosis	and	in	healthy	control	participants.	Participants	will	undergo	three	study	visits,	one	for	each	of	the	three	TMS	conditions.	At	each	study	visit,	we	will	measure	the	following	before	and	after	TMS:		

Page	5	of	29		a) Time	perception:	We	will	measure	time	perception	using	a	time	perception	task.	Hypothesis:	Compared	with	healthy	control	participants,	patients	with	psychotic	disorders	will	have	impaired	timing	perception	(i.e.,	higher	number	of	errors	and/or	greater	inter-trial	variability	in	the	task)	both	at	baseline	and	after	sham	TMS.	We	predict	that	the	abnormalities	in	patients	will	further	worsen	after	inhibitory	TMS,	and	improve	after	excitatory	TMS.			b) Executive	Function:	We	will	measure	executive	function	using	a	behavioral	task.	Hypothesis:	Compared	with	healthy	control	participants,	patients	with	psychotic	disorders	will	have	executive	dysfunction,	as	measured	by	a	higher	number	of	errors	and	longer	reaction	times	on	both	tasks,	both	at	baseline	and	after	sham	TMS.	We	predict	that	these	deficits	in	patients	will	become	more	exaggerated	after	inhibitory	TMS,	and	improve	after	excitatory	TMS.		c) Symptoms:		We	will	measure	mood	and	psychotic	(e.g.,	hallucinations,	delusions)	symptoms	with	visual	analogue	scales	(VAS).	Hypothesis:	Symptom	ratings	will	improve	in	the	period	immediately	after	excitatory	TMS,	and	worsen	in	the	period	immediately	after	inhibitory	TMS,	and	show	no	significant	change	after	sham	TMS.		Aim	2:	Investigate	the	relationship	between	time	perception	and	(a)	executive	function	and	(b)	symptomatology	in	patients	with	psychotic	disorders.	Hypothesis:	We	hypothesize	that	performance	on	the	time	perception	task	will	correlate	with	performance	on	a	working	memory	task	as	well	as	with	mood	and	psychotic	symptoms.		III. SUBJECT	SELECTION:		We	will	recruit	participants	from	the	following	two	groups:	1. Patients	with	psychotic	disorders	–	patients	diagnosed	with	schizophrenia	(SZ),	schizoaffective	disorder	(SZA),	or	psychotic	bipolar	disorder	(BP).	2. Healthy	controls	(HC)—individuals	with	no	psychiatric	illness.		We	will	enroll	up	to	100	participants	for	each	of	the	two	protocols	(Protocol	A	and	Protocol	B,	which	are	identical	except	that	they	involve	different	time	perception	and	executive	tasks	that	participants	must	complete	before	and	after	the	cerebellar	TMS.	Specifically,	the	tasks	in	Protocol	A	are	the	interval	discrimination	ask,	flanker	task	and	the	N-back	working	task,	while	those	in	Protocol	B	are	the	repetitive	finger	tappi[INVESTIGATOR_903341]-Source	Interference	Task,	or	MSIT).	Participants	may	elect	to	participate	in	both	Protocol	A	and	Protocol	B,	should	they	wish	to	do	so.	Participation	in	the	second	protocol	will	be	entirely	optional.				Protocol	A:			n=50	patients	with	psychotic	disorders			n=50	healthy	controls	Protocol	B:			n=50	patients	with	psychotic	disorders			n=50	healthy	controls		Thus,	we	will	enroll	between	100-200	participants	in	total.	There	may	be	overlap	in	the	Protocol	A	and	Protocol	B	participants.	As	previously	stated,	participants	will	be	given	the	opportunity	(optional)	to	participate	in	both	Protocols	A	and	B.	(Thus,	in	the	event	that	all	participants	complete	both	protocols,	we	will	enroll	only	100	total	participants,	i.e.,	50	patients	and	50	healthy	controls).	This	being	the	first	study	of	its	kind,	it	is	difficult	to	do	a	formal	power	and	sample	size	
Page	[ADDRESS_1267130]	size,	but	given	previous	similar	studies	and	our	usual	rate	of	loss	to	follow	up,	we	calculate	we	will	need	50	participants	per	group	for	each	protocol.		Our	enrollment	numbers	take	into	account	the	likelihood	of	attrition.	We	will	only	be	able	to	use	data	sets	that	are	complete	(i.e.,	data	collected	from	sham,	excitatory,	and	inhibitory	TMS).	However,	we	anticipate	that	a	subset	of	enrolled	participants	will	not	be	able	to	complete	all	three	study	visits	within	a	protocol	because	of	scheduling	or	other	challenges.	Though	we	aim	to	enroll	up	to	[ADDRESS_1267131]	useable	data	will	be	smaller.		Inclusion	Criteria:	Patients	• Men	and	women	• Ages	18-50	years	• Patients	diagnosed	with	schizophrenia	(SZ),	schizoaffective	disorder	(SZA),	or	psychotic	bipolar	disorder	(BP).	• On	a	stable	psychiatric	medication	regimen	for	at	least	a	month	prior	to	and	during	study	participation	• Have	structural	brain	MRI	data	on	file	from	previous	participation	in	research	within	the	McLean	Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_903342]	• Have	clinical	diagnostic	data	(Structured	Clinical	Interview	for	DSM-IV:	SCID)	on	file	from	previous	participation	in	research	within	the	McLean	Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_903343]:	• Men	and	women	• Ages	18-50	years	• Without	major	psychiatric	illness	• Have	structural	brain	MRI	data	on	file	from	previous	participation	in	research	within	the	McLean	Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_903344]:	Patients	• Any	change	in	psychiatric	medications	within	a	month	prior	to	and	during	study	participation	• Legal	or	mental	incompetency	• Intellectual	disability	• Substance	use	disorder	(abuse	or	dependence)	with	active	use	within	the	last	3	months	• Significant	medical	or	neurological	illness	• Prior	neurosurgical	procedure	• History	of	seizures	• History	of	ECT	treatment	or	clinical	TMS	within	the	past	three	months	• History	of	participation	in	a	cerebellar	TMS	study	• Implanted	cardiac	pacemakers	• Patients	who	have	conductive,	ferromagnetic	or	other	magnetic-sensitive	metals	implanted	in	their	head	or	neck,	or	are	non-removable	and	within	30	cm	of	the	treatment	coil.	These	include:		o Aneurysm	clips	or	coils	o Carotid	or	cerebral	stents	o Metallic	devices	implanted	in	the	head	(e.g.	Implanted	pacemaker,	medication	
Page	7	of	29		pump,	vagal	stimulator,	deep	brain	stimulator,	TENS	unit,	or	ventriculo-peritoneal	shunt)	o Magnetically	active	dental	implants		o Cochlear/otologic	implants		o CSF	shunts		o Ferromagnetic	ocular	implants		o Pellets,	bullets,	fragments	less	than	30	cm	from	the	coil	o Facial	tattoos	with	metallic	ink,	permanent	makeup	less	than	30	cm	from	the	coil				• Pregnant	women		Healthy	Controls:	• History	of	major	psychiatric	illness,	including	psychosis	• Has	a	first-degree	relative	with	psychosis	• Active	use	of	neuropsychoactive	medications	• Legal	or	mental	incompetency	• Intellectual	disability	• Substance	use	disorder	(abuse	or	dependence)	with	active	use	within	the	last	3	months	• Significant	medical	or	neurological	illness	• Prior	neurosurgical	procedure	• History	of	seizures	• History	of	ECT	treatment	or	clinical	TMS	within	the	past	three	months	• History	of	participation	in	a	cerebellar	TMS	study	• Implanted	cardiac	pacemakers	• Individuals	who	have	conductive,	ferromagnetic	or	other	magnetic-sensitive	metals	implanted	in	their	head	or	neck,	or	are	non-removable	and	within	30	cm	of	the	treatment	coil.	These	include:		o Aneurysm	clips	or	coils	o Carotid	or	cerebral	stents	o Metallic	devices	implanted	in	the	head	(e.g.	Implanted	pacemaker,	medication	pump,	vagal	stimulator,	deep	brain	stimulator,	TENS	unit,	or	ventriculo-peritoneal	shunt)	o Magnetically	active	dental	implants		o Cochlear/otologic	implants		o CSF	shunts		o Ferromagnetic	ocular	implants		o Pellets,	bullets,	fragments	less	than	30	cm	from	the	coil	o Facial	tattoos	with	metallic	ink,	permanent	makeup	less	than	30	cm	from	the	coil				• Pregnant	women		Source	of	subjects	and	recruitment	methods			For	patients,	we	will	preferentially,	though	not	exclusively,	recruit	individuals	who	are	already	enrolled	in	one	of	two	ongoing	research	studies	in	the	McLean	Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_903342]:		• The	"Core	Protocol"	(IRB	Protocol	#2014P000476,	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_903345]	Öngür,	“Multimodal	neuroimaging,	genetic,	metabolic,	and	clinical	characterization	of	patients	with	schizophrenia,	psychotic	bipolar	disorder,	and	related	disorders”).	This	is	a	large,	ongoing	genotype-phenotype	study	of	psychotic	disorders.	The	pool	of	potential	patients	available	for	participation	in	the	current	proposal	through	this	study	is	large.	As	of	11/2015,	the	
Page	8	of	29		genotype-phenotype	study	has	enrolled	approximately	[ZIP_CODE]	patients	with	psychotic	disorders	(SZ,	SZA,	or	psychotic	BP),	and	MRI	data	are	available	for	285	of	these	patients.		• The	"First-Epi[INVESTIGATOR_903346]"	(IRB	Protocol	#2012P001796,	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_903345]	Öngür,	“Longitudinal	multimodal	neuroimaging	studies	in	patients	with	first	epi[INVESTIGATOR_903347]”).	This	study	seeks	to	characterize	brain,	genetic,	and	metabolic	abnormalities	in	individuals	with	first	epi[INVESTIGATOR_903347],	and	includes	a	SCID	assessment	as	well	as	collection	of	structural	MRI	data.	As	of	11/2015,	the	first-epi[INVESTIGATOR_903348]	55	patients.			The	rationale	for	this	recruitment	strategy	is	three-fold:	(1)	Collecting	many	different	types	of	data—with	the	goal	to	combine	methods	and	technologies	at	multiple	levels	of	analysis—within	the	same	cohort	of	subjects	may	lead	to	greater	understanding	of	the	mechanisms	underlying	psychotic	disorders.	(2)	Collection	of	clinical	data	can	be	more	efficient	and	streamlined	for	subjects	who	have	enrolled	in	the	core	and	first	epi[INVESTIGATOR_903349].	Because	individuals	who	have	participated	in	these	protocols	have	already	undergone	a	SCID	for	diagnosis,	we	will	not	need	to	complete	a	new	SCID	for	the	purposes	of	this	study.	Instead,	we	will	simply	assess	during	the	course	of	administering	the	scales	that	the	core/first	epi[INVESTIGATOR_903350]	(i.e.,	has	not	changed/evolved	in	the	interim).	(3)	We	will	already	have	structural	MRI	scan	data	for	these	subjects	from	previous	studies,	which	will	be	necessary	for	neuro-navigation	to	accurately	identify	and	place	the	TMS	coil	over	the	target	stimulation	region	of	the	cerebellum.		The	IRB-approved	consent	form	for	the	core/genotype-phenotype	and	first-epi[INVESTIGATOR_903351].	For	individuals	we	recruit	through	these	two	other	studies,	we	will	contact	[CONTACT_903396].	We	will	also	make	sure	to	contact	[CONTACT_903397]	"up	to	five	years"	period	after	signing	the	consent	form	has	not	expi[INVESTIGATOR_5697].	These	individuals	may	or	may	not	be	receiving	inpatient	or	outpatient	care	at	McLean	at	the	time	of	our	recruitment	efforts.	Regardless	of	their	treatment	status	at	the	time,	these	are	individuals	we	will	have	identified	through	our	research	database	(not	through	medical	records	or	other	clinical	data	sources).	Therefore,	we	will	make	contact	[CONTACT_903398]	(IRB-approved)	recruitment	emails,	recruitment	letters,	and/or	by	[CONTACT_648],	rather	than	first	contact[CONTACT_903399].		Though	we	will	primarily	recruit	through	the	core/genotype-phenotype	and	first-epi[INVESTIGATOR_903349],	these	other	studies	will	not	be	the	exclusive	source	of	our	patient	recruitment.	We	may	also	recruit	patients	we	identify	through	medical	records	in	the	inpatient	and	outpatient	services	at	McLean	Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].	In	such	instances,	we	will	take	special	precautions,	in	accordance	with	the	PHRC	guidelines,	to	ensure	that	we	respect	patient	privacy.	In	specific,	we	will	not	directly	approach	patients	we	identify	through	their	private	health	information.	Instead,	we	will	first	contact	a	member	of	the	patient's	treatment	team,	someone	who	is	known	to	the	patient	and	who	has	first-hand	knowledge	of	the	patient's	medical	history	(e.g.,	attending	physician	for	inpatients;	therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541],	prescriber,	or	case	manager	for	outpatients).	We	will	ask	the	patient's	treatment	provider	if	the	particular	patient	in	question	is	appropriate	for	the	study.	If	the	patient's	treater	indicates	that	the	patient	does	seem	appropriate,	we	will	ask	the	treatment	provider	to	briefly	talk	to	the	patient	about	the	research	and	obtain	the	patient's	verbal	permission	for	study	staff	to	contact	[CONTACT_903400].	We	may	provide	the	treatment	provider	with	IRB-approved	recruitment	materials,	with	the	idea	that	written	material	may	facilitate	the	discussion	between	the	patient	and	treatment	provider	and	thus	help	with	the	recruitment	process.			Though	we	may	make	contact	[CONTACT_903401][INVESTIGATOR_903352],	we	will	not	actually	enroll	any	participants	while	they	are	inpatients.	The	main	reason	for	this	is	that	the	TMS	study	procedures	will	take	place	at	a	different	site,	at	the	[LOCATION_005]	General	Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_903353].	Therefore,	if	there	are	
Page	[ADDRESS_1267132]	in	the	study,	we	will	wait	until	after	they	are	discharged	to	enroll	them.				Patients	that	we	recruit	through	clinical	services	at	McLean	Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_903354]'s	core/genotype-phenotype	and	first-epi[INVESTIGATOR_903355].	We	anticipate	that	such	patients	will	constitute	the	minority	of	research	participants,	since	we	will	preferentially	recruit	through	the	core/genotype-phenotype	and	first-epi[INVESTIGATOR_903349].	In	such	cases,	we	will	inform	these	patients	that	they	are	ineligible	for	this	study.	Should	they	be	interested	in	hearing	about	other	research	studies	that	include	MRI,	independent	from	involvement	in	the	current	study,	we	will	let	the	patients	know	about	the	core/genotype-phenotype	and	first-epi[INVESTIGATOR_903349].	If	they	choose	to	enroll	in	either	of	these	studies	and	indicate	willingness	to	be	contact[CONTACT_903402],	we	will	re-contact	[CONTACT_903403]-screen	them	for	participation	in	this	study.		Healthy	control	participants	will	be	recruited	through	community	advertisements	and	through	ongoing	neuroimaging	studies	in	our	group.	Potential	healthy	control	participants	will	undergo	a	screening	interview	for	eligibility	by	[CONTACT_756].	Similar	to	patient	participants,	potential	healthy	control	subjects	without	MRI	data	on	file	will	be	ineligible	to	participate	in	the	current	study.	Should	they	be	interested	in	hearing	about	other	research	studies	that	include	MRI,	independent	from	involvement	in	this	study,	we	will	let	them	know	about	the	core/genotype-phenotype	and	first-epi[INVESTIGATOR_903356].	If	they	choose	to	enroll	in	either	of	these	studies	and	indicate	willingness	to	be	contact[CONTACT_903402],	we	will	re-contact	[CONTACT_903403]-screen	them	for	participation	in	this	current	study.		We	will	also	recruit	both	patients	and	healthy	control	participants	through	a	posting	on	the	Partners	Healthcare	Clinical	Trials	website.	The	posting	will	use	simple,	layman	language	to	describe	the	purpose	of	the	study,	inclusion	and	exclusion	criteria,	study	procedures,	and	compensation	details.	It	will	allow	potential	subjects	to	contact	[CONTACT_903404],	who	will	then	conduct	a	screening	interview	for	eligibility	by	[CONTACT_756].					IV. SUBJECT	ENROLLMENT	Screening	for	Eligibility			We	will	use	a	standardized	form	(see	Healthy	Control	Phone	Screen	and	Patient	Phone	Screen,	attached)	for	eligibility	screening.	The	form	asks	about	history	of	participating	in	neuroimaging	studies	within	the	McLean	Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_903342],	age,	medical	and	neurological	illnesses,	whether	pregnant,	psychiatric	history,	family	history	of	psychiatric	illness,	substance	use	history,	history	of	ECT	or	TMS	treatments,	history	of	participation	in	a	cerebellar	TMS	study,	and	any	conditions	that	would	preclude	TMS	administration	(e.g.,	metal	implants	near	the	head	or	neck).	The	screening	interview	will	take	approximately	10	minutes	to	complete.		• Inpatients:	The	research	coordinator	will	regularly	visit	the	Schizophrenia	and	Bipolar	Disorder	inpatient	units	in	the	McLean	Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_903357],	check	patient	medical	records	(e.g.,	admission	notes,	progress	notes)	and	be	in	frequent	contact	[CONTACT_903405].	The	research	coordinator	will	perform	screening	with	potential	subjects	who	are	interested	in	participating	in	the	study	for	inclusion	and	exclusion	criteria.		• Outpatients:	The	research	coordinator	will	be	in	contact	[CONTACT_903406].	The	research	coordinator	will	also	refer	to	recruitment	records	of	other	ongoing	imaging	studies	of	our	group	to	select	potential	subjects.	Patients	who	are	interested	will	undergo	a	screening	interview	for	inclusion	and	exclusion	criteria	either	in	person	or	by	[CONTACT_756].	• Healthy	controls:	Potential	participants	will	undergo	a	screening	interview	for	eligibility	by	[CONTACT_756].		
Page	[ADDRESS_1267133]	care	to	a	small	subset	(n=5-10)	of	patients	in	the	clinic.	To	ensure	that	patients	who	receive	treatment	from	[CONTACT_903429]	do	not	experience	coercion	to	participate,	[CONTACT_903429]	will	not	approach	her	own	patients	about	this	research.	This	will	be	done	by	[CONTACT_903407].	Similarly,	the	consenting	procedures	will	be	performed	by	[CONTACT_903407],	i.e.	the	research	assistant.	Lastly,	as	we	will	do	with	all	subjects,	we	will	emphasize	to	patients	under	the	care	of	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_903358],	and	that	declining	to	participate	in	research	or	withdrawing	from	the	study	after	consenting	will	not	affect	clinical	care	in	any	way.		Procedures	of	obtaining	informed	consent		Informed	consent	will	be	obtained	on	all	study	participants.	As	already	mentioned,	for	potential	subjects	who	are	inpatient	hospi[INVESTIGATOR_057],	we	will	wait	until	they	are	discharged	from	the	unit	to	obtain	informed	consent,	as	patients	may	not	enroll	or	participate	in	the	current	protocol	as	inpatients.		All	subjects	who	meet	eligibility	criteria	will	be	given	a	description	of	the	study,	and	any	questions	they	may	have	will	be	answered.	Participants	must	be	capable	of	understanding	the	nature	of	this	study,	its	potential	risks,	discomforts,	and	benefits.	Since	all	participants	will	be	[ADDRESS_1267134]	been	fully	and	clearly	explained,	and	the	potential	participant	has	demonstrated	an	understanding	of	the	protocol,	willingness	to	participate,	and	capacity	to	consent.			As	a	means	of	assessing	participants’	understanding	of	what	the	study	entails,	we	will	conduct	a	one-on-one	informed	consent	survey,	which	asks	questions	such	as,	“What	illness	is	being	studied	in	this	project?”	“Are	there	any	risks	to	participating	in	this	study?”	and	“Will	you	lose	any	of	your	benefits	if	you	refuse	to	participate	in	this	study?”	If	the	participant	is	unable	to	answer	the	questions	or	demonstrates	a	lack	of	understanding,	the	investigator	will	review	the	details	of	the	study	again.	The	survey	therefore	serves	to	ensure	that	participants	are	actively	engaged	in	the	informed	consent	process.	For	each	participant,	we	will	re-administer	the	informed	consent	survey	at	the	beginning	of	each	visit,	in	order	to	ensure	that	the	participant	is	capable	of	consent	throughout	the	entire	study.	Participants	who	are	unable	to	answer	all	9	questions	on	the	survey	correctly	even	after	additional	information	is	provided	will	be	excluded	from	the	study.		We	will	acquire	written	informed	consent	for	all	participants	using	the	IRB-approved	consent	form.	All	signed	forms	will	be	stored	in	a	file	cabinet	in	a	locked	office.		For	individuals	who	wish	to	participate	in	the	second	protocol	(e.g.,	Protocol	B	after	completing	Protocol	A),	we	will	take	the	necessary	time	to	remind	participants	about	the	study	procedures,	risks,	and	benefits,	and	answer	any	questions	they	may	have	about	the	study.	We	will	also	re-evaluate	whether	participants	continue	to	meet	the	eligibility	criteria.	However,	because	Protocols	A	and	B	are	both	part	of	this	same	IRB	protocol,	we	will	not	maintain	separate	written	informed	consent	forms	for	the	two	protocols.		Treatment	assignment,	and	randomization		All	subjects,	including	controls,	will	receive	either	cTBS	(inhibitory),	iTBS	(excitatory),	or	sham	TBS	in	each	of	the	three	visits.		The	order	in	which	they	receive	a	particular	type	of	TMS	will	be	randomized	for	each	subject	by	[CONTACT_903408].	The	investigators	and	the	research	coordinator	will	not	be	blinded	to	the	randomized	order,	since	all	
Page	[ADDRESS_1267135]	same	procedure	with	a	sham	coil,	which	is	designed	to	induce	the	same	nonspecific	sensory	effects	of	TMS	(auditory	and	somatosensory	activation)	without	inducing	the	neuromodulatory	magnetic	fields.	At	the	end	of	each	study	visit,	subjects	will	be	asked	to	speculate	on	which	mode	of	TMS	(inhibitory,	excitatory,	or	sham)	they	received	as	well	as	the	degree	of	certainty	of	their	judgment	so	that	we	can	assess	the	potential	contributions	of	subjects'	expectations	on	their	task	performance.		V. STUDY	PROCEDURES:	All	subjects,	including	healthy	controls,	will	undergo	three	visits	at	the	MGH	Laboratory	for	Neuropsychiatry	and	Neuromodulation	in	the	Charlestown	Navy	Yard	Campus,	with	at	least	[ADDRESS_1267136]	is	free	to	withdraw	from	the	study	at	any	time	simply	by	[CONTACT_903409].	Similarly,	the	investigators	may	decide	to	stop	the	study	if	the	purposes	of	the	study	cannot	be	met	(technical	difficulties,	new	information	on	subject	characteristics,	etc.).		Summary	of	Study	Procedures		The	first	visit	will	include	the	following	procedures	(for	the	second	and	third	visits,	the	clinical	characterization	step	will	be	skipped):		 	Patients:	• Consenting	procedures	(15-20	minutes)	• Clinical	characterization	(1-2	hours)	o Positive	and	Negative	Syndrome	Scale	(PANSS)	o Young	Mania	Rating	Scale	(YMRS)	o Montgomery-Asberg	Depression	Rating	Scale	(MADRS)	o North	American	Adult	Reading	Test	(NAART)	o Psychotic	Symptom	Rating	Scale:	PSYRATS-AH	o The	Behavior	Rating	Inventory	of	Executive	Function	–	Adult	Form		(BRIEF-A)	o Barratt	Impulsiveness	Scale	(Version	11;	BIS-11)	o Fagerstrom	Test	for	Nicotine	Dependence	• Urine	toxicology/pregnancy	screen	(5	minutes)	• Baseline/pre-TMS	assessments	(15-20	minutes)	o Interval	discrimination	task	for	Protocol	A	(or	repetitive	finger-tappi[INVESTIGATOR_903359]	B)	o N-back	working	memory	task	for	Protocol	A	(or	multi-source	interference	task	(MSIT)	for	Protocol	B)	o Flanker	task	for	Protocol	A	o Visual	analog	scales	(VAS)	to	assess	mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	• Transcranial	Magnetic	Stimulation	(TMS)	(15	minutes)	o Excitatory,	inhibitory,	or	sham	(order	randomized)	• Post-TMS	assessments	(15-20	minutes)	o Interval	discrimination	task	for	Protocol	A	(or	repetitive	finger-tappi[INVESTIGATOR_903359]	B)	o N-back	working	memory	task	for	Protocol	A	(or	multi-source	interference	task	(MSIT)	for	Protocol	B)	o Flanker	task	for	Protocol	A	o Visual	analog	scales	(VAS)	to	assess	mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	
Page	12	of	29			Healthy	Control	Participants:	• Consenting	procedures	(15-20	minutes)	• Clinical	characterization	(1-2	hours)	o Structured	Clinical	Interview	for	DSM-IV-TR	(SCID)	o North	American	Adult	Reading	Test	(NAART)		o The	Behavior	Rating	Inventory	of	Executive	Function	–	Adult	Form		(BRIEF-A)	o Barratt	Impulsiveness	Scale	(Version	11;	“BIS-11”)	o Fagerstrom	Test	for	Nicotine	Dependence	• Urine	toxicology/pregnancy	screen	(5	minutes)	• Baseline/pre-TMS	assessments	(15-20	minutes)	o Interval	discrimination	task	for	Protocol	A	(or	repetitive	finger-tappi[INVESTIGATOR_903359]	B)	o N-back	working	memory	task	for	Protocol	A	(or	multi-source	interference	task	(MSIT)	for	Protocol	B)	o Flanker	task	for	Protocol	A	o Visual	analog	scales	(VAS)	to	assess	mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	• Transcranial	Magnetic	Stimulation	(TMS)	(15	minutes)	• Visual	analog	scales	(VAS)	to	assess	mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	o Excitatory,	inhibitory,	or	sham	(order	randomized)	• Post-TMS	assessments	(15-20	minutes)	o Interval	discrimination	task	for	Protocol	A	(or	repetitive	finger-tappi[INVESTIGATOR_903359]	B)	o N-back	working	memory	task	for	Protocol	A	(or	multi-source	interference	task	(MSIT)	for	Protocol	B)	o Flanker	task	for	Protocol	A	o Visual	analog	scales	(VAS)	to	assess	mood	and	psychotic	symptoms		Clinical	characterization	For	the	purposes	of	clinical	characterization,	we	will	record	demographic	(i.e.	age,	sex,	race/ethnicity,	parental	education,	duration	of	illness,	handedness)	and	medication	information	for	all	subjects	during	the	first	visit.	For	healthy	control	participants,	we	will	administer	the	SCID,	which	assesses	lifetime	history	of	psychiatric	symptoms	and	diagnoses,	but	not	symptom	severity,	which	can	fluctuate	over	time.	To	capture	the	clinical	presentation	of	patients	at	the	time	of	the	study,	we	will	use	the	following	clinical	scales	(included	with	this	protocol):	PANSS,	YMRS,	MADRS,	PSYRATS-AH,	BRIEF-A,	BIS-11.	Each	of	these	scales	will	be	used	to	capture	the	most	severe	symptoms	in	the	previous	month.	The	NAART,	BRIEF-A,	BIS-11,	will	be	administered	for	all	subjects.	The	clinical	characterization	step	will	not	be	repeated	at	study	Visits	[ADDRESS_1267137]	menstrual	period	(LMP).	Clinical	symptoms	and	cognitive	functioning	can	vary	according	to	the	phase	of	the	menstrual	period.	We	will	evaluate	what	phase	of	the	menstrual	cycle	a	female	participant	is	in	at	the	time	of	each	study	visit	so	that	we	can	potentially	control	for	any	associated	confounding	effects.	Similarly,	nicotine	is	well-documented	to	affect	cognitive	functioning,	and	is	an	important	variable	to	control	for.	Therefore,	we	will	administer	a	Fagerstrom	Test	for	Nicotine	Dependence	in	all	research	participants.	For	individuals	who	are	smokers,	we	will	record	the	time	of	the	participant's	last	cigarette	prior	to	each	study	visit.	For	all	subjects,	during	each	and	every	visit,	urine	toxicology	screens	will	be	used	to	assess	for	current	substance	use,	and	urine	pregnancy	tests	in	women	of	child-bearing	age	to	determine	if	she	is	
Page	13	of	29		pregnant	(and	thus	is	ineligible	to	participate	in	the	study).		Scheduling	of	study	visits	As	mentioned	before,	this	will	be	a	cross-over	design,	in	which	participants	will	undergo	excitatory,	inhibitory,	and	sham	TBS	over	three	study	visits,	separated	by	[CONTACT_201597]	[ADDRESS_1267138]	36	hours	in	order	to	provide	more	than	ample	time	for	the	brain	to	return	to	homeostatic	balance	and	ensure	that	there	are	no	potential	residual	TMS	effects	from	the	previous	study	visit.	If	scheduling	permits,	participants	may	be	able	to	complete	all	three	study	visits	in	as	short	as	one	week.	However,	to	accommodate	scheduling	flexibility	for	research	participants,	we	will	allow	up	to	two	months	for	participants	to	complete	all	three	study	visits	within	a	single	protocol.		Participants	will	participate	in	one	of	two	protocols,	Protocol	A	(Figure	2)	or	Protocol	B	(Figure	3).	The	two	protocols	are	identical	except	that	they	involve	different	time	perception	and	executive	function	tasks.	Specifically,	the	tasks	in	Protocol	A	are	the	interval	discrimination	task,	flanker	task	and	the	N-back	working	memory	task,	while	those	in	Protocol	B	are	the	repetitive	finger	tappi[INVESTIGATOR_903360]-source	interference	task	(MSIT).	Should	they	choose	to	do	so,	participants	may	optionally	return	to	participate	in	the	protocol	in	which	they	have	not	already	participated	(e.g.,	Protocol	B	after	completing	Protocol	A)	at	any	time	point	that	the	study	remains	open	to	recruitment	and	the	participant	continues	to	meet	eligibility	criteria.	Once	a	participant	returns	for	Visit	1	of	the	second	protocol,	we	will	allow	up	to	two	months	for	participants	to	complete	study	Visits	2	and	Visits	3	of	the	same	protocol.		Figure	2.	Protocol	A	Visit	1	
≥ 36	hours	Visit	2	
≥ 36	hours	Visit	3	NAART*					PANSS					YMRS					MADRS					PSYRATS-AH					BRIEF-A*					BIS-11*					Fagerstrom*					Utox	and	upreg	screens	Utox	and	upreg	screens	Utox	and	upreg	screens	Mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	(VAS)	Mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	(VAS)	Mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	(VAS)	Interval	discrimination	Interval	discrimination	Interval	discrimination	N-back	test	Flanker	N-back	test	Flanker	N-back	test	Flanker	TMS	-	sham†	TMS	-	excitatory†	TMS	-	inhibitory†	Mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	(VAS)	Mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	(VAS)	Mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	(VAS)	Interval	discrimination	Interval	discrimination	Interval	discrimination	N-back	test	Flanker	N-back	test	Flanker	N-back	test	Flanker	Compensation:	$75	Compensation:	$50	Compensation:	$50		+	$25	completion	bonus	
Page	14	of	29		*Scale	also	administered	to	healthy	control	participants.	†Order	of	TMS	randomized				Figure	3.	Protocol	B	Visit	4	
≥	36	hours	Visit	5	
≥	36	hours	Visit	6	NAART*					PANSS					YMRS					MADRS					PSYRATS-AH					BRIEF-A*					BIS-11*					Fagerstrom*					Utox	and	upreg	screens	Utox	and	upreg	screens	Utox	and	upreg	screens	Mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	(VAS)	Mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	(VAS)	Mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	(VAS)	Finger	tappi[INVESTIGATOR_903361]	-	sham†	TMS	-	excitatory†	TMS	-	inhibitory†	Mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	(VAS)	Mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	(VAS)	Mood	and	psychotic	symptoms	(VAS)	Finger	tappi[INVESTIGATOR_903362]:	$75	Compensation:	$50	Compensation:	$50	+	$25	completion	bonus	*Scale	also	administered	to	healthy	control	participants.	†Order	of	TMS	randomized				Transcranial	Magnetic	Stimulation	(TMS)		TMS	has	a	well-established	safety	profile	and	it	is	able	modulate	brain	activity	without	surgery,	anesthesia	or	the	generation	of	a	convulsion	(Rossi	et	al.,	2009).	Since	its	development	in	the	mid-1980s,	it	has	become	a	widely	used	tool	for	neuroscience	research	and	for	clinical	applications,	both	diagnostic	and	therapeutic	(Camprodon,	2014).	Repetitive	TMS	(rTMS)	has	been	suggested	to	induce	changes	in	neural	activity	at	the	systems	level,	which	may	contribute	to	its	therapeutic	effects.	In	the	motor	cortex,	high	frequency	rTMS	(hf-rTMS)	has	been	shown	to	increase	cortical	excitability,	while	low	frequency	rTMS	(lf-rTMS)	has	been	shown	to	decrease	excitability	(Maeda	et	al.,	2000).		We	will	use	a	MagVenture	MagPro	X100	with	MagOption	stimulator	and	two	dynamic	cooled	butterfly	coils:	one	real	and	one	sham	(MagVenture,	Denmark)	navigated	with	an	infrared	TMS	Neuronavigation	Research	Premium	system	(Localite,	[LOCATION_013])	to	administer	the	TMS.	We	will	start	by	[CONTACT_903410]´s	motor	threshold	(MT),	which	is	a	measure	of	cortical	excitability	used	to	standardize	the	intensity	of	stimulation	across	subjects.	To	do	this,	the	TMS	coil	is	placed	over	the	primary	motor	cortex	(M1).	Single	pulses	are	applied	with	an	interpulse	interval	(IPI)	of	at	least	5	seconds,	to	prevent	additive	neuromodulatory	effects.	When	pulses	are	applied	at	suprathreshold	intensities,	a	volley	of	activity	travels	through	the	pyramidal	motor	pathways	and	leads	to	the	contraction	of	the	contralateral	target		muscle	(generally	the	Abductor	Pollicis	Brevis,	Fist	Dorsal	Interosseus	or	Tibialis	Anterior).	The	intensity	of	stimulation	is	sequentially	reduced	until	we	reach	a	point	when	fewer	than	50%	of	the	pulses	(usually	<3	out	of	6)	lead	to	a	muscle	contraction	(identified	by	[CONTACT_903411]).	The	first	TMS	intensity	that	is	unable	to	elicit	a	muscle	contraction	more	than	3	out	of	6	pulses	is	considered	the	motor	threshold,	and	usually	expressed	as	a	percentage	of	the	maximum	stimulator	output.	
Page	15	of	29			Once	the	MT	is	determined,	we	will	apply	TBS	to	our	main	target:	the	cerebellar	vermis.	In	specific,	we	will	target	the	posterior	vermis	(comprised	of	lobules	VI-X),	which	is	believed	to	subserve	cognitive	and	affective	functions	(vs.	the	anterior	vermis,	comprised	of	lobules	I-V,	which	is	associated	with	somatomotor	functions).	From	a	practical	standpoint,	the	posterior	vermis	(especially	lobules	VII-VIII)	is	also	closer	to	the	skull	surface	and	thus	will	receive	more	direct	TMS	modulation	(Figure	4).	Using	the	Localite	TMS	neuronavigation	system	we	will	co-register	the	participant´s	head	to	his	or	her	MRI,	and	place	the	TMS	coil	over	the	scalp	position	that	allows	direct	stimulation	of	the	vermal	lobules	VII-VIII	in	the	mid-sagittal	plane.			
	Figure	4.	Mid-sagittal	view	of	the	cerebellum.	We	will	apply	theta-burst	stimulation	(TBS)	to	the	posterior	cerebellar	vermis,	directing	the	coil	to	lobules	VII	and	VIII,	which	are	closest	to	the	skull	surface.	Figure	from	113,	pp.	241,	figure	4.	At	this	point,	the	experimental	session	can	begin.	In	a	random	order,	patients	will	receive	either	cTBS	(inhibitory),	iTBS	(excitatory)	or	sham	TBS	in	each	of	the	[ADDRESS_1267139]	same	procedure	with	a	sham	coil,	which	is	designed	to	induce	the	same	nonspecific	sensory	effects	of	TMS	(auditory	and	somatosensory	activation)	without	inducing	the	neuromodulatory	magnetic	fields.	At	the	end	of	each	study	visit,	subjects	will	be	asked	to	speculate	on	which	mode	of	TMS	(inhibitory,	excitatory,	or	sham)	they	received	as	well	as	the	degree	of	certainty	of	their	judgment	so	that	we	can	assess	the	potential	contributions	of	subjects'	expectations	on	their	task	performance.		Visual	Analogue	Scales	(VAS)	A	visual	analogue	scale	(VAS)	is	a	psychometric	response	scale,	which	easily	and	rapi[INVESTIGATOR_903363]-evaluate	the	intensity	of	subjective	measures,	such	as	mood	and	psychotic	symptoms.	Participants	will	complete	visual	analogue	scales	to	indicate	their	current	levels	of	

Page	16	of	29		depression,	anxiety,	euphoria,	auditory	hallucinations,	visual	hallucinations,	paranoia,	referential	thinking,	and	delusions	of	control	before	and	after	TMS	using	RedCap.		Behavioral	Tasks		1. N-back	task:	The	n-back	task	engages	working	memory,	a	cognitive	construct	that	falls	under	executive	function.	Deficits	in	working	memory	are	observed	across	psychiatric	diagnoses.	In	the	n-back	task,	subjects	are	presented	with	a	series	of	stimuli,	such	as	words	or	numbers.	The	subjects	are	prompted	to	indicate	whether	the	currently	presented	stimuli	are	the	same	as	the	stimuli	presented	n-stimuli	previously.	For	instance,	a	2-back	task	would	ask	the	subjects	to	indicate	whether	the	current	stimuli	was	identical	to	that	presented	two	previously.	Outcome	measures	of	interest	include	reaction	time	and	accuracy.		2. Interval	discrimination	task	(Papageorgioiu	et	al.,	2013):	This	experimental	procedure	requires	subjects	to	perform	time	interval	comparisons.	In	each	trial,	two	tones	separated	by	1200	ms	(the	standard	interval)	are	first	presented,	followed	by	a	[ADDRESS_1267140]	pair	(E-condition).	In	another	set	of	trials,	the	time	interval	of	the	second	pair	is	longer	than	the	standard	interval	(L-condition),	while	in	the	remaining	trials,	the	time	interval	of	the	second	pair	is	shorter	than	that	of	the	first	pair	(S-condition).	The	order	of	the	conditions	in	the	trials	will	be	ad	hoc	randomized	and	afterwards	kept	constant	for	all	subjects.	After	each	trial,	subjects	will	be	asked	to	identify	whether	the	time	interval	of	the	subject	was	equal,	longer,	or	shorter	than	that	of	the	first	pair	of	sounds.	Each	subject’s	performace	will	be	evaluated	through	the	overall	percentage	of	correct	responses	(O),	as	well	as	the	percentage	of	correct	responses	in	the	L,	S,	and	E	conditions.		3. Flanker	task	(Holmes	at	al.,	2008): The	flanker	task	is	a	measure	of	attention	and	inhibitory	control.	In	the	task,	subjects	must	attend	and	respond	to	a	certain	stimulus	that	is	surrounded	(“flanked”)	by	[CONTACT_903412].	The	stimuli	are	most	commonly	arrows.	The	flanking	arrows	can	either	have	the	same	or	opposing	orientation	as	the	central	stimulus.	Outcome	measures	of	interest	include	accuracy	and	reaction	time.		4. Multi-Source	Interference	Task	(MSIT):	the	MSIT	is	a	behavioral	task	that	combines	multiple	dimensions	of	cognitive	interference	and	decision-making,	and	other	factors	such	as	target	detection,	novelty	detection,	error	detection,	response	selection,	stimulus/response	competition,	and	task	difficulty.	For	the	MSIT,	subjects	are	given	a	button-press	and	instructed	that	the	keypad	buttons	represent	one,	two,	and	three	from	left	to	right.	They	are	told	to	use	the	index,	middle,	and	ring	fingers	of	the	right	hand	to	respond.	They	are	instructed	that	sets	of	three	numbers	(1	and/or	2	and/or	3)	and/or	letters	(x)	would	appear	in	the	center	of	the	screen	every	1.75	s,	and	that	one	number	would	always	be	different	from	the	other	two	(matching	distractor)	numbers	or	letters.	Subjects	are	asked	to	report,	via	button-press,	the	identity	of	the	number	that	was	different	from	the	other	two	items.	Subjects	are	informed	that	each	session	will	begin	and	end	with	fixation	of	a	white	dot	for	30s,	and	that	between	these	times	there	will	be	two	trial	types	that	would	appear	in	alternating	42	s	long	blocks.	In	trials	with	numbers	and	letters	(control	trials),	the	target	number	will	always	match	its	position	on	the	button-press	(e.g.	the	number	“1”	will	appear	in	the	first	[leftmost]	position).	In	contrast,	during	the	trials	involving	all	numbers	(interference	trials),	the	target	will	never	match	its	position.	It	will	be	emphasized	that	they	are	to	“report	what	the	target	number	is	regardless	of	its	position.”	Further,	subjects	are	informed	that	in	the	numbers	and	letters	(control)	condition,	the	target	number	will	always	be	large,	while	the	numbers	only	(interference)	condition	the	target	number	will	sometimes	be	large	and	sometimes	be	small	(in	
Page	[ADDRESS_1267141]	to	subjects,	the	number	of	large	target	trials	and	small	target	interference	trials	will	be	equal).	For	all	trials,	subjects	are	instructed	to	answer	as	quickly	as	possible	but	to	make	sure	that	they	give	the	right	answer.			5. Repetitive	finger	tappi[INVESTIGATOR_903364]	(Carroll	et	al.,	2009):	The	repetitive	finger	tappi[INVESTIGATOR_007]-task	consists	of	two	conditions:	(1)	tone-paced	tappi[INVESTIGATOR_007],	and	(2)	self-paced	tappi[INVESTIGATOR_007].	In	both	conditions,	a	press	of	the	response	button	is	used	to	calculate	the	inter-tap	interval.	Each	trial	begins	with	an	auditory	tone	placed	at	500	ms	inter-tone	intervals.	In	the	tone-paced	tappi[INVESTIGATOR_903365],	participants	are	instructed	to	tap	the	response	button	at	the	same	rate	as	tone.	After	12	taps,	the	tone	is	discontinued	and	participants	are	required	to	continue	tappi[INVESTIGATOR_903366]	(self-paced	tappi[INVESTIGATOR_007]).	Trials	are	terminated	following	30	self-paced	button	presses.	Error	taps	are	defined	as	inter-tap	intervals	250	ms	above	or	below	the	500	ms	pacing	interval	during	either	the	tone	or	self-paced	portion	of	the	trial.	A	total	of	6	error-free	trials,	or	a	maximum	of	12	trials,	signal	the	completion	of	the	task.		
		Compensation	Subjects	will	be	compensated	by	[CONTACT_903413]	$200	for	completion	of	a	protocol	(Protocol	A	or	B).	The	breakdown	of	compensation	is	as	follows:		• 1st	Visit	(Clinical	evaluation,	TMS,	and	pre-	and	post-TMS	assessments)		$	75	• 2nd	Visit	(TMS	and	pre-	and	post-TMS	assessments)					$	50	• 3rd	Visit	(TMS	and	pre-	and	post-TMS	assessments)					$	50	• Protocol	completion	bonus								$	25											TOTAL	$	200			Because	data	from	all	three	visits	(sham,	excitatory,	and	inhibitory	TMS)	are	necessary	to	interpret	the	results	with	causal	explanatory	power,	participants	will	be	paid	a	completion	bonus	for	completing	all	three	visits.	If	the	subject	does	not	complete	the	entire	study	he/she	will	be	compensated	for	the	procedures	listed	above	that	were	completed.	Subjects	are	informed	that	it	may	take	up	to	4-6	weeks	for	them	to	receive	their	payment.	Should	they	choose	to	do	so,	subjects	may	participate	in	both	Protocol	A	and	Protocol	B.	Subjects	will	be	additionally	compensated	by	[CONTACT_903413]	$200	for	completion	of	the	second	protocol	(e.g.,	Protocol	B	after	completing	Protocol	A).	The	breakdown	of	compensation	for	Protocol	B	is	as	follows:		• 4th	Visit	(Clinical	evaluation,	TMS	and	pre-	and	post-TMS	assessments)		$	75	• 5th	Visit	(TMS	and	pre-	and	post-TMS	assessments)					$	50	

Page	18	of	29		• 6th	Visit	(TMS	and	pre-	and	post-TMS	assessments)					$	50	• Protocol	completion	bonus								$	25												TOTAL	$	200			VI. BIOSTATISTICAL	ANALYSIS:	A.	Data	variables	being	collected	for	the	study	(Data	collection	sheet)		We	will	collect	the	following	data	variables	for	this	study: 		Demographic	information:	• Age	• Gender	• Race	• Ethnicity	• Handedness	• Education	level	• Parental	education	level	• Clinical	diagnosis	• Age	at	onset	of	illness	• Medications		• Past	medical	history	• Smoking	habits	• Substance	use/abuse	history	• For	female	participants:	first	day	of	last	menstrual	period	• Results	from	urine	screening	for	pregnancy	and	drug	use	Scores	from	clinical	scales:	• SCID	(both	patients	and	healthy	controls)	• NAART	(both	patients	and	healthy	controls)	• PANSS	(patients	only)	• YMRS	(patients	only)	• MADRS	(patients	only)	• PSYRATS	(patients	only)	• BRIEF-A	(both	patients	and	healthy	controls)	• BIS-11	(both	patients	and	healthy	controls)	• Fagerstrom	Test	for	Nicotine	Dependence	Scores	from	subject-completed	surveys	and	tasks:	• Visual	Analogue	Scales	scores	on	mood	and	psychosis	symptoms	• Interval	discrimination	task	accuracy	(Protocol	A)	• N-back	working	memory	task	accuracy	and	reaction	time	(Protocol	A)	• Flanker	(Protocol	A)	• Repetitive	finger-tappi[INVESTIGATOR_903367]	(Protocol	B)	• MSIT	accuracy	and	reaction	time	(Protocol	B)		B.	Study	endpoints		As	this	study	is	not	a	clinical	trial,	there	is	no	particular	outcome	measure	that	will	be	indicative	of	a	study	endpoint.		We	will	end	the	study	when	we	meet	our	recruitment	goals.	In	the	event	that	we	encounter	any	major	adverse	events,	we	will	consult	with	the	IRB	to	discuss	whether	the	study	needs	to	be	terminated.		
Page	[ADDRESS_1267142]	measure	the	change	(Δ)	in	each	of	the	pre-	and	post-TMS	assessments	at	each	study	visit:	i.e.	accuracy	in	time	interval	discrimination	task,	accuracy	and	reaction	time	(RT)	in	N-back	working	memory	task,	executive	function	in	Flanker	task	accuracy	and	RT	in	repetitive	finger	tappi[INVESTIGATOR_903364],	and	accuracy	and	RT	in	MSIT.	We	will	then	run	two-way	ANOVA	for	each	outcome	measure,	with	diagnosis	(patients	vs.	healthy	controls)	and	the	TMS	type	(excitatory,	inhibitory,	or	sham)	as	independent	variables.	These	models	will	include	as	covariates	sex,	age,	handedness,	medication	load,	and	symptom	severities	(derived	from	the	clinical	scales	scores:	NAART,	PANSS,	YMRS,	MADRS,	PSYRATS,	BRIEF-A,	BIS-11,	and	the	Fagerstrom	Test).			D.	Power	analysis	(e.g.	sample	size,	evaluable	subjects)	This	is	a	pi[INVESTIGATOR_107734].	This	being	the	first	study	of	its	kind,	it	is	difficult	to	do	a	formal	power	and	sample	size	analysis	because	we	do	not	have	a	measure	of	effect	size,	but	given	previous	similar	studies	and	our	usual	rate	of	loss	to	follow	up,	we	estimate	we	will	need	[ADDRESS_1267143]	to	the	study	is	the	change	(Δ)	in	outcome	measures	within	the	psychosis	group.	With	[ADDRESS_1267144]	80%	power	to	detect	an	effect	size	of	0.35,	which	is	a	moderate	effect.				VII. RISKS	AND	DISCOMFORTS:	Common	risks	of	TMS	procedure		Subject	may	feel	twitching	of	the	scalp	muscles	during	stimulation	and/or	local	discomfort	(tappi[INVESTIGATOR_903368])	under	the	coil.	It	is	possible	that	the	subject	may	feel	a	headache	after	the	TMS	measurement	that	is	generally	caused	by	[CONTACT_9377][INVESTIGATOR_903369]	a	lengthy	period	of	time	and/or	by	[CONTACT_903414].	TMS	may	also	induce	nausea	in	some	patients114.	The	headache	or	nausea,	if	present,	is	typi[INVESTIGATOR_903370],	disappears	soon	and	can	be	treated	by	[CONTACT_903415]-the-counter	analgesics.	Although	there	are	no	reports	suggesting	increased	risk	for	TMS	during	pregnancy,	pregnant	women	are	excluded	from	this	study	due	to	insufficient	knowledge	of	the	effects	of	the	strong	magnetic	fields	on	the	fetus.	Subjects	are	thoroughly	screened	by	a	research	assistant	prior	to	their	enrollment	in	the	study	to	ensure	subject	safety.	Subjects	are	carefully	assessed	before,	during,	and	after	TMS	administration	by	[CONTACT_903416].		Uncommon	risks	of	TMS	procedure	Repetitive	TMS	at	high	frequencies	has	the	rare	potential	to	induce	a	seizure	even	in	healthy	individuals	(~	8	reported	cases	worldwide	since	the	invention	of	TMS	in	1985,	1	with	cTBS),	but	the	risk	for	seizure	can	be	effectively	managed	by	[CONTACT_903417][INVESTIGATOR_903371]	(Rossi	et	al.,	2009).	Compared	with	traditional	low	or	high	frequency	TMS	protocols,	theta	burst	stimulation	(TBS)	uses	less	pulses	(600	vs.	1200-1800),	lower	intensity	(80%	of	AMT	vs.	120%	RMT)	and	shorter	duration	(40-190	seconds	vs.	20-30	minutes).	With	such	low	intensity,	subjects	receiving	TBS	seldom	complain	of	any	unpleasant	sensation	that	is	seen	in	the	other	rTMS	stimulation	protocols,	and	TBS	has	been	considered	safer	than	other	TMS	protocols.	Nevertheless,	one	should	consider	that	theta	burst	stimulation	uses	higher	frequencies,	even	if	in	a	patterned	manner.	One	single	case	has	been	reported	of	a	seizure	using	TBS,	but	with	a	stimulation	intensity	of	100%	of	the	RMT	(higher	than	the	currently	used	80%	of	the	AMT).	Oberman	and	colleagues	published	a	recent	review	and	meta	analysis	of	the	safety	of	TBS,	and	concluded	that	the	“general	risk	of	adverse	events	during	TBS	is	comparable	to	or	less	than	other	high	frequency	rTMS	protocol	(Oberman	et	
Page	20	of	29		al.,	2011).		The	TMS	parameters	used	in	this	study	will	not	result	in	long-term	changes.	Continuous	TBS	at	an	intensity	of	80%	AMT	over	the	primary	motor	area	produces	significant	inhibition	of	Motor	Evoked	Potential	size	lasting	for	20	or	60	minutes	depending	on	whether	the	stimulation	is	given	for	20	seconds	(300	pulses)	or	40	seconds	(600	pulses)	(Huang	et	al.,	2009).	To	protect	the	subjects	from	the	risk	of	a	seizure,	this	study	strictly	adheres	to	the	international	safety	consensus	by	[CONTACT_903418]		(Rossi	et	al.,	2009).	In	the	unlikely	event	that	a	seizure	occurred,	the	seizure	would	stop	as	soon	as	the	TMS	was	stopped,	and	the	MGH	TMS	clinical	service	safety	plan	would	be	activated,	including	transfer	of	the	subject	with	an	ambulance	to	MGH	ER	for	a	medical	check-up.		No	one	has	ever	developed	epi[INVESTIGATOR_903372]	a	consequence	of	TMS.	There	are	no	known	or	foreseeable	long-term	risks	associated	with	TMS.	Subjects	are	thoroughly	screened	by	a	research	assistant	prior	to	their	enrollment	in	the	study	to	ensure	subject	safety.	Subjects	are	carefully	assessed	before,	during,	and	after	TMS	administration	by	[CONTACT_903416].		Psychosocial	risks	Answering	questions	about	psychiatric	history	and	symptoms	during	the	psychiatric	evaluation	may	cause	anxiety	or	discomfort.	However,	patients	will	not	be	forced	to	answer	any	questions,	will	be	given	multiple	opportunities	to	take	breaks,	and	may	completely	withdraw	from	the	study	without	any	negative	consequences.	The	risk	of	breach	of	confidentiality	is	present	by	[CONTACT_903419],	given	the	precautions	we	take	in	de-identifying	and	protecting	our	data.	The	subject	may	feel	mildly	bored	or	frustrated	while	participating	in	the	behavioral	tasks,	but	he	or	she	is	free	to	stop	at	any	time.		Though	we	anticipate	no	increase	in	risk	of	suicide	or	self-harm	as	a	result	of	study	procedures	or	participation,	we	are	(a)	studying	psychiatric	patients	and	(b)	our	study	procedures	involve	asking	participants	about	mood	and	psychosis	symptoms	at	each	of	the	study	visits.	Therefore,	it	is	possible	that	in	the	course	of	study	participation,	participants	may	have	and/or	express	suicidal	ideation	or	intent.	If	a	research	staff	has	any	concerns	about	participant	suicidality	during	a	study	visit,	the	research	team	will	follow	the	plan	outlined	below:		1. Study	staff	will	page	study	PI	([CONTACT_903430]),	site-PI	([CONTACT_903431]),	or	covering	clinician	(to	be	designated	if	both	[CONTACT_903429]	or	[CONTACT_903432]	cannot	be	available	for	a	particular	study	visit).	Study	staff	will	discuss	with	the	responsible	PI/clinician	the	clinical	details	relating	to	the	participant's	safety/suicidality.	The	responsible	PI/clinician	will	recommend	a	plan	as	is	appropriate	to	the	clinical	situation.	2. If	the	responsible	PI/clinician	determines	that	the	patient	or	clinical	situation	warrants	further	(i.e.,	a	higher	level	of)	evaluation,	he/she	will	physically	go	to	the	location	where	study	procedures	are	being	conducted,	evaluate	the	research	participant	in	person,	and	act	as	the	clinical	situation	warrants.	If	the	responsible	PI/clinician	determines	that	the	participant	is	at	imminent	risk	of	harm,	the	safety	plan	may	include	urgent	transfer	of	the	participant	to	the	MGH	Emergency	Room	via	ambulance,	contact[CONTACT_903420]’s	clinician,	and/or	other	similar	procedures."		We	will	follow	a	similar	plan	in	the	event	that	a	research	participant	experiences	any	other	psychiatric	symptoms	that	are	acutely	or	imminently	concerning	(not	just	suicidal	thoughts	or	thoughts	of	self-harm),	including	but	not	limited	to	confusion,	agitation,	severe	anxiety/panic,	and	paranoia	or	other	psychotic	symptoms.		Informed	Consent	Participants	must	be	capable	of	understanding	the	nature	of	this	study,	its	potential	risks,	discomforts,	and	benefits.	Since	all	participants	will	be	[ADDRESS_1267145]	been	fully	and	clearly	explained,	and	the	potential	participant	has	demonstrated	an	understanding	of	the	protocol,	willingness	to	participate,	and	capacity	to	consent.		As	a	means	of	assessing	participants’	understanding	of	what	the	study	entails,	the	candidate	will	conduct	a	one-on-one	informed	consent	survey,	which	asks	questions	such	as	“What	illness	is	being	studied	in	this	project?”	“Are	there	any	risks	to	participating	in	this	study?”	and	“Will	you	lose	any	of	your	benefits	if	you	refuse	to	participate	in	this	study?”	If	the	participant	is	unable	to	answer	the	questions	or	demonstrates	a	lack	of	understanding,	the	investigator	will	review	the	details	of	the	study	again.	The	survey	therefore	serves	to	ensure	that	participants	are	actively	engaged	in	the	informed	consent	process.	For	each	participant,	we	will	re-administer	the	informed	consent	survey	at	the	beginning	of	each	visit,	in	order	to	ensure	that	the	participant	is	capable	of	consent	throughout	the	entire	study.	Participants	who	are	unable	to	answer	all	[ADDRESS_1267146]	be	“scrubbed,”	or	removed,	of	any	personally	identifying	header	information	and	transferred	via	the	Partners	Research	Computing	Secure	File	Transfer	and	Collaboration	system	(http://rc.partners.org/sFTP),	which	is	secured	via	256-bit	SSL	encryption,	scans	all	files	with	anti-virus	software,	and	is	HIPAA	compliant.	Subjects	will	be	informed	that	all	the	information	obtained	in	this	study	will	be	used	for	research	investigational	purposes	only.	The	names	of	subjects	will	never	be	publicly	disclosed	at	any	time.	Subjects	will	not	be	identifiable	in	any	publication	that	may	arise	from	this	research.	Subjects	will	receive	a	copy	of	the	consent	document	to	keep.	Subjects	will	be	informed	that	this	research	will	be	conducted	and	administered	in	compliance	with	all	state	and	federal	laws.		Subjects	will	be	informed	of	their	confidentiality	rights	in	the	informed	consent	form.	To	ensure	that	subjects’	rights	and	safety	are	protected	during	the	conduct	of	this	research	study,	subjects	consent	to	the	inspection	of	medical	records	by	[CONTACT_903421].	Such	monitoring	may	be	performed	by	[CONTACT_903422],	or	by	[CONTACT_903423].	Any	email	communication	with	subjects	will	be	done	using	encryption,	i.e.	using	the	“Send	Secure”	function	in	the	Partners	Healthcare	email	system.	We	will	also	discourage	subjects	from	communicating	about	medical	issues	via	non-secure	email.		VIII. POTENTIAL	BENEFITS:		Potential	benefits	to	participating	individuals	and	society	
Page	[ADDRESS_1267147]	benefit	to	them	from	participating	in	this	study.	As	mentioned	in	the	section	on	Background	and	Significance,	the	potential	benefits	to	society	are	increased	understanding	of	mood	and	psychotic	disorders,	and	the	role	that	the	cerebellum	plays	in	them,	specifically	in	the	abnormalities	of	time	perception,	cognition,	and	mood	and	psychotic	symptoms.	The	current	research,	which	uses	TMS	as	a	tool	to	investigate	with	causal	explanatory	power	the	role	of	the	cerebellum	in	psychotic	disorders,	may	provide	the	basis	for	the	development	of	TMS	as	a	potential	treatment	tool	in	such	disorders	in	the	future.		IX. MONITORING	AND	QUALITY	ASSURANCE:		Human	Subjects	Protections:	See	Section	VI	(Risks	and	Discomforts)	for	measures	to	protect	research	subjects	from	the	risks	associated	with	the	informed	consent	process,	confidentiality,	psychiatric	evaluations,	and	TMS	procedures.		Independent	monitoring	of	source	data		Ann	Shinn,	the	Principal	Investigator	(PI),	will	be	responsible	for	monitoring	the	validity	and	integrity	of	the	data,	as	well	as	adherence	to	the	protocol.	She	will	be	present	for	the	informed	consent	procedures,	assessments,	and	TMS	administration	for	the	first	several	subjects	and	closely	supervise	the	training	of	all	study	staff	involved	in	carrying	out	this	research.	In	addition,	co-investigator	Joan	Camprodon,	who	is	a	physician,	will	be	on-site	at	the	MGH	Laboratory	for	Neuropsychiatry	and	Neuromodulation	in	the	Charlestown	Navy	Yard	Campus,	to	monitor	the	correct	and	safe	administration	of	TMS	for	each	subject.		Standard	operating	procedures	(SOP)	will	be	written,	routinely	followed,	and	updated	as	necessary	to	ensure	adherence	to	the	IRB-approved	protocol.	Any	time	there	is	a	change	in	study	staff,	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_903373]-on	training	in	order	to	ensure	that	all	procedures	are	conducted	in	adherence	with	the	IRB-approved	protocol	and	that	the	data	collected	are	of	high	quality,	validity,	and	integrity.	Moreover,	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_903374]	a	week	with	the	study	staff	to	review	any	issues	and	data	quality.	Finally,	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_903375],	thereby	[CONTACT_903424]	a	consistent	basis.	The	research	coordinator	and	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_903376].	Major	deviations	will	be	reported	within	5	working	days	of	the	incident's	occurrence	or	detection.		Safety	monitoring	(e.g.	Data	Safety	Monitoring	Board,	etc.)	The	current	research	uses	standard	nonsignificant	risk	applications	of	TMS	in	the	context	of	a	physiological/cognitive	study,	not	a	therapeutic	clinical	trial;	thus	reporting	of	adverse	events	to	the	FDA	is	not	applicable.	Given	the	relatively	low	risk	posed	by	[CONTACT_903425]	a	DSMB	is	necessary.		Outcomes	monitoring	All	subjects’	clinical	data	will	be	coded	with	research	numbers	that	do	not	contain	any	identifying	information.	The	code	linking	the	research	number	to	personal	identifying	information	will	be	stored	in	a	password-protected	encrypted	computer	file	on	a	locked	computer	in	a	locked	office	at	McLean.	Subject	interview	information	is	stored	in	locked	file	cabinets	in	locked	rooms	at	McLean.		Medical	Follow-up	and	Referrals	Participants who test positive on the urine pregnancy test conducted as a part of this research study will be informed of the positive test result and recommended to follow-up with their primary care 
Page	[ADDRESS_1267148] results will be offered the opportunity to consult with the study PI.  	Reporting	of	Adverse	Events	As	soon	as	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_1660]	a	member	of	research	staff	learns	of	an	adverse	event,	he/she	will	first	consider	the	immediate	safety	of	the	patient.	If	the	patient	is	not	safe,	either	to	him/herself	or	others,	the	member	of	the	research	staff/PI	[INVESTIGATOR_903377].	Members	of	the	research	staff	will	defer	to	the	PI’s	judgment.	If	there	is	an	adverse	event	without	an	imminent	safety	concern,	then	the	person	who	learned	of	the	adverse	event	will	call	the	PI	[INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or	other	members	of	the	research	staff	and	decide	the	best	course	of	action	to	deal	with	the	event,	guided	by	[CONTACT_903426].	They	will	then	submit	an	adverse	event	report	to	the	IRB	and	regulatory	officials	using	the	Research	Subject	Report	of	Adverse	Event	form,	according	to	the	PHRC	reporting	guidelines,	within	5	working	days	or	7	calendar	days	of	the	date	they	become	aware	of	the	problem.		X. REFERENCES:		1.	Wu	EQ,	Birnbaum	HG,	Shi	L,	Ball	DE,	Kessler	RC,	Moulis	M,	Aggarwal	J.	The	economic	burden	of	schizophrenia	in	the	United	States	in	2002.	J	Clin	Psychiatry.	2005;66(9):1122-1129.	2.	Wyatt	RJ,	Henter	I.	An	economic	evaluation	of	manic-depressive	illness--1991.	Soc	Psychiatry	Psychiatr	Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541].	1995;30(5):213-219.	3.	Folsom	DP,	Hawthorne	W,	Lindamer	L,	Gilmer	T,	Bailey	A,	Golshan	S,	Garcia	P,	Unutzer	J,	Hough	R,	Jeste	DV.	Prevalence	and	risk	factors	for	homelessness	and	utilization	of	mental	health	services	among	10,340	patients	with	serious	mental	illness	in	a	large	public	mental	health	system.	Am	J	Psychiatry.	2005;162(2):370-376.	4.	Green	MF.	What	are	the	functional	consequences	of	neurocognitive	deficits	in	schizophrenia?	Am	J	Psychiatry.	1996;153(3):321-330.	5.	Heinrichs	RW,	Zakzanis	KK.	Neurocognitive	deficit	in	schizophrenia:	a	quantitative	review	of	the	evidence.	Neuropsychology.	1998;12(3):426-445.	6.	Martinez-Aran	A,	Vieta	E,	Reinares	M,	Colom	F,	Torrent	C,	Sanchez-Moreno	J,	Benabarre	A,	Goikolea	JM,	Comes	M,	Salamero	M.	Cognitive	function	across	manic	or	hypomanic,	depressed,	and	euthymic	states	in	bipolar	disorder.	Am	J	Psychiatry.	2004;161(2):262-270.	7.	Dixon	T,	Kravariti	E,	Frith	C,	Murray	RM,	McGuire	PK.	Effect	of	symptoms	on	executive	function	in	bipolar	illness.	Psychol	Med.	2004;34(5):811-821.	8.	Mur	M,	Portella	MJ,	Martinez-Aran	A,	Pi[INVESTIGATOR_903378]	J,	Vieta	E.	Persistent	neuropsychological	deficit	in	euthymic	bipolar	patients:	executive	function	as	a	core	deficit.	J	Clin	Psychiatry.	2007;68(7):1078-1086.	9.	Andreasen	NC.	A	unitary	model	of	schizophrenia.	Bleuler's	"Fragmented	Phrene"	as	schizencephaly.	Archives	of	General	Psychiatry.	1999;56:781-787.	10.	Andreasen	NC,	Nopoulos	P,	O'Leary	DS,	Miller	DD,	Wassink	T,	Flaum	M.	Defining	the	phenotype	of	schizophrenia:	cognitive	dysmetria	and	its	neural	mechanisms.	Biological	Psychiatry.	1999;46:908-920.	11.	Schmahmann	JD.	An	emerging	concept.	The	cerebellar	contribution	to	higher	function.	Arch	Neurol.	1991;48(11):1178-1187.	12.	Schmahmann	JD.	Dysmetria	of	thought:	clinical	consequences	of	cerebellar	dysfunction	on	cognition	and	affect.	Trends	Cogn	Sci.	1998;2(9):362-371.	13.	Schmahmann	JD,	Sherman	JC.	The	cerebellar	cognitive	affective	syndrome.	Brain.	1998;121	(	Pt	4):561-579.	14.	Strick	PL,	Dum	RP,	Fiez	JA.	Cerebellum	and	nonmotor	function.	Annu	Rev	Neurosci.	2009;32:413-434.	
Page	24	of	29		15.	Stoodley	CJ,	Schmahmann	JD.	Functional	topography	in	the	human	cerebellum:	a	meta-analysis	of	neuroimaging	studies.	Neuroimage.	2009;44(2):489-501.	16.	Bostan	AC,	Dum	RP,	Strick	PL.	Cerebellar	networks	with	the	cerebral	cortex	and	basal	ganglia.	Trends	Cogn	Sci.	2013;17(5):241-254.	17.	Buckner	RL.	The	cerebellum	and	cognitive	function:	25	years	of	insight	from	anatomy	and	neuroimaging.	Neuron.	2013;80(3):807-815.	18.	Kelly	RM,	Strick	PL.	Cerebellar	loops	with	motor	cortex	and	prefrontal	cortex	of	a	nonhuman	primate.	J	Neurosci.	2003;23(23):8432-8444.	19.	Clower	DM,	West	RA,	Lynch	JC,	Strick	PL.	The	inferior	parietal	lobule	is	the	target	of	output	from	the	superior	colliculus,	hippocampus,	and	cerebellum.	J	Neurosci.	2001;21(16):6283-6291.	20.	Anand	BK,	Malhotra	CL,	Singh	B,	Dua	S.	Cerebellar	projections	to	limbic	system.	J	Neurophysiol.	1959;22(4):451-457.	21.	Heath	RG,	Harper	JW.	Ascending	projections	of	the	cerebellar	fastigial	nucleus	to	the	hippocampus,	amygdala,	and	other	temporal	lobe	sites:	evoked	potential	and	histological	studies	in	monkeys	and	cats.	Exp	Neurol.	1974;45(2):268-287.	22.	Snider	RS,	Maiti	A.	Cerebellar	contributions	to	the	Papez	circuit.	J	Neurosci	Res.	1976;2(2):133-146.	23.	Exner	C,	Weniger	G,	Irle	E.	Cerebellar	lesions	in	the	PI[INVESTIGATOR_903379].	Neurology.	2004;63(11):2132-2135.	24.	Tavano	A,	Grasso	R,	Gagliardi	C,	Triulzi	F,	Bresolin	N,	Fabbro	F,	Borgatti	R.	Disorders	of	cognitive	and	affective	development	in	cerebellar	malformations.	Brain.	2007;130(Pt	10):2646-2660.	25.	Schmahmann	JD,	Macmore	J,	Vangel	M.	Cerebellar	stroke	without	motor	deficit:	clinical	evidence	for	motor	and	non-motor	domains	within	the	human	cerebellum.	Neuroscience.	2009;162(3):852-861.	26.	Stoodley	CJ,	Schmahmann	JD.	Evidence	for	topographic	organization	in	the	cerebellum	of	motor	control	versus	cognitive	and	affective	processing.	Cortex.	2010;46(7):831-844.	27.	Weinberger	DR,	Kleinman	JE,	Luchins	DJ,	Bigelow	LB,	Wyatt	RJ.	Cerebellar	pathology	in	schizophrenia:	a	controlled	postmortem	study.	Am	J	Psychiatry.	1980;137(3):359-361.	28.	Tran	KD,	Smutzer	GS,	Doty	RL,	Arnold	SE.	Reduced	Purkinje	cell	size	in	the	cerebellar	vermis	of	elderly	patients	with	schizophrenia.	Am	J	Psychiatry.	1998;155(9):1288-1290.	29.	Reyes	MG,	Gordon	A.	Cerebellar	vermis	in	schizophrenia.	Lancet.	1981;2(8248):700-701.	30.	Eastwood	SL,	Cotter	D,	Harrison	PJ.	Cerebellar	synaptic	protein	expression	in	schizophrenia.	Neuroscience.	2001;105(1):219-229.	31.	Eastwood	SL,	Burnet	PW,	Gittins	R,	Baker	K,	Harrison	PJ.	Expression	of	serotonin	5-HT(2A)	receptors	in	the	human	cerebellum	and	alterations	in	schizophrenia.	Synapse.	2001;42(2):104-114.	32.	Rossi	A,	Stratta	P,	Mancini	F,	de	Cataldo	S,	Casacchia	M.	Cerebellar	vermal	size	in	schizophrenia:	a	male	effect.	Biol	Psychiatry.	1993;33(5):354-357.	33.	Jacobsen	LK,	Giedd	JN,	Berquin	PC,	Krain	AL,	Hamburger	SD,	Kumra	S,	Rapoport	JL.	Quantitative	morphology	of	the	cerebellum	and	fourth	ventricle	in	childhood-onset	schizophrenia.	Am	J	Psychiatry.	1997;154(12):1663-1669.	34.	Nopoulos	PC,	Ceilley	JW,	Gailis	EA,	Andreasen	NC.	An	MRI	study	of	cerebellar	vermis	morphology	in	patients	with	schizophrenia:	evidence	in	support	of	the	cognitive	dysmetria	concept.	Biological	Psychiatry.	1999;46(5):703-711.	35.	Loeber	RT,	Cintron	CM,	Yurgelun-Todd	DA.	Morphometry	of	individual	cerebellar	lobules	in	schizophrenia.	Am	J	Psychiatry.	2001;158(6):952-954.	36.	Ichimiya	T,	Okubo	Y,	Suhara	T,	Sudo	Y.	Reduced	volume	of	the	cerebellar	vermis	in	neuroleptic-naive	schizophrenia.	Biol	Psychiatry.	2001;49(1):20-27.	
Page	25	of	29		37.	Okugawa	G,	Sedvall	G,	Nordstrom	M,	Andreasen	N,	Pi[INVESTIGATOR_98803]	R,	Magnotta	V,	Agartz	I.	Selective	reduction	of	the	posterior	superior	vermis	in	men	with	chronic	schizophrenia.	Schizophr	Res.	2002;55(1-2):61-67.	38.	Okugawa	G,	Sedvall	GC,	Agartz	I.	Smaller	cerebellar	vermis	but	not	hemisphere	volumes	in	patients	with	chronic	schizophrenia.	Am	J	Psychiatry.	2003;160(9):1614-1617.	39.	Joyal	CC,	Pennanen	C,	Tiihonen	E,	Laakso	MP,	Tiihonen	J,	Aronen	HJ.	MRI	volumetry	of	the	vermis	and	the	cerebellar	hemispheres	in	men	with	schizophrenia.	Psychiatry	Res.	2004;131(2):115-124.	40.	Bottmer	C,	Bachmann	S,	Pantel	J,	Essig	M,	Amann	M,	Schad	LR,	Magnotta	V,	Schroder	J.	Reduced	cerebellar	volume	and	neurological	soft	signs	in	first-epi[INVESTIGATOR_903380].	Psychiatry	Res.	2005;140(3):239-250.	41.	Hirjak	D,	Wolf	RC,	Kubera	KM,	Stieltjes	B,	Maier-Hein	KH,	Thomann	PA.	Neurological	soft	signs	in	recent-onset	schizophrenia:	Focus	on	the	cerebellum.	Prog	Neuropsychopharmacol	Biol	Psychiatry.	2015;60:18-25.	42.	Wassink	TH,	Andreasen	NC,	Nopoulos	P,	Flaum	M.	Cerebellar	morphology	as	a	predictor	of	symptom	and	psychosocial	outcome	in	schizophrenia.	Biol	Psychiatry.	1999;45(1):41-48.	43.	Keller	A,	Castellanos	FX,	Vaituzis	AC,	Jeffries	NO,	Giedd	JN,	Rapoport	JL.	Progressive	loss	of	cerebellar	volume	in	childhood-onset	schizophrenia.	Am	J	Psychiatry.	2003;160(1):128-133.	44.	Laidi	C,	d'Albis	MA,	Wessa	M,	Linke	J,	Phillips	ML,	Delavest	M,	Bellivier	F,	Versace	A,	Almeida	J,	Sarrazin	S,	Poupon	C,	Le	Dudal	K,	Daban	C,	Hamdani	N,	Leboyer	M,	Houenou	J.	Cerebellar	volume	in	schizophrenia	and	bipolar	I	disorder	with	and	without	psychotic	features.	Acta	Psychiatr	Scand.	2015;131(3):223-233.	45.	Coffman	JA,	Schwarzkopf	SB,	Olson	SC,	Nasrallah	HA.	Midsagittal	cerebral	anatomy	by	[CONTACT_903427].	The	importance	of	slice	position	and	thickness.	Schizophr	Res.	1989;2(3):287-294.	46.	Sullivan	EV,	Deshmukh	A,	Desmond	JE,	Mathalon	DH,	Rosenbloom	MJ,	Lim	KO,	Pfefferbaum	A.	Contribution	of	alcohol	abuse	to	cerebellar	volume	deficits	in	men	with	schizophrenia.	Arch	Gen	Psychiatry.	2000;57(9):894-902.	47.	Staal	WG,	Hulshoff	Pol	HE,	Schnack	HG,	van	Haren	NE,	Seifert	N,	Kahn	RS.	Structural	brain	abnormalities	in	chronic	schizophrenia	at	the	extremes	of	the	outcome	spectrum.	Am	J	Psychiatry.	2001;158(7):1140-1142.	48.	Cahn	W,	Hulshoff	Pol	HE,	Bongers	M,	Schnack	HG,	Mandl	RCW,	Van	Haren	NEM,	Durston	S,	Koning	H,	Van	der	Linden	JA,	Kahn	RS.	Brain	morphology	in	antipsychotic-naive	schizophrenia:	a	study	of	multiple	brain	structures.	British	Journal	of	Psychiatry.	2002;181	(suppl.	43):s66-s72.	49.	Hulshoff	Pol	HE,	Schnack	HG,	Bertens	MG,	van	Haren	NE,	van	der	Tweel	I,	Staal	WG,	Baare	WF,	Kahn	RS.	Volume	changes	in	gray	matter	in	patients	with	schizophrenia.	Am	J	Psychiatry.	2002;159(2):244-250.	50.	James	AC,	James	S,	Smith	DM,	Javaloyes	A.	Cerebellar,	prefrontal	cortex,	and	thalamic	volumes	over	two	time	points	in	adolescent-onset	schizophrenia.	Am	J	Psychiatry.	2004;161(6):1023-1029.	51.	Nasrallah	HA,	Schwarzkopf	SB,	Olson	SC,	Coffman	JA.	Perinatal	brain	injury	and	cerebellar	vermal	lobules	I-X	in	schizophrenia.	Biol	Psychiatry.	1991;29(6):567-574.	52.	Levitt	JJ,	McCarley	RW,	Nestor	PG,	Petrescu	C,	Donnino	R,	Hirayasu	Y,	Kikinis	R,	Jolesz	FA,	Shenton	ME.	Quantitative	volumetric	MRI	study	of	the	cerebellum	and	vermis	in	schizophrenia:	clinical	and	cognitive	correlates.	Am	J	Psychiatry.	1999;156(7):1105-1107.	53.	Lee	KH,	Farrow	TF,	Parks	RW,	Newton	LD,	Mir	NU,	Egleston	PN,	Brown	WH,	Wilkinson	ID,	Woodruff	PW.	Increased	cerebellar	vermis	white-matter	volume	in	men	with	schizophrenia.	J	Psychiatr	Res.	2007;41(8):645-651.	
Page	26	of	29		54.	Lungu	O,	Barakat	M,	Laventure	S,	Debas	K,	Proulx	S,	Luck	D,	Stip	E.	The	incidence	and	nature	of	cerebellar	findings	in	schizophrenia:	a	quantitative	review	of	fMRI	literature.	Schizophr	Bull.	2013;39(4):797-806.	55.	Liang	M,	Zhou	Y,	Jiang	T,	Liu	Z,	Tian	L,	Liu	H,	Hao	Y.	Widespread	functional	disconnectivity	in	schizophrenia	with	resting-state	functional	magnetic	resonance	imaging.	Neuroreport.	2006;17(2):209-213.	56.	Bluhm	RL,	Miller	J,	Lanius	RA,	Osuch	EA,	Boksman	K,	Neufeld	RW,	Theberge	J,	Schaefer	B,	Williamson	P.	Spontaneous	low-frequency	fluctuations	in	the	BOLD	signal	in	schizophrenic	patients:	anomalies	in	the	default	network.	Schizophr	Bull.	2007;33(4):1004-1012.	57.	Shen	H,	Wang	L,	Liu	Y,	Hu	D.	Discriminative	analysis	of	resting-state	functional	connectivity	patterns	of	schizophrenia	using	low	dimensional	embedding	of	fMRI.	Neuroimage.	2010;49(4):3110-3121.	58.	Liu	H,	Fan	G,	Xu	K,	Wang	F.	Changes	in	cerebellar	functional	connectivity	and	anatomical	connectivity	in	schizophrenia:	a	combined	resting-state	functional	MRI	and	diffusion	tensor	imaging	study.	J	Magn	Reson	Imaging.	2011;34(6):1430-1438.	59.	Repovs	G,	Csernansky	JG,	Barch	DM.	Brain	network	connectivity	in	individuals	with	schizophrenia	and	their	siblings.	Biol	Psychiatry.	2011;69(10):967-973.	60.	Collin	G,	Hulshoff	Pol	HE,	Haijma	SV,	Cahn	W,	Kahn	RS,	van	den	Heuvel	MP.	Impaired	cerebellar	functional	connectivity	in	schizophrenia	patients	and	their	healthy	siblings.	Front	Psychiatry.	2011;2:73.	61.	Chen	YL,	Tu	PC,	Lee	YC,	Chen	YS,	Li	CT,	Su	TP.	Resting-state	fMRI	mappi[INVESTIGATOR_903381]-scale	networks	in	patients	with	schizophrenia.	Schizophr	Res.	2013;149(1-3):26-34.	62.	Brambilla	P,	Harenski	K,	Nicoletti	M,	Mallinger	AG,	Frank	E,	Kupfer	DJ,	Keshavan	MS,	Soares	JC.	MRI	study	of	posterior	fossa	structures	and	brain	ventricles	in	bipolar	patients.	Journal	of	Psychiatric	Research.	2001;35(6):313-322.	63.	Nasrallah	HA,	Jacoby	[INVESTIGATOR_294535],	McCalley-Whitters	M.	Cerebellar	atrophy	in	schizophrenia	and	mania.	Lancet.	1981;1(8229):1102.	64.	Lippmann	S,	Manshadi	M,	Baldwin	H,	Drasin	G,	Rice	J,	Alrajeh	S.	Cerebellar	vermis	dimensions	on	computerized	tomographic	scans	of	schizophrenic	and	bipolar	patients.	Am	J	Psychiatry.	1982;139(5):667-668.	65.	Mills	NP,	Delbello	MP,	Adler	CM,	Strakowski	SM.	MRI	analysis	of	cerebellar	vermal	abnormalities	in	bipolar	disorder.	Am	J	Psychiatry.	2005;162(8):1530-1532.	66.	Monkul	ES,	Hatch	JP,	Sassi	RB,	Axelson	D,	Brambilla	P,	Nicoletti	MA,	Keshavan	MS,	Ryan	ND,	Birmaher	B,	Soares	JC.	MRI	study	of	the	cerebellum	in	young	bipolar	patients.	Prog	Neuropsychopharmacol	Biol	Psychiatry.	2008;32(3):613-619.	67.	DelBello	MP,	Strakowski	SM,	Zimmerman	ME,	Hawkins	JM,	Sax	KW.	MRI	analysis	of	the	cerebellum	in	bipolar	disorder:	a	pi[INVESTIGATOR_107734].	Neuropsychopharmacology.	1999;21(1):63-68.	68.	Loeber	RT,	Sherwood	AR,	Renshaw	PF,	Cohen	BM,	Yurgelun-Todd	DA.	Differences	in	cerebellar	blood	volume	in	schizophrenia	and	bipolar	disorder.	Schizophrenia	Research.	1999;37(1):81-89.	69.	Cecil	KM,	DelBello	MP,	Sellars	MC,	Strakowski	SM.	Proton	magnetic	resonance	spectroscopy	of	the	frontal	lobe	and	cerebellar	vermis	in	children	with	a	mood	disorder	and	a	familial	risk	for	bipolar	disorders.	J	Child	Adolesc	Psychopharmacol.	2003;13(4):545-555.	70.	Keele	SW,	Ivry	R.	Does	the	cerebellum	provide	a	common	computation	for	diverse	tasks?	A	timing	hypothesis.	Ann	N	Y	Acad	Sci.	1990;608:179-207;	discussion	207-111.	71.	O'Reilly	JX,	Mesulam	MM,	Nobre	AC.	The	cerebellum	predicts	the	timing	of	perceptual	events.	J	Neurosci.	2008;28(9):2252-2260.	72.	D'Angelo	E,	Casali	S.	Seeking	a	unified	framework	for	cerebellar	function	and	dysfunction:	from	circuit	operations	to	cognition.	Front	Neural	Circuits.	2012;6:116.	
Page	[ADDRESS_1267149]	neural	architecture	for	specific	temporal	prediction.	Neurosci	Biobehav	Rev.	2013;37(10	Pt	2):2587-2596.	74.	Mangels	JA,	Ivry	RB,	Shimizu	N.	Dissociable	contributions	of	the	prefrontal	and	neocerebellar	cortex	to	time	perception.	Brain	Res	Cogn	Brain	Res.	1998;7(1):15-39.	75.	Ivry	RB,	Keele	SW.	Timing	functions	of	the	cerebellum.	J	Cogn	Neurosci.	1989;1(2):136-152.	76.	Courchesne	E,	Allen	G.	Prediction	and	preparation,	fundamental	functions	of	the	cerebellum.	Learn	Mem.	1997;4(1):1-35.	77.	Nixon	PD.	The	role	of	the	cerebellum	in	preparing	responses	to	predictable	sensory	events.	Cerebellum.	2003;2(2):114-122.	78.	Gomez	J,	Jesus	Marin-Mendez	J,	Molero	P,	Atakan	Z,	Ortuno	F.	Time	perception	networks	and	cognition	in	schizophrenia:	a	review	and	a	proposal.	Psychiatry	Res.	2014;220(3):737-744.	79.	Bolbecker	AR,	Hong	SL,	Kent	JS,	Forsyth	JK,	Klaunig	MJ,	Lazar	EK,	O'Donnell	BF,	Hetrick	WP.	Paced	finger-tappi[INVESTIGATOR_903382].	Bipolar	Disord.	2011;13(1):99-110.	80.	Vogeley	K,	Kupke	C.	Disturbances	of	time	consciousness	from	a	phenomenological	and	a	neuroscientific	perspective.	Schizophr	Bull.	2007;33(1):157-165.	81.	Waters	FR.	Time	perception	and	discrimination	in	individuals	suffering	from	hallucinations.	In:	Jardri	R,	Cachia	A,	Thomas	P,	Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2115]	D,	eds.	The	Neuroscience	of	Hallucinations.	New	York:	Springer	Science	and	Business	Media;	2013:185-199.	82.	Minichino	A,	Bersani	FS,	Trabucchi	G,	Albano	G,	Primavera	M,	Delle	Chiaie	R,	Biondi	M.	The	role	of	cerebellum	in	unipolar	and	bipolar	depression:	a	review	of	the	main	neurobiological	findings.	Riv	Psichiatr.	2014;49(3):124-131.	83.	Camprodon	J.	Transcranial	magnetic	stimulation.	In:	Camprodon	J,	Rauch	S,	Greenberg	B,	Dougherty	D,	eds.	Psychiatric	Neurotherapeutics:	Contemporary	Surgical	&	Device-Based	Treatments	in	Psychiatry.	New	York,	NY:	Humana	Press	(Springer);	2016.	84.	Rossi	S,	Hallett	M,	Rossini	PM,	Pascual-Leone	A,	Safety	of	TMSCG.	Safety,	ethical	considerations,	and	application	guidelines	for	the	use	of	transcranial	magnetic	stimulation	in	clinical	practice	and	research.	Clin	Neurophysiol.	2009;120(12):2008-2039.	85.	Barker	AT,	Jalinous	R,	Freeston	IL.	Non-invasive	magnetic	stimulation	of	human	motor	cortex.	Lancet.	1985;1(8437):1106-1107.	86.	Groppa	S,	Oliviero	A,	Eisen	A,	Quartarone	A,	Cohen	LG,	Mall	V,	Kaelin-Lang	A,	Mima	T,	Rossi	S,	Thickbroom	GW,	Rossini	PM,	Ziemann	U,	Valls-Sole	J,	Siebner	HR.	A	practical	guide	to	diagnostic	transcranial	magnetic	stimulation:	report	of	an	IFCN	committee.	Clin	Neurophysiol.	2012;123(5):858-882.	87.	Sack	AT,	Kohler	A,	Linden	DE,	Goebel	R,	Muckli	L.	The	temporal	characteristics	of	motion	processing	in	hMT/V5+:	combining	fMRI	and	neuronavigated	TMS.	Neuroimage.	2006;29(4):1326-1335.	88.	Maeda	F,	Keenan	JP,	Tormos	JM,	Topka	H,	Pascual-Leone	A.	Modulation	of	corticospi[INVESTIGATOR_903383].	Clin	Neurophysiol.	2000;111(5):800-805.	89.	O'Reardon	JP,	Solvason	HB,	Janicak	PG,	Sampson	S,	Isenberg	KE,	Nahas	Z,	McDonald	WM,	Avery	D,	Fitzgerald	PB,	Loo	C,	Demitrack	MA,	George	MS,	Sackeim	HA.	Efficacy	and	safety	of	transcranial	magnetic	stimulation	in	the	acute	treatment	of	major	depression:	a	multisite	randomized	controlled	trial.	Biol	Psychiatry.	2007;62(11):1208-1216.	90.	George	MS,	Taylor	JJ,	Short	EB.	The	expanding	evidence	base	for	rTMS	treatment	of	depression.	Curr	Opin	Psychiatry.	2013;26(1):13-18.	91.	Ohtsuka	K,	Enoki	T.	Transcranial	magnetic	stimulation	over	the	posterior	cerebellum	during	smooth	pursuit	eye	movements	in	man.	Brain.	1998;121	(	Pt	3):429-435.	
Page	[ADDRESS_1267150].	2001;545:140-144.	93.	Jenkinson	N,	Miall	RC.	Disruption	of	saccadic	adaptation	with	repetitive	transcranial	magnetic	stimulation	of	the	posterior	cerebellum	in	humans.	Cerebellum.	2010;9(4):548-555.	94.	Shimizu	H,	Tsuda	T,	Shiga	Y,	Miyazawa	K,	Onodera	Y,	Matsuzaki	M,	Nakashima	I,	Furukawa	K,	Aoki	M,	Kato	H,	Yamazaki	T,	Itoyama	Y.	Therapeutic	efficacy	of	transcranial	magnetic	stimulation	for	hereditary	spi[INVESTIGATOR_903384].	Tohoku	J	Exp	Med.	1999;189(3):203-211.	95.	Cattaneo	Z,	Renzi	C,	Casali	S,	Silvanto	J,	Vecchi	T,	Papagno	C,	D'Angelo	E.	Cerebellar	vermis	plays	a	causal	role	in	visual	motion	discrimination.	Cortex.	2014;58:272-280.	96.	Del	Olmo	MF,	Cheeran	B,	Koch	G,	Rothwell	JC.	Role	of	the	cerebellum	in	externally	paced	rhythmic	finger	movements.	J	Neurophysiol.	2007;98(1):145-152.	97.	Koch	G,	Oliveri	M,	Torriero	S,	Salerno	S,	Lo	Gerfo	E,	Caltagirone	C.	Repetitive	TMS	of	cerebellum	interferes	with	millisecond	time	processing.	Exp	Brain	Res.	2007;179(2):291-299.	98.	Groiss	SJ,	Ugawa	Y.	Cerebellar	stimulation	in	ataxia.	Cerebellum.	2012;11(2):440-442.	99.	Farzan	F,	Wu	Y,	Manor	B,	Anastasio	EM,	Lough	M,	Novak	V,	Greenstein	PE,	Pascual-Leone	A.	Cerebellar	TMS	in	treatment	of	a	patient	with	cerebellar	ataxia:	evidence	from	clinical,	biomechanics	and	neurophysiological	assessments.	Cerebellum.	2013;12(5):707-712.	100.	Narayana	S,	Rezaie	R,	McAfee	SS,	Choudhri	AF,	Babajani-Feremi	A,	Fulton	S,	Boop	FA,	Wheless	JW,	Papanicolaou	AC.	Assessing	motor	function	in	young	children	with	transcranial	magnetic	stimulation.	Pediatr	Neurol.	2015;52(1):94-103.	101.	Ni	Z,	Pi[INVESTIGATOR_903385],	Lang	AE,	Chen	R.	Involvement	of	the	cerebellothalamocortical	pathway	in	Parkinson	disease.	Ann	Neurol.	2010;68(6):816-824.	102.	Lu	MK,	Chiou	SM,	Ziemann	U,	Huang	HC,	Yang	YW,	Tsai	CH.	Resetting	tremor	by	[CONTACT_903428]'s	disease	and	essential	tremor.	Clin	Neurophysiol.	2015.	103.	Demirtas-Tatlidede	A,	Freitas	C,	Cromer	JR,	Safar	L,	Ongur	D,	Stone	WS,	Seidman	LJ,	Schmahmann	JD,	Pascual-Leone	A.	Safety	and	proof	of	principle	study	of	cerebellar	vermal	theta	burst	stimulation	in	refractory	schizophrenia.	Schizophr	Res.	2010;124(1-3):91-100.	104.	Huang	YZ,	Edwards	MJ,	Rounis	E,	Bhatia	KP,	Rothwell	JC.	Theta	burst	stimulation	of	the	human	motor	cortex.	Neuron.	2005;45(2):201-206.	105.	Stefan	K,	Gentner	R,	Zeller	D,	Dang	S,	Classen	J.	Theta-burst	stimulation:	remote	physiological	and	local	behavioral	after-effects.	Neuroimage.	2008;40(1):265-274.	106.	McIntosh	AM,	Semple	D,	Tasker	K,	Harrison	LK,	Owens	DG,	Johnstone	EC,	Ebmeier	KP.	Transcranial	magnetic	stimulation	for	auditory	hallucinations	in	schizophrenia.	Psychiatry	Res.	2004;127(1-2):9-17.	107.	Rajji	TK,	Rogasch	NC,	Daskalakis	ZJ,	Fitzgerald	PB.	Neuroplasticity-based	brain	stimulation	interventions	in	the	study	and	treatment	of	schizophrenia:	a	review.	Can	J	Psychiatry.	2013;58(2):93-98.	108.	Zhao	S,	Kong	J,	Li	S,	Tong	Z,	Yang	C,	Zhong	H.	Randomized	controlled	trial	of	four	protocols	of	repetitive	transcranial	magnetic	stimulation	for	treating	the	negative	symptoms	of	schizophrenia.	Shanghai	Arch	Psychiatry.	2014;26(1):15-21.	109.	Nahas	Z,	Kozel	FA,	Li	X,	Anderson	B,	George	MS.	Left	prefrontal	transcranial	magnetic	stimulation	(TMS)	treatment	of	depression	in	bipolar	affective	disorder:	a	pi[INVESTIGATOR_903386].	Bipolar	Disord.	2003;5(1):40-47.	110.	Michael	N,	Erfurth	A.	Treatment	of	bipolar	mania	with	right	prefrontal	rapid	transcranial	magnetic	stimulation.	J	Affect	Disord.	2004;78(3):253-257.	
Page	29	of	29		111.	Dell'Osso	B,	Mundo	E,	D'Urso	N,	Pozzoli	S,	Buoli	M,	Ciabatti	M,	Rosanova	M,	Massimini	M,	Bellina	V,	Mariotti	M,	Altamura	AC.	Augmentative	repetitive	navigated	transcranial	magnetic	stimulation	(rTMS)	in	drug-resistant	bipolar	depression.	Bipolar	Disord.	2009;11(1):76-81.	112.	Zendjidjian	XY,	Lodovighi	MA,	Richieri	R,	Guedj	E,	Boyer	L,	Dassa	D,	Lancon	C.	Resistant	bipolar	depressive	disorder:	case	analysis	of	adjunctive	transcranial	magnetic	stimulation	efficiency	in	medical	comorbid	conditions.	Bipolar	Disord.	2014;16(2):211-213.	113.	Schmahmann	JD,	Doyon	J,	McDonald	D,	Holmes	C,	Lavoie	K,	Hurwitz	AS,	Kabani	N,	Toga	A,	Evans	A,	Petrides	M.	Three-dimensional	MRI	atlas	of	the	human	cerebellum	in	proportional	stereotaxic	space.	Neuroimage.	1999;10(3	Pt	1):233-260.	114.	Satow	T,	Mima	T,	Hara	H,	Oga	T,	Ikeda	A,	Hashimoto	N,	Shibasaki	H.	Nausea	as	a	complication	of	low-frequency	repetitive	transcranial	magnetic	stimulation	of	the	posterior	fossa.	Clin	Neurophysiol.	2002;113(9):1441-1443.		