 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Official Title: An Open Label, Proof -of-Principle, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_41707].  
 
NCT Number: Pending  
 
Document date: 23FEB2021  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data at baseline and scheduled follow up visits per study protocol will be collected in the 
form of standardized rating scales used to measure symptom severity in Tourette 
syndrome as described below.  
 
The primary endpoint is the change in the Total Tic S core (TTS) of the Yale Global Tic 
Severity Scale (YGTSS) from baseline to week [ADDRESS_43872] clinical benefit. Any degree of reduction in this score will be described as a 
suggestion of clinical benefit. A similar approach will be applied to the othe r scales 
mentioned in the study protocol. If there is suggestion of clinical benefit, we will consider 
this an indication of feasibility for a larger study.  
 
Secondary endpoints include changes from baseline to week 8 in: - Yale-Brown 
Obsessive Compulsive Scale (Y -BOCS) - Tourette Syndrome -Clinical Global 
Impression (TS -CGI) score - Tourette Syndrome -Patient Global Impression of Impact 
(TS-PGII) score - Gilles de la Tourette syndrome -quality of life scale (GTS -QOL) - 
Global Severity Score (GSS) of the YGTSS  - Motor Tic Severity Score (MTSS) of the 
YGTSS - Vocal Tic Severity Score (VTSS) of the YGTSS - YGTSS Impairment score - 
Proportion of patients who have a reduction of [ADDRESS_43873] a TS -CGI red uction of 2 or more points - 
Observed values and change in patient -assessed Tic -free Interval assessment.  
 
All these variables will be analyzed over the 8 week treatment period. The data will be 
analyzed using standardized software and statistical tools a s indicated. The data will be 
presented in the form of graphs/tables showing the change in scores over the 8 week 
treatment period.  
 
Safety Analyses: All adverse events will be coded using the Medical Dictionary for 
Regulatory Activities. Summaries will b e presented for all adverse events, adverse 
events determined by [CONTACT_41708], serious adverse 
events, and adverse events causing withdrawal from the study. Patient listings of 
serious adverse events and adverse events leading to withdrawal will be presented. 
Observed values and changes from baseline in laboratory results, vital signs and EKG 
parameters will be summarized descriptively. The use of concomitant medications will 
be monitored and will include all medications  taken while the patient is treated with IMP.  
 
Observed values in the C -SSRS will be monitored for all patients.  