Metformin Prostate Cancer Adjuvant Trial Protocol v. 8 06/22 /2018 Page 1 
 Title: Metformin Prostate Cancer Adjuvant Trial  
Principal  Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_59775] E. Katz, MD  
Sub-Investigators: Jonathan Haa s, MD,  Jeffrey Schiff,  MD,  Cindy Bredefeld , MD, Seth 
Blacksburg,  MD,  James Lewis, PA -C, Anthony T. Corcoran , MD  
Clinical Research Coordinator:  Amanda Le Sueur, Ph .D. 
Research Analyst: Ardenne Martin  
Biostatistician: Melissa J. Fazzari, Ph.D.  
 
PURPOSE OF STUDY AND BACKGROUND  
Purpose   
This is a Phase II clinical study  to determine if Metformin can increase Prostate Specific 
Antigen (PSA) doubling time for patients with Prostate Cancer  who have failed  primary 
treatment with radiation , or surgical patients that are at high risk for recurrence based on 
surgical pathology .  Men with confirmed prostate cancer and rising serum PSA levels will 
receive Metformin and will be monitored for PSA response and disease progression.  
Background  
Recent population studies have identified Metform in as a drug which could potentially 
halt th e progression of several cancers, including Prostate Cancer1.   The specific effect of 
Metformin on cancer cells is still unclear, but several studies have shown that its mechanism of 
action may be related to regulation of cellular metabolism.    In vitro  studies have demonstrated 
that Metformin reduces cell viability and causes cell cycle arrest in prostate cancer cells2, 
reduces proliferation of breast cancer cells3, and induces programmed cell death in p53 
deficient colon cancer cells4.   
A large scale population study of 3,837  patients showed that cumulative Metformin use 
among men with diabetes was associated with a significant decrease in the risk of Prostate 
Cancer related death in a dose -dependent fashion .  For every ad ditional 6 month s of treatment 
with Metformin, the risk of prostate cancer specific mortality decreased  by 24%.5    The study 
 
1 (Margel, et al., 2013)  
2 (Sahra, et al., 2010)  
3 (Zakikhani, Dowling, Fantus, Sonenberg, & Pollack, 2006)  
4 (Buzzai, et al., 2007)  
5 (Margel, et al., 2013)  
Metformin Prostate Cancer Adjuvant Trial Protocol v. 8 06/22 /2018 Page 2 
 also demonstrated  that Metformin treatment produced this survival benefit independent of 
any other cancer treatment .  A Phase II trial of Metform in in men with progressive castration -
resistant Prostate cancer observed a prolongation of PSA Doubling Time in 52.3% of patients, 
and two patients had a confirmed >50% PSA decline after 12 weeks of Metformin treatment.6 
Works Cited  
Buzzai, M., Jones, R. G., Amaravadi, R. K., Lum, J. J., DeBerardinis, R. J., Zhao, F., et al. (2007). Systemic 
Treatment with the Antidiabetic Drug Metformin Selectively Impairs p53 -Deficient Tumor Cell Growth. 
Cancer Research  , 6745 -6752.  
Margel, D., Urbach, D. R ., Lipscombe, L. L., Bell, C. M., Kulkarni, G., Austin, P. C., et al. (2013). Metformin 
Use and All -Cause and Prostate Cancer -Specific Mortality Among Men with Diabetes. Journal of Clinical 
Oncology  , 3069 -3075.  
Rothermundt, C., Hayoz, S., Templeton, A. J. , Winterhalder, R., Strebel, R. T., Bartschi, D. , et al. (2014). 
Metformin in Ch emotherapy -naive Castration -resistant Prostate Cancer: A Multicenter Phase 2 Trial 
(SAKK 08/09). European Urology  . 
Sahra, I. B., Laurent, K., Giuliano, S., Larbret, F., Ponzio , G., Gounon, P., et al. (2010). Targeting Cancer 
Cell Metabolism: The Combination of Metformin and 2 -Deoxyglucose Induces p53 -Dependent Apoptosis 
in Prostate Cancer Cells. Cancer Research  , 2465 -2475.  
Zakikhani, M., Dowling, R., Fantus, I. G., Sonenberg, N., & Pollack, M. (2006). Metformin is an AMP 
Kinase -Dependent Growth Inhibitor for Breast Cancer Cells. Cancer Research  , [ADDRESS_64763] three arms:   
1. High Risk Surgical Cohort: R adical prostatectomy patients with high risk surgical 
pathology  (>Gleason 8, positive surgical margins, evidence of extra capsular extension or 
seminal vesicle invasion ) and undetectable PSA  
2. Rising PSA Surgical Cohort: R adical prostatectomy patients with rising PSA defined as 
any rise in PSA over three successive PSA serum tests at least one month apart   
3. Radiation Cohort: R adiation patients with rising PSA meeting Phoenix criteria for 
Biochemica l Recurrence  (nadir PSA level plus 2ng/mL, occurring at least [ADDRESS_64764] radiation treatment )  
After receiving informed consent but prior to beginning the treatment, patients will be asked to 
complete the Memorial Anxiety Scale for Prostate Can cer (MAX -PC) to determine baseline of 
 
6 (Rothermundt, et al., 2014)  
Metformin Prostate Cancer Adjuvant Trial Protocol v. 8 06/22 /2018 Page 3 
 disease -related patient anxiety, and the Expanded Prostate Cancer Index Composite (EPIC) to 
determine baseline disease -related quality of life.  Participants will be asked to complete these 
questionnaires every 3 month s while enrolled in the study.   
Statistical methods  (rising PSA surgical and radiation cohort s):  At least three PSA data points 
(pre and post treatment initiation) will be collected for each patient.  Prior to enrollment, a 
minimum of three PSA measurements at least [ADDRESS_64765] -enrollment, PSA will  be measured every 3 months until month 9, for a total of 3 
measurements.   
PSA kinetics :  The relationship between the log of PSA and time of PSA measurement  will be 
estimated from a pi[INVESTIGATOR_59776]:  log(PSA) = α 1+ α 2(POST) + β1(Time) +  
β2(Time x POST),  where POST=[ADDRESS_64766] -treatment PSA slope will be estimated for each patient ( β1 and β 1+ β 2, respectively ).   PSA-
DT will be computed as the natural log of 2 divided by [CONTACT_59780].   
Response :  The primary end point is changes in PSA doubling time (PSA -DT) computed at 9 
months compared to pre -treatment PSA -DT.  Response to treatment will be defined as the  
lengthening of PSA -DT at 9 months from pre -treatment PSA -DT by > 3 months.  Secondary 
outcomes include safety and other measures of response such as the proportion of patients 
achieving a PSA decline of ≥ 50% in the highest measured pre -treatment PSA.   
Statistical methods  (High R isk surgical cohort) :   
PSA kinetics :  The patients in the surgical cohort all have non -detectable pre -treatment PSA 
levels however are considered at a higher risk for relapse based on surgical parameters such as 
surgical margins,  age, and Gleason scores.   
Response :  The primary end point is the maintenance of undetectable PSA levels  achieved post -
surgery for a minimum of 9 months.  Response to treatment will be defined as a PSA of < 0.20  
at 9 months.  Secondary outcomes include safety  and PSA slope (if rising PSA levels observed) .   
Trial Design and sample size considerations :  For each patient group (surgical,  rising PSA 
surgical,  radiation), a single arm Phase II trial of the same treat ment regimen will be conducted 
in parallel.  For each, Simon’s two -stage optimal design will be used with the following 
assumptions:  an ineffectiveness cutoff of 10 %; a clinically relevant response rate of at least 
30%; type I error rate of 0.05; type II error rate of 0.10.  Given these parameters, a total of [ADDRESS_64767] stage of the trial .  Based response defined as a PSA -DT 
change > [ADDRESS_64768] 3 response s are  observed  in the set of 18  patients, an additional 
17 patients will be enrolled in the second stage , for a total of 35  patients enrolled .  At the end 
Metformin Prostate Cancer Adjuvant Trial Protocol v. 8 06/22 /[ADDRESS_64769] achieved the targeted response rate.  
Under this optimal design, the probability of early stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_59777] 
0.73.    
Primary Endpoints  
• Increase PSA Doubling Time  
• Decrease PSA Levels (% PSA decline)  
Secondary En dpoints:  
• Determine time to secondary therapy for prostate cancer upon PSA recurrence  
• Time to Cancer Progression  
• Salvage therapy outcomes after treatment with Me tformin  
• Determine the safety and incidence of serious adverse even ts from the administration 
of [ADDRESS_64770] -treatment.  
Number of Subjects  
 Stage 1: 18  High Risk  Surgical patients, 18 Rising PSA Surgical Patients, 18 Radiation 
patients  
 Stage 2 (if Stage 1 deemed succe ssful): 17 High Risk Surgical Patients, 17 Rising PSA 
Surgical patients, 17 Radiation patients  
Gender of Subjects  
 All subjects included in this study will be male.  
Metformin Prostate Cancer Adjuvant Trial Protocol v. 8 06/22 /[ADDRESS_64771] 18 years or older . 
Racial and Ethnic Origin   
 Subjects will be recruited from all racial and ethnic groups.  
Inclusion/Exclusion Criter ia 
Inclusion Criteria:  
1) Must b e male > 18 years of age  
2) Biopsy confirmed adenocarcinoma of the prostate.  
3) Radiation Patients: Rising serum PSA for on >[ADDRESS_64772] be >6 months.  
4) High Risk Surgical Patients: patients who have had radical prostatectomy and:  
a) High Risk based on Surgical Pathol ogy ( Patients have any of the following: ≥Gleason 8 or 
higher, Extra -capsular extension, positive surgical margins, or seminal vesicle invasion)  
b) Undetectable PSA  
5) Rising PSA Surgical Patients:  Patients who have had radical prostatectomy and:  
a) Rising serum PSA for >[ADDRESS_64773] 1 month apart  
b) Unwilling or medically unfit for salvage Radiation Therapy  
6) Able to swallow and retain oral medication  
7) Hemoglobin A1c < 7.0%  
8) Able and will ing to participate in the full 12 months of the study  
9) Able to understand instructions related to study procedures  
10) Able to read and write (health outcome questionnaires are self -administered), understand 
instructions related to study procedures and give written informed consent  
Exclusion Criteria:  
1. Metastatic  Disease  
Metformin Prostate Cancer Adjuvant Trial Protocol v. 8 06/22 /2018 Page 6 
 2. PSADT < [ADDRESS_64774] that has ever been treated for prostate cancer with any of the following:  
• Chemotherapy  
• Hormonal therapy (e.g., megestrol, medoxyprogesterone, cyproterone)  
• Oral glucocorticoids  
• GnRH analogues (e.g., leuprolide, goserelin, degarelix)  
• Previous treatment with GnRH analogues is allowed after a wash out of 
at least one month and a return to normal serum Testosterone levels  
4. Current and/or previous use of the following medications:  
• Use of 5α -reductase inhibitors (eg. Finasteride, Dutasteride ) within the past 6 
months of screening  
• Drugs with antiandrogenic properties (e.g., flutamide, bicalutamide, 
ketoconazole, progestational agents) within 6 months prior to screening  
• Diagnosis of T ype 1 Diabetes  Mellitus   
• Exposure to metformin within 12 m onths of screening  
• Planned or concurrent use of any oral or injectable diabetes drug  
• Known hypersensitivity or intolerance to metformin hydrochloride  
5. Any condition associated with increased risk of metformin hydrochloride -associated 
lactic acidosis  
6. Participation in any investigational or marketed drug trial within 30 days prior to 
screening or anytime during the study period. This includes any interventional or 
exercise trials . 
7. Any unstable serious co -existing medical condition(s) including, but not limited to, 
myocardial infarction, coronary by[CONTACT_4897], unstable angina, cardiac arrhythmias, 
clinically evident congestive heart failure, or cerebrovascular accident within [ADDRESS_64775]:  
• Total bilirubin >  institutional upper limit of normal (ULN)  
• Aspart ate aminotransferase (AS T) >  institutional ULN  
• Alan ine aminotransferase (ALT) >  institutional ULN  
• Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) >  institutional ULN  
Metformin Prostate Cancer Adjuvant Trial Protocol v. 8 06/22 /2018 Page 7 
 • Serum cr eatinine > institutional  ULN  
10. History of other malignancies, with the exception of adequately treated nonmelanoma 
skin cancer, stage I melanoma, NMIBC or other solid tumors curatively treated with no 
evidence of disease for at least 5 years  
11. History or cur rent evidence of substance abuse, as defined in DSM -IV, within 12 months 
of screening  
12. History of any illness (including psychiatric) that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], 
might confound the results of the study or pose additional risk to the subject  
Vulnerable Subjects  
 No subjects from vulnerable populations (children, pregnant women, incarcerated 
persons) will be recruited for this study.  
METHODS AND PROCEDURES  
Pre-Enrollment Evaluation  
1. Personal Medical History, including medication history, alcohol and tobacco use  
2. Physical Examination including ECOG status, blood pressure, pulse, height, weight 
and BMI.  
3. Hematology and Serum Chemistry, Liver  Panel , total and free PSA, Testosterone 
level, Hemoglobin A1C, Insulin levels.  
4. Tumor Character istics, including Gleason  score, tumor grade, MRI results (if 
available) , biopsy results  
5. List of previous prostate cancer treatment, any previous radiation treatment (for any 
disease condition).  
6. PSA Kinetics: current PSA doubling time, record of all PSA te sts in the year prior to 
enrollment  
7. Completion of two study questionnaires for baseline disease related anxiety and 
quality of life: MAX -PC and EPIC.  
Study Interventions  
1. Upon study initiation, patie nt will receive two weeks of 750 mg Metformin Extended 
Rele ase (ER) to assess any adverse reactions.  
2. After two weeks , patient will receive two doses o f 750mg Metformin Extended Release 
(ER) per day for 8  months , two weeks .  
3. Patients will receive Metformin Extended Release (ER)  from the Principal  or Sub -
Investigators free of charge.  
Metformin Prostate Cancer Adjuvant Trial Protocol v. 8 06/22 /2018 Page 8 
 4. The study drug, 750mg Metformin Extended Release (ER) , will be stored in the Principal  
Investigator’s practice in a separate locked safe accessible only to research study 
personnel.   
Study Evaluations  
Patients will re turn to the Principal  Investigator’s practice eve ry three months for 
evaluation of study compliance, completion of study questionnaires, and blood draw.  
a) Study subjects will be required to bring the medication bottle with them on each study 
visit and will a lso be required to sign an attestation that they are taking the medication 
as per study protocol.  
b) Study subjects will also submit  a blood sample for evaluation of hematology and serum 
chemistry, insulin levels, total and free PSA, and Hemoglobin A1C.    
c) Study subjects will complete two questionnaires, the Expanded Prostate Cancer Index 
Composite (EPIC) to evaluate Prostate Cancer specific symptoms, and the Memorial 
Anxiety Scale for Prostate Cancer (MAX -PC) for evaluation of disease and treatment 
related anx iety.  
d) At the end of the study, at approximately 9 months, subjects will also be tested for 
insulin and testosterone levels.  
Study Exit Procedures  
If study participants experience any of the following while receiving Metformin treatment, they 
will be removed from the study and referred for alternative treatment such as Androgen 
Deprivation Therapy, Salvage Cryotherapy for radiation patients, or Salvage Radiotherapy:  
• High Risk Surgical Patients: PSA level rises 0.6ng/mL from baseline  
• Rising PSA and Radi ation Patients: PSA Doubling Time accelerates  below [ADDRESS_64776] including informed consent procedures, 
accrual, drop -outs, protocol deviations and AEs in aggregate on a monthly basis.  The principal 
and sub -investigators review serious adverse events (SAEs), and laboratory results monitoring 
Metformin Prostate Cancer Adjuvant Trial Protocol v. 8 06/22 /[ADDRESS_64777] compliance with study procedures on a three month basis.  
Study data are provided to the research coordinator and study investigators prior to each 
mon thly review by [CONTACT_59781].  Data reports for end of phase analysis are prepared by 
[CONTACT_4305], Melissa J. Fazzari.  
The research coordinator provides a written report to the study team with recommendations 
for study modification, study  continuation/discontinuation as relevant.  After the report is 
generated, the coordinator will meet with the study investigators to discuss relevant findings.  
The study team is responsible for forwarding the report to the IRB.  
Analysis of Adverse Events  
Adverse events will be monitored on an ongoing monthly basis throughout the duration of the 
study, and the rates will be formally analyzed at the end of the first stage of the study as 
outlined in the statistical methods section of the protocol.   
Analysis  of Serious Adverse Events  
Serious adverse events will be monitored in real time, and the rate of subjects experiencing 
these events will be analyzed every month as needed as the study progresses.  
Analysis of Efficacy  
The primary end points for efficacy f or each study cohort will be analyzed at the end of the first 
stage of the study (total accrual 18 patients, 9 months of treatment).   
• Efficacy in the Rising PSA Surgical and Radiation Cohort s: Response to treatment is 
defined as a lengthening of PSA doubl ing time from pre -treatment PSA doubling time by 
>3 months at the end of the 9 months of treatment.  
• Efficacy in the  High Risk  Surgical Cohort: Response to treatment is defined as PSA level 
of <0.20ng/mL at the end of the 9 months of treatment.  
• Secondary E fficacy in  Rising PSA Surgical and  Radiation Cohort s: The proportion of 
patients achieving a PSA decline of > 50% from the highest measured pre -treatment 
PSA.   
Data Storage and Confidentiality  
 Data will be stored in our HIPAA -compliant case report form d atabase.  Only the study 
investigators, research coordinator, research fellow, and biostatistician will be provided with 
Metformin Prostate Cancer Adjuvant Trial Protocol v. 8 06/22 /2018 Page 10 
 access information to the database.  A unique non -identifying code will be assigned to each 
study participant.  
 
RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT  
Risk 
Expected AEs  
Expected AEs associated with Metformin include:   
• Hypoglycemia (10% of diabetic patients)  
• Diarrhea (9.6% of diabetic patients)  
• Nausea/Vomiting (6.5% of diabetic patients)  
• Constipation (Between 1 -5% of diabetic patients)  
• Weight loss (14% of metastatic prostate cancer patients)  
• Fatigue (18% of metastatic prostate cancer patients)  
Rare but Serious AEs  
Rare but serious AEs that may be associated with Metformin include:  
• Lactic Acidosis : approximately 0.03 cases/1000 patient -years, with ap proximately 0.015 
fatal cases/[ADDRESS_64778] will be immediately removed from 
the study.  
 
Metformin Prostate Cancer Adjuvant Trial Protocol v. 8 06/22 /2018 Page 11 
 ADDENDUM:  
Subjects who cannot tolerate the 1500mg per day dose of Metformin will be kept on the study at a 
lower dosage.  They will receive Metformin 750mg, once daily dose for [ADDRESS_64779] Risks  
 Study subjects will be evaluated for adverse events at every study visit (every 3 months).  
In the case of unacceptable toxicity or side effects, patients may be removed from the study at 
the discretion of the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_54720] -Investigators.  Patients may also drop out of 
the study at any time if side effects become intolerable.   
 
Potential Benefits to Subjects  
 The potential benefits to subjects include reduction of serum PSA levels, prolongation of 
PSA doubling time, and increased time to disease progression, however, the probability of 
these benefits are uncertain, and will be evaluated as part of this trial.  
 
INVESTIGATOR’S QUALIFICATIONS AND EXPERIENCE  
All research personnel are required to complete training in the protection of human subjects.   
In addition, all investigator s will submit a copy of their CV through the IRB website.   
SUBJECT IDENTIFICATION, RE CRUITMENT AND CONSENT  
Subject Identification and Recruitment  
 Subjects meeting the inclusion criteria  will be referred to the Principal  Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_59778]-investigators by [CONTACT_24018].  IRB -approved posters will also be posted 
throughout the community  to advertise and recruit patients.  
Process of Consent  
Metformin Prostate Cancer Adjuvant Trial Protocol v. 8 06/22 /[ADDRESS_64780]/Representative Comprehension  
 No subjects with reduced mental capacity as judged by [CONTACT_59782].  
Early Withdrawal of Subjects  
 Study subjects are permitted to leave the trial at any time for any reason.  S ubjects 
electing to discontinu e the study should contact [CONTACT_45822]  [INVESTIGATOR_59779] .  Subjects may also be released from the study in the event of unacceptable 
adverse effects of the drug under the guida nce of the Principal  Investig ator or Sub -
Investigators . 
 
Consent Forms  and Documentation of Consent  
 Consent forms will be reviewed with each study subject with the Principal  Investigator 
[INVESTIGATOR_54720] -Investigator to ensure understanding the benefits, risks and all steps of the research 
study .  Consent forms will be signed and stored with the Research Coordinator in a locked file 
cabinet accessible only to study personnel.   
Costs t o the Subject  
 There are no anticipated extra costs for study subjects.  Research tests which are 
outside the standard of care will be paid for by [CONTACT_59783].  
Prostate Specific Antigen testing is standard of care for Prostate Cancer patients and will not be 
included in research costs.  Hemoglobin A1C is not a standard of care and will be paid for by [CONTACT_59784].  
 
Metformin Prostate Cancer Adjuvant Trial Protocol v. 8 06/22 /2018 Page 13 
 Payment for Participation  
There will be no payment given to participants in this trial.  
 
STORAGE AND DISPENSING OF STUDY DRUG  
Study drug will be stored in the principal investigator’s practice at [ADDRESS_64781] of 1989, 
EPA, [LOCATION_001] DOH and [LOCATION_001] DEC regulations and standards and WUH Regulated Medical 
Waste Policy and Procedures.  