Version: 5/2024  
 
 
Official Title: Phase II - Safety -Enhancing Motor Vehicle Child Safety 
Seat 
Study ID: [REMOVED]    
Document Date : May  2024 
Document Contents: Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version: 5/[ADDRESS_600014].  
The research team from the Ohio State University (OSU) was involved in a Phase I SBIR with the 
prototype car seat. In that project, the prototype was shown to 15 volunteer participants (12 caregivers and 
3 certified Child Passenger Safety Technicians  (CPSTs) ). The study participants practiced installing the 
car seat and gave verbal and written feedback on the understandability and ease -of-use of the load leg. 
They provided information about their families’ travel habits and whether they saw value in the new ly 
designed feature.  
In this Phase II SBIR proposal, OSU will conduct additional human subjects testing to gauge the usability 
of the new car seat safety feature in a more in -depth and quantitative approach.  
Objectives  
The primary objective is to assess the usability of the load leg design for caregivers who must install the 
child safety seat into a vehicle.  The specific aims are to quantify any errors committed by [CONTACT_468409]’ opi[INVESTIGATOR_468407]’s load leg design.  
Research design  
A descriptive study will be conducted to determine whether human subjects are able to install the new 
feature of the prototype car seat correctly. Participants will be presented with the prototype car seat and a 
set of basic written instructions  and labels  to guide their installations. The percentage of participants who 
use the new feature and use it correctly will be reported. Any installation errors on other parts of the child 
seat (seat belt, lower anchors, top tether) will also be reported.  
Detailed study procedures  
Recruitment  
Announcements will be posted in OSU  employee newsletters , volunteer mailing lists, department mailing 
lists, and social media. Interested participants will be asked to email the study team. Study personnel will 
send a response email  to determine if the participant is eligible to participate.  Pre-screen questions will 
identify potential participants who  meet the following criteria:  
1. Age [ADDRESS_600015] 2 years   
4. Able to lift and install a child safety seat into a vehicle  
5. English -speaking  
Participants who meet the above criteria will be asked to schedule an  individual  appointment.  
Version: 5/[ADDRESS_600016] are the rate of load leg installation (without being prompted to use this feature) and 
correct installation of the  load leg. Other errors of interest include routing of the seat belt or lower anchor 
straps, looseness of attachment, recline angle, etc.  A handheld tension gauge will be used to quantify 
installation tightness. All other metrics are a visual pass/fail me tric. 
Following the installations, participants will complete a short survey with open -ended queries to describe 
facilitators or barriers they experi enced while installing the seat , as well as what they liked or did not like 
about the seat. They will use a Likert scale to rate their self -efficacy in installing the seats, if they 
believed they were installed  correctly, and general ease -of-use. Socio -demographic data will also be 
collected (e.g. gender, age, and socioeconomic status). After study procedures are com pleted, the 
researcher will demonstrate how to correctly install the seat and provide the participant with educational 
materials.   
Internal/external validity  
Product usability studies  are an effective, low -risk way to obtain information about a product design. 
Published work exists as a model for product usability protocols (for example: Mirman et al. 2015, 
Mansfield et al. 2018). Product usability studies help to highlight consumer  habits and attitudes which 
engineers and product designers may not be aware of.  
Data /statistical analysis  
The percentage of participants who install with the load leg (without being prompted) will be recorded. 
Any installation errors associated with the load leg will also be recorded. Other errors will also be 
recorded as a percentage of the study sample (belt  routing, looseness of attachment, etc.). The rates of 
these common errors will be compared to those reported in recent literature. There are currently no 
resources reporting typi[INVESTIGATOR_468408] t he current 
car seat market. The proposed study will provide a benchmark for this factor. Any installation errors with 
respect to the load leg will be analyzed for their likelihood of causing potential harm to the occupant.  
The participant information collected in the surveys will be analyzed using descriptive and inferential 
statistics. Descriptive statistics such as means, standard deviations, medians, ranges, and frequency 
distributions will be calculated from the Likert s cale data according to type of safety seat. Continuous 
data will be checked for normality. We will use either paired t -tests or Wilcoxon signed -rank test for 
correlated data to test the hypothesis of no change on ratings of ease -of-use and self -efficacy. L ogistic 
regression will be used to predict correct load leg usage (pass/fail) using perceived self -efficacy, gender, 
and age of participants for each device.  
Version: 5/[ADDRESS_600017] lower anchor configurations 
for child restraint system (CRS) installation. Traffic Injury Prevention . [Accepted  [ADDRESS_600018] 2018 , release 
pending editor’s formatting ] 
 
Mirman JH, Seifert SJ, Zonfrillo MR, Metzger K, Durbin DR, Arbogast KB. Evaluating the effect of a 
mechanical adjunct to improve the installation of child restraint systems to vehicles. Traffic Injury 
Prevention . 2015; 16(sup2):S24 -S31. 
 
 
 