Study Protocol for Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters 
(ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392]) study  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Official Title:  A comparative effectiveness trial of strategies to implement firearm safety promotion as a universal 
suicide prevention strategy in pediatric primary care  
 
Funding Agency: National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)  
 
NIH Grant Number: R01 MH123491  
 
University of Pennsylvania Protocol Number: 844327  
 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_742948] S. Beidas, PhD  
 
ClinicalTrials.gov Number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Original Study Protocol:  08 February 2022  
 
Final Study Protocol: 03 January 2023  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents  
 
Final approved protocol  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..............  2 
Protocol amendments  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ................  27 
Initial approved protocol  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ..........  29 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   2 
 
Final approved protocol  
Approved by [CONTACT_742986]: 03 January 2023  
 
Social and Behavioral Sciences Human Research Protocol  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (Northwestern University):  
Rinad Beidas, PhD  
PHONE; EMAIL  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR (University of Pennsylvania):  
Kristin Linn, PhD  
PHONE; EMAIL  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: A comparative effectiveness trial of strategies to implement firearm safety promotion as a 
universal suicide prevention strategy in pediatric primary care  
 
INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE:  
The number of young people dying by [CONTACT_742987] U.S.1,[ADDRESS_1015676] 
youth visit primary care each year.4 One study found that 77% of youth who died by [CONTACT_742988], with nearly 40% attending a visit within [ADDRESS_1015677] 
increase in safe firearm storage could prevent up to 32% of firearm -related deaths in youth due to both suicide and 
accidents.[ADDRESS_1015678] (IRB number 824449) conducted in the Mental 
Health Research Network (MHRN), in which we interviewed 70 stakeholders, including pediatric clinicians, health 
system leaders, firearm safety experts , and parents who own firearms. We queried about needed adaptations to 
Safety Check , implementation barriers, and preferred implementation strategies guided by [CONTACT_742989] (CFIR), a leading implementation science framework.17-19 Adaptation 
recommendations included renaming the program (now called SAFE Firearm ), removing the formal screening step 
and any documentation of firearm ownership in the electronic health record (EHR), and offering brief counseling on 
safe storage and cable locks to all families.17,[ADDRESS_1015679] frequent implementation strategy suggestion was to 
integrate the program into the EHR. Studies support the effectiveness and scalability of EHR approaches to make 
implementation of new practices more salient and part of workflow.20-22 Specifically, based on principles of 
behavioral economics, a well -designed EHR order set can ‘nudge’ clinician behavior.23 However, our interviews 
identified implementation barriers that may warrant additional strategies, including clinician comfort with the 
program and clinic workflow.19 Facilitation is an evidence -based implementation approach that focuses on building 
organizational capacity for improvement and directly targets the unique implementation barriers experienced by 
[CONTACT_463871].24-26 We will answer: Is the less costly and scalable EHR -based ‘nudge’ powerful enough to increase 
implementation of SAFE Firearm or is more intensive and expensive facilitation needed to overcome 
implementation barriers?  
 
We will conduct a hybrid type III effectiveness -implementation trial with a longitudinal cluster randomized design 
to answer questions related to implementation strategy and program effectiveness. We will also apply mixed 
methods to investigate implementat ion strategy mechanisms. During the active implementation period, all 30 clinics 
in the two participating health systems will receive SAFE Firearm  materials, including brief training in program 
delivery, cable locks, and the deployment of an EHR implementa tion strategy. Half of the clinics will be randomized 
to only receive the EHR implementation strategy ( Nudge ); the other half will be randomized to receive Nudge plus 1 
year of facilitation to target additional clinician and organizational implementation barriers ( Nudge+ ). We will 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015680] the primary implementation outcome for 1 year following the active trial year to allow for comparisons 
between the active and sustainment periods. Results will guide future efforts to promote firearm safety as a universal 
suicide prevention strateg y. 
 
EQUITY SUPPLEMENT PURPOSE:  
Prior to launching the full trial, we are pi[INVESTIGATOR_742949] 2 clinics in each health 
system during an approximately 4 -5 month period. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_742950] (more details are below). After the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], we will conduct  this 
sub-study. Specifically, we will explore any signals of disparities and examine SAFE Firearm  delivery by [CONTACT_7683]’s 
medical complexity (per ICD -9 and -10 codes) and ra ce/ethnicity. Because we anticipate that clinicians will provide 
helpful contextualization for the program that will be informative for facilitation for the program and for the broader 
literature on firearm safety counseling, regardless of whether we detec t differences in program delivery, we will 
interview KPCO and HFH clinicians who participated in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_742951], and convene 
key stakeholders (e.g., facilitation leaders, pediatric leadership) for virtual meetings. We expe ct that this step will 
prime facilitation for trial launch. The goal of this sub -study is to learn more about barriers to delivering the SAFE 
Firearm  program equitably to all patients, regardless of medical complexity and race/ethnicity, and to optimize 
facilitation to address disparities.  
 
An important note about what we are requesting the IRB to review as part of this protocol: Leadership within both 
health systems has agreed to deploy the Evidence -Based Program (i.e. SAFE Firearm) and the Implementation 
Strategies (i.e. EHR Nudges, Facilitation) within their respective systems. They also are in support of conducting the 
Research  Activities (i.e. quantitative surveys, qualitative interviews, and EHR/Administrative data extraction) to 
learn more about the implementation of the SAFE Firearm pr ogram as well as about EHR Nudge and Facilitation 
strategies. We have described the SAFE Firearm program as well as the EHR Nudge and Facilitation strategies in 
this protocol for reference, but we are requesting IRB review and oversight of only the Researc h Activities. The 
SAFE Firearm program is evidence -based and the primary research question isn’t about effectiveness of this 
program but rather about implementation. Parents may receive SAFE Firearm during a pediatric primary care 
appointment and not parti cipate in the research survey and vice versa. Requiring consent from participants to receive 
the SAFE Firearm program, EHR Nudge, and/or facilitation would make this implementation research study 
impossible to conduct because it would create undue bias and  be overly burdensome on health systems. The 
program and strategies are low -risk, evidence -based, and prevention oriented, and ultimately the decision to deliver 
the SAFE Firearm program is left to the individual clinicians for each family. We are looking to answer pragmatic 
questions about the implementation strategies in a healthcare setting, i.e. is the less costly and scalable EHR -based 
‘nudge’ powerful enough to increase implementation of SAFE Firearm or is more intensive and expensive 
facilitation nee ded to overcome implementation barriers? The purpose of this study is not to establish SAFE Firearm 
as an effective program, because that has already been done, but rather to study which strategy improves clinician 
adherence to the program in a healthcare setting (as reported by [CONTACT_15098]).  
 
OBJECTIVES:  
• Aim [ADDRESS_1015681] the comparative effectiveness of two active 
implementation strategies, Nudge  (EHR) vs. Nudge+  (EHR + facilitation).  
• Aim 2 . To use mixed methods to identify implementation strategy moderators and mediators.  
• Aim 3 . To examine the effects of SAFE Firearm on patient clinical outcomes.  
 
Primary outcome variables:  
• Aim 1 . Clinician -reported reach (program delivery as documented in the EHR)  
• Aim 2 . Staff -reported clinic adaptive reserve  
• Aim 3 . Parent -reported firearm storage behavior  
 
Secondary/Other outcome variables (Moderators and mediators to be measured):  
• Aim [ADDRESS_1015682]  
• Aim 2 .  
- Moderators : Clinician burnout, clinician attitudes towards firearms counseling  
- Mediators : Clinician motivation  
• Aim 3 . Youth suicide attempts, deaths, and unintentional firearm injury and mortality  
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   4 
 
BACKGROUND:  
Youth suicide deaths are on the rise in the [LOCATION_002] (U.S.). Firearms are a common and lethal method of suicide 
attempt. Reducing access to lethal means is a promising yet underused suicide prevention strategy.[ADDRESS_1015683] manner: locked and unloaded. Approximately 4.6 million U.S. 
children (7%) live in homes in which at least one firearm is stored un locked and loaded.[ADDRESS_1015684] increase in safe 
firearm storage could prevent as many as 32% of youth firearm deaths due to suicide and acc idents.[ADDRESS_1015685] no known psychiatric history,39,40 underscoring the 
importance of universal prevention. With 90% of youth visiting primary care annually41 and a high rate of primary 
care visits among youth who die by [CONTACT_742990],42 primary care provides an excellent opportunity for 
universal firearm safety intervention.  
 
Safety Check  is an evidence -based, pediatric primary care program targeting parental safe firearm storage as part of 
a bundle of violence prevention strategies.6 The program includes screening for firearms in the home, brief 
counseling around safe storage, and providing cable locks. A large clinical trial in 137 pediatric practices found that 
parents receiving Safety Check  reported double the odds of safe storage (OR = 2.0, p < .011) compared to the control 
group. The intervention group showed a 10% increase in use of cable locks, while there was a 12% decrease in safe 
storage in the control group ( p < .001). While these results led major professional organizations  to recommend 
implementation of safe firearm storage programs like Safety Check , they have not been routinely implemented.14 
There are a number of potential explanations for slow uptake. One potential reason may be the fit of the program for 
primary care (i.e., program -setting fit).[ADDRESS_1015686] been advances in implementation science and an 
increasingly sensitive national debate about firearms, including an evolving role of professional medical associations 
in advocating for firearm safety as a public health appr oach. Our preliminary work allowed us to gather key 
information about barriers and facilitators to the implementation of Safety Check  in primary care as a universal 
suicid e prevention strategy within the current national context, including primary care provider (PCP) attitudes 
about discussing firearm safety with parents and firearm stakeholders’ attitudes about PCPs raising this topic.14,[ADDRESS_1015687] the potential to increase 
use of SAFE Firearm  in routine pediatric practice. Behavioral economics focuses on the power of context and an 
individual’s limited resources (e.g., time, attention) in shapi[INVESTIGATOR_742952],[ADDRESS_1015688] yielded promising effects when applied to mental health in our NIMH -funded P50 Penn ALACRITY 
Center (MPIs: Beidas, Mandell, Buttenheim).[ADDRESS_1015689] (EHR) have 
the capacity to prompt and shape medical decision -making in unobtrusive ways that do not disrupt workflow or add 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015690].20,22,51,52 Given that more than 90% of U.S. hospi[INVESTIGATOR_742953]53 and that the highest rates of EHR adoption are in primary care,[ADDRESS_1015691] ementation 
strategy costs to inform national scale -up efforts.  
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE STUDY POPULATION:  
  
1. Target Population and Accrual:  
• Setting : all participants will be recruited from one of a maximum 41  pediatric clinics  within two Mental Health 
Research Network (MHRN) systems ([ADDRESS_1015692] Health [HFH], formerly Henry 
Ford Health System [HFH] in Michigan; up to 27 pediatric clinics within Kaiser Permanente Colorado [KPCO] 
in Colorado). Both systems use the Epic Electronic Health Record (EHR) system.  
 
• Parents of youth seen in pediatric primary care (parents) . We will include parents and/or legal guardians 
(referred to as parents going forward) at participating pediatric clinics who have a child aged [ADDRESS_1015693] ivity and Study 
Period.  
- For the EHR/Administrative data extraction (i.e., which includes data from the EHR, VDW, and 
Administrative systems; see Data Collection  section for more details), we anticipate HFH and KPCO to 
pull data from 74,080 unique clinic encounters each year (based on health system numbers from 2018).  As 
such, we anticipate extracting data from about 37,040 clinic encounters in the 6 -month pre -implementation 
period, 74,080 clinic encounters in the 1 -year implementation period, and 74,080 clinic encounters in the 1 -
year sustainment period. In order to make this number we will pull approximately 100,000 from KPCO and 
100,000 from HFH.  
- For the parent surveys, we will recruit eligible participants from the extracted EHR/Administrative data 
each study period. We estimate a 31.58% response rate, with our main goal of 23,[ADDRESS_1015694] 11,697 surveys in the 6 -month pre -implementation 
period and 23,394 surveys in the 1 -year sustainment period.  
 
Study Phase  Pre-implementation  
(6 mo)  Implementation  
(1 yr)  Sustainment  
(1 yr)  Total maximum 
enrollment  
EHR/Admin data  37,040  74,080  74,080  185,2001 
Survey data (31.58% response rate)2 11,697  23,394  23,394  58,4851 
1This is the total maximum enrollment (i.e. if all data came from unique patients at each period)   
2 The participants who complete the surveys will be identified from the EHR/Admin data above  
 
• Primary Care Providers (PCPs) . There are currently 137 pediatric physicians and 14 non -physician PCPs (N = 
151) in the two systems. Two surveys will be administered to these PCPs: one during the 6 -month pre -
implementation period (baseline survey) and one during the 1 -year active impleme ntation period 
(implementation survey). We expect response rates of 50% at each of these two time points, so our target 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015695]. Beidas and KPCO and HFH Site PIs (N=3), facilitation leaders (N=6), and 
pediatric leadership (N=4). Note, we are not conceptualizing the stakeholder meeting as a research activity.  
 
• Health System Leaders (leaders) . There are currently 20 health system leaders (i.e., clinic, department chiefs, 
and health plan directors) in the two systems. We plan to complete 6 health system leader qualitative interviews 
for Aim 2 (i.e., our target accrual for these interviews is 6 leaders) .   
 
• Clinic point people (point people).  As part of S.A.F.E. Firearm implementation, we have identified a “point 
person” at each participating clinic to be the primary point of contact [CONTACT_169280] S.A.F.E. Firearm (e.g., they help 
coordinate lock deliveries, the research team checks in with them t o see if the clinic has any questions or issues 
related to S.A.F.E. Firearm). Clinic point people vary in their roles depending on the clinic – some are clinicians 
and others hold other roles in the clinic (e.g., administ rator, nurse). Clinic point people will be invited to 
participate in Aim 2 qualitative interviews. Our target accrual for point people interviews is 16 . 
 
2. Key Eligibility Criteria:  
• Parents (Aims 1 and 3) . Parents and/or legal guardians at participating pediatric clinics who have a child aged [ADDRESS_1015696] 18 years old to participate. Lastly, at HFH, 
parents who are not US residents or do not speak English will not be eligible to participate. There are no other 
exclusion criteria to optimize ecological validity. A small number of patients may be excluded who previously 
requested to not be outreached for research studies.  
 
To avoid erroneously making parents aware of their teen’s confidential visit at KPCO, parents of teens whose 
well-visits are tagged with a confidential diagnostic code (Z02.9) or the administrative type indicator of 
“Confidential Accounts – Do Not Use Insu rance” by [CONTACT_742991]. (Only youth ages [ADDRESS_1015697] confidential visits or confidential diagnostic codes in the EHR.) Youth 
under 18 at HFH always need parental permission for visits. The one exception  is teen sexual health visits 
(which can be confidential), but these visits are not well -visits, and therefore we will not be contact[CONTACT_742992]. Therefore, this issue of parents not being aware of their children’s well -visits cannot happen at 
HFH.  
 
• PCPs (Aims 1 and 2) . Pediatric physicians and non -physician PCPs employed within the participating pediatric 
clinics are eligible to participate in surveys per Aims [ADDRESS_1015698] Health or Kaiser Colorado.  
 
• Leaders (Aim 2) . Health system leaders (i.e., clinic, department chiefs, and health plan directors) employed 
within the 2 health systems are eligible to participate in an interview per Aim 2.  
 
• Point people (Aim 2).  Clinic point people employed within the [ADDRESS_1015699] Recruitment and Screening:  
• Parents (Aims 1 and 3) . Parents who attend a well visit with a child aged 5 -17 years will be eligible to 
participate in surveys per Aims 1 and 3. See Procedures  section below for details about recruitment and 
enrollment.  
 
• PCPs (Aims 1 and 2) . Leadership within both health systems has agreed to deploy these implementation 
strategies at their respective health systems. Half of the clinics will be randomized to receive only the EHR 
implementation strategy ( Nudge ), and the other half will be randomized to receive the EHR implementation 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   7 
 
strategy plus 1 year of facilitation to target additional clinician and organizational implementation barriers 
(Nudge+ ). All PCPs employed within the 41 pediatric clinics will receive either the Nudge  or the Nudge+ , and 
as such they will all be eligible to complete the baseline and active implementation surveys (per Aims 1 and 2). 
They will also be eligible to participate in an interview per Aim 2. See Procedures  section below for details 
about recruitment and enrollment.  
- Equity Supplemen t. We will partner with each site’s (KPCO, HFH) principal investigators (PIs) to recruit 
interview participants and will send invitations by [CONTACT_6968].  
 
• Leaders and Clinic Point People (Aim 2) . All leaders and clinic point people will be eligible to participate in an 
interview per Aim 2. See Procedures  section below for details about recruitment and enrollment.  
 
4. Early Withdrawal of Subjects:  
For Aim 1 ( Nudge  or Nudge+ ), we are requesting waiver of informed consent, so the option to early withdraw from 
this study is not applicable. For all surveys and interviews administered across aims, the steps to withdraw early 
from participation will be outlined during the consent process. See the Consent Process  section below for more 
details.  
 
5. Vulnerable Populations:   
We are not targeting any vulnerable populations as part of this study.  
 
6. Populations vulnerable to undue influence or coercion:  
We will not be targeting participants who are likely to be vulnerable to undue influence or coercion . 
 
STUDY DESIGN:  
We will conduct a hybrid type III effectiveness -implementation trial with a longitudinal cluster randomized design 
to answer questions related to implementation strategy and program effectiveness. We will also apply mixed 
methods to investigate implementat ion strategy mechanisms. During the active implementation period, all 41 clinics 
in the two participating health systems will receive SAFE Firearm  materials, including brief training in program 
delivery, cable locks, and the deployment of an EHR implementa tion strategy. Half of the clinics will be randomized 
to only receive the EHR implementation strategy ( Nudge ); the other half will be randomized to receive Nudge plus 1 
year of facilitation to target additional clinician and organizational implementation barriers ( Nudge+ ). We will 
randomize clinics to the active implementation conditions, as cluster randomization is more appropriate for 
organization -level implementation strategies134 and because there is high potential for contamination if we were to 
random ize at the PCP level.135 To ensure balance across conditions, we will use covariate -constrained 
randomization.136 Covariates include health system (HFH, KPCO), clinic characteristics (size of clinic), and 
clinician characteristics (whether a stakeholder involved in study planning works in the clinic).   
 
Based on historical precedent, we expect minimal staff turnover at the participating clinics during the study. If this 
does occur, we will follow procedures used in prior clinic -level cluster randomized trials, which involved brief 
training of new provider s as part of their onboarding process at the clinic.  
 
EQUITY SUPPLEMENT STUDY DESIGN :  
Prior to launching the full trial, we are pi[INVESTIGATOR_742949] [ADDRESS_1015700] this sub -study. Specific ally, we 
will explore any signals of disparities and examine SAFE Firearm  delivery by [CONTACT_7683]’s medical complexity (per 
ICD-9 and -10 codes), sex, and race/ethnicity. SAFE Firearm  delivery will be captured by [CONTACT_7620] -visit parent 
survey described in this protocol (below; see Parent Surveys [Aims 1 and 3]), which will be confirming receipt of 
the program; consistent with the primary outcome measure for the ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_246390] (as describe d in this protocol), 
clinicians must report “yes” to both program components (i.e., counseling and cable lock offer) to have received the 
program. Medical complexity will be determined by [CONTACT_48334] -9 and -10 codes in the EHR, and race/ethnicity also be 
from the EHR (as described in the Data Collection section of this protocol). We will fit two separate inverse 
probability weighted GEE logistic regression models to analyze the data. We will use a parameter of 10% difference 
in program delivery for youth in each group of interest to explore further. Regardless of whether we detect 
differences in program delivery, we will conduct qualitative interviews with up to [ADDRESS_1015701] 
Health or Kaiser Permanente Colorado to identify barriers to SAFE Firearm  delivery. We will use the Health Equity 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   8 
 
Implementation Framework (HEIF) as a theoretical framework for the interviews, analysis, and interpretation of 
findings. The HEIF is a multilevel framework that assesses health equity determinants to identify factors that 
promote or hinder implementation o f new interventions. The HEIF is well -suited for this inquiry given its explicit 
attention to the clinical encounter in which the intervention is delivered and emphasis on facilitation as essential 
process to address implementation problems, specifically d isparities. Following analysis of the interview data, the 
research team will identify strategies to optimize facilitation.  
 
As an extension of the Equity Supplement, we will repeat the above -described statistical analysis to descriptively 
evaluate approximately 6 months of data (i.e., from approximately March 2022 -September 2022) in the same pi[INVESTIGATOR_742954] (N=4) to confirm the p reliminary findings from the pre -trial pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. If we find a 10% difference in 
program delivery (as indicated above to signify clinical significance) by [CONTACT_1962]’ race/ethnicity and sex, the trial 
facilitators (local members of the research team at Hen ry Ford and Kaiser CO) will feed back this information to 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_742955], with the goal of increasing clinician awareness of potential disparities in implementation and 
broadly learning from this feedback process. If we do not find any clinically significant differences in program 
delivery, the facilitators will notify these clinics of the positive findings. These activities fall under the types of 
facilitation activities that the trial facilitators are already doing at clinics participating in the  trial. For the Equity 
Supplement, we are simply proposing to do these same activities with the pi[INVESTIGATOR_742956]. We do not 
expect greater than minimal risks.  
 
Study Duration:  
We propose to conduct this project from 08/01/2020 through 06/30/2025, with human subject research activities 
starting no earlier than 01/01/2021 and data collection ending no later than 12/31/2024. After pi[INVESTIGATOR_742957] 
(planned for approximately Apri l-May 2021 for parent survey pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], and Fall 2021 and early 2022 [approximately 
October -February; duration of approximately 4 -5 months] for SAFE Firearm program pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]), we plan to start in July 
[ADDRESS_1015702] analysis and prepare 
manuscripts.  
 
Equity Supplement Study Duration :  
S.A.F.E. Firearm pi[INVESTIGATOR_742958] [ADDRESS_1015703] interviews from January 2022 -February 2022 (approximately 6 weeks). We will re -analyze 
approximately 6 months of pi[INVESTIGATOR_742959] 2022 (once IRB approval is received) and 
engage in facilitation activities shortly afterward as described above.  
 
METHODS:  
 
1. Study Instruments:  
• Parent surveys (Aims 1 and 3) . 
○ These surveys will be administered three times, during a [ADDRESS_1015704] of two parts:  
○ Part 1 : One -question fidelity survey. To maximize response rate, we will only ask one question of parents; 
we are prioritizing the fidelity (Aim 1) questions. Half of parents will receive each fidelity question 
(regarding the clinician discussing firearm storage with them or being offered a cable lock). The survey will 
be sent via a text message that the parent can respond directly to with their multiple -choice response. We 
will use Twilio and REDCap for this text messaging (consistent with how text messaging for REDCap 
surveys has been done for this and other studies in th e health systems; both are approved for use in the 
HFH and KPCO health systems and are HIPAA compliant). Responses will not be stored by [CONTACT_742993]. We will also recruit parents to participate in the one -question survey vi a 
email and/or patient portal message. For both, we will send a survey link for the parents to complete the 
survey in REDCap. Finally, we will offer participants the option to respond to the one -question survey 
directly over email. For this method, the sur vey question will be sent in the body of the email and 
participants will be instructed to reply via email with the number corresponding with their response. 
Language alerting patients not to send confidential or identifying information in their email respo nse will 
be included with the email survey message.  
○ Part 2 : Based on our learnings about response rates from pi[INVESTIGATOR_742960], we are 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_742961] (secondary Aim 1 outcome; Part 1 survey) to maximize response rate. Then, we 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015705] other secondary outcomes via the longer survey (Part 2, described below), understanding that 
the response rate will be lower for this second survey. After recruiting parents for the one -question survey 
(Part 1), we will invite them to particip ate in the longer parent survey (Part 2). We anticipate Part 2 parent 
surveys will take about 1 -3 minutes for parents to complete.  
- Aim 1 measures will ask questions about PCP fidelity to the two steps of the SAFE Firearm  program 
(whichever question was not answered during Part 1; e.g. did your child’s PCP talk to you about 
firearm safety, did your child’s PCP offer you a cable lock?). Aim 1 measures may also include 
questions about acceptability of the SAFE Firearm  program and parents’ reactions to the firearm 
discussions with providers.  
- Aim 3 measures will ask questions about firearm storage behavior (e.g. if they took a cable lock, if all 
firearms are stored with a gun lock on them, if bullets are stored separate from all firearms, etc.).  
- For NIH reporting purposes, we will also collect parent demographics (e.g., gender, race, ethnicity); 
disclosure of this information will be optional.  
 
• PCP surveys (Aims 1 and 2) . We anticipate PCP surveys will take about 15 minutes for PCPs to complete. Two 
surveys will be administered: one will be completed during the 6 -month pre -implementation period (baseline 
survey) and one will be completed during the 1 -year active implement ation period. Each of the surveys will 
include questions related to some or all of the following constructs below:   
○ Aim 1 measures will ask questions about acceptability and use of the SAFE Firearm  program and of the 
implementation strategies. PCPs will also be offered the opportunity to disclose whether they are firearm 
owners; we will make it clear that disclosure is entirely voluntary.  
○ Aim 2 moderator measures will ask questions about PCP attitudes and experiences (e.g., attitudes towards 
firearm counseling, burnout).  
○ Aim 2 mediator measures will also ask about PCP attitudes and experiences (e.g., clinic -level adaptive 
reserve and PCP motivation to implement SAFE Firearm ). 
○ Demographic questions  
 
• PCP, Point People, and Leader interviews (Aim 2) . We anticipate interviews with PCPs, point people, and 
leaders will last about 15 -30 minutes. These interviews will be administered once, during the end of active 
implementation through the early part of the sustainment period. Development of the intervie w guide was 
guided by [CONTACT_251979] (CFIR); the guide asks questions about 
other additional mechanisms through which implementation strategies might operate (e.g. clin ician knowledge 
about firearms, community factors outside the clinic).  
○ Equity Supplement . We will use a semi -structured interview guide to conduct interviews. The interview 
guide is based on the HEIF, with domains specific to recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840] (patient and provider factors), clinical 
encounter, and organizational level. The interview guide will incl ude several questions, e.g., “During this 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_49149], how did you prioritize SAFE Firearm  delivery?”; “How do you prioritize preventative 
counseling in the clinical encounter?”; “How did patients’ medical needs impact SAFE Firearm  delive ry?” 
The guide will be structured to ensure consistent data collection and pi[INVESTIGATOR_31219].  
 
 
2. Administration of Surveys and/or Process:  
• Parent surveys (Aims 1 and 3) . Parents will be asked to complete surveys up to [ADDRESS_1015706] method(s) are 
preferred and have been shown to work in previous research at each health syst em. For Part 1 (one -question 
survey), parents will be asked the survey question directly via text message and/or email (and they will respond 
with their multiple -choice answer) and/or will be invited via email and/or patient portal message to access the 
one-question survey via a REDCap link. For Part 2 (longer parent survey; after the Part 1 survey), parents will 
receive a message that will invite them to complete a brief survey via KPCO/HFH REDCap, a secure, web -
based applica tion for collecting and managing survey data that can be completed via computer or mobile 
device. Parents will be contact[CONTACT_65312], email, text message, online patient portal (e.g., My Chart) message, 
and/or mail, sent by [CONTACT_742994] b y their respective health system. We will contact [CONTACT_742995] [ADDRESS_1015707] the option to 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   10 
 
complete a mailed version of the survey. For Part 1, parents will not be compensated for participating. For Part 
2, participants will be eligible for an incentive via lottery for survey completion (e.g., $[ADDRESS_1015708]). Note that 
parents who receive the P art [ADDRESS_1015709] read the consent form. Parents who recei ve the Part 1 survey via text message will be 
sent a link to the consent form in the introductory text message before the survey question. For people 
participating in Part 1 via email or patient portal message, a link to the consent form will be included w ithin the 
invitation message. The Part 1 survey consent form indicates that participants should review it before 
completing the survey, and completion of the survey indicates their consent to participate.  
 
• PCP surveys (Aims 1 and 2) . PCPs will be asked to complete surveys 2 times: once during the pre -
implementation period (baseline survey) and once during the implementation period (implementation survey). 
They will be contact[CONTACT_742996]/or research specialists from their respective health 
systems and by [CONTACT_742997]/or Northwestern team using the Dillman Tailored Design 
Method. We have used this method in prior survey research with clinical staff. Su rveys will  be administered via 
Penn’s REDCap (baseline survey) and Northwestern’s REDCap (implementation survey). If allowed by [CONTACT_742998], PCPs will receive $20 e -gift cards or an altruistic gift ($20 donation to a suicide prevention 
charity on their behalf) at each time point they complete a survey.  
 
• PCP, Point People, and Leader interviews (Aims 2) . PCPs, point people, and leaders will be asked to engage in 
a brief qualitative interview. We will purposively sample 16 PCP survey respondents (equally distributed across 
health system and randomized arm), to obtain more detailed information about their perspectives on S.A.F.E. 
Firearm. We will oversample for PCPs who chose to self -report firearm ownership on the survey. Ad ditionally, 
we will interview 16 point people (stratified by [CONTACT_96304], randomiza tion arm, and reach) and 6 leaders 
(stratified by [CONTACT_96304]). If allowed by [CONTACT_742999], PCPs, point people, and leaders will receive 
a $[ADDRESS_1015710] or health system -branded gift of equivalent value for interview participation.  
Interviews will be audio -recorded. Data from interviews will be stored in Northwestern REDCap and on 
HIPAA -compliant servers at Northwestern. Data will be shared with the research teams at KPCO, HFH, and 
Penn using HIPAA -compliant methods in accordance wi th the data use agreement between KPCO, HFH, Penn, 
and Northwestern.  
 
o Equity Supplement . A trained research coordinator or team member will administer the one -time qualitative 
interview to participants verbally over the phone, or through videoconferencing software if the participant 
prefers. The interview will be audio -recorded. Demographics  and audio recordings will be entered into and 
stored on REDCap, and transcribed interview data will be loaded into Nvivo (see Data Management section 
below for more details). Based on what is allowed at each health system, participants will receive a $[ADDRESS_1015711] (or if no gift card is permitted for research study incentives by [CONTACT_73733], we will 
send a personalized thank you email). We anticipate the interview will take about 25 -30 minutes to 
complete.  
 
If our analysis of approximately 6 months of data (i.e., from approximately March 2022 -September 2022) in 
the same pi[INVESTIGATOR_46223] (N=4) involved in the pre -trial equity sub -study indicates clinically significant 
differences, trial facilitators at both healt h systems will conduct facilitation activities (i.e., audit and 
feedback) with the pi[INVESTIGATOR_742956].  
 
3. Data Management:  
A Data Use Agreement will be established between University of Pennsylvania, Northwestern University, and the 
two health systems in partnership with Penn’s Office of Research Services and the respective offices at the three 
other sites.  
 
At the University of Pennsylvania, we will use secure, encrypted servers to host the data and conduct the analysis to 
minimize the risk of breach of data and confidentiality. The Penn Medicine Academic Computing Services 
(PMACS) will be the hub for the har dware and database infrastructure that will support the project. The PMACS 
provides a secure computing environment for a large volume of highly sensitive data, including clinical, genetic, 
socioeconomic, and financial information. PMACS requires all users of data or applications on PMACS servers to 
complete a PMACS -hosted cybersecurity awareness course annually, which stresses federal data security policies 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015712] (HIPAA) training and covers secure data transfer, passwords, computer security habits and 
knowledge of what constitutes misuse or ina ppropriate use of the server. We will implement multiple, redundant 
protective measures to guarantee the privacy and security of the participant data. All investigators and research staff 
with direct access to the identifiable data will be required to unde rgo annual responsible conduct of research, 
cybersecurity, and HIPAA certification in accordance with University of Pennsylvania regulations. Data will be 
stored, managed, and analyzed on a secure, encrypted server behind the University of Pennsylvania Hea lth System 
(UPHS) firewall. All study personnel that will use this data are listed on the Penn IRB application and have 
completed training in HIPAA standards and the Collaborative IRB Training Initiative (CITI) human subjects 
research. Data access will be password protected. Whenever possible, data will be de -identified for analysis.  
 
Equity Supplement Data Management : 
All data management will be overseen by [CONTACT_6283]. Beidas and Linn. Quantitative data management for the pi[INVESTIGATOR_742962]. Demographic data from the qualitative 
interviews will be entered into Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap), a HIPAA -compliant web -
based survey platform which is supported by [CONTACT_743000] s (PMACS). 
REDCap provides secure, web -based applications that are flexible enough to be used for a variety of types 
of research, provide an intuitive interface for users to enter data and have real time validation rules (with 
automated data type and range  checks) at the time of entry. These systems offer easy data manipulation 
with audit trails for reporting, monitoring and querying patient records, as well as an automated export 
mechanism to common statistical packages (SPSS, SAS, Stata, R/S -Plus). REDCap  servers are housed in a 
local data center at the University of Pennsylvania and all web -based information transmission is 
encrypted. REDCap was developed specifically around HIPAA Security guidelines.  
 
Audio recordings from the interviews will be digitally recorded and stored in REDCap. Audio recordings will be 
sent to TranscribeMe, a professional transcription service. TranscribeMe services include multiple safeguards 
designed to protect the privacy and security of personal health information, along with utilizing workers specifically 
cleared to work with this type of sensitive information. TranscribeMe maintains crowd w orker teams that are vetted, 
trained, and authorized to work on content containing PH I/PII.  Data submitted to TranscribeMe is stored on servers 
located inside secure, dedicated Microsoft Azure data centers, with state -of-the-art physical and online intrusion 
prevention measures in place. Data is submitted and maintained through a secure f ile transfer protocol (SFTP) 
platform that has been set up specifically for HIPAA compliance. The service limits the amount of internal staff that 
has access to customer data within this SFTP only to essential personnel. Transcripts will be loaded into Nvi vo 
qualitative data analysis software for management and analysis. Qualitative analysis is described in the Statistical 
Analysis section below.  
 
A number of procedures will be utilized to ensure confidentiality of participant data. First, all qualitative interview 
participants will be assigned a random ID number. This ID number will be used on all data collected from 
participants. The names that co rrelate to those ID numbers will be kept separate, i.e. identifiable data will be stored 
in one file and de -identified research data will be kept in a separate file.  Given COVID -19 and the geographic 
spread of our participants (e.g., Colorado, Michigan), this study is designed to be deployed remotely and virtually. 
The key linking ID numbers to participant names will only be kept in REDCap. Only the research team outlined in 
this application will have access to the participant’s identifiable data. Electron ic records (e.g., digital audio files) 
will be stored in REDCap as well as on a PMACS and/or Northwestern HIPAA -compliant server. All requests to use 
the data will be reviewed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Beidas. Any data files provided to other individuals will be de -identifie d and 
contain only the random ID numbers. Participants will be notified of the above procedures during informed consent.  
 
4. Management of Information for Multi -Site Research where a Penn Investigator is the Lead Investigator of a 
Multi -Site Study:   
[CONTACT_743032] (Penn) is the lead investigator at Penn of this multi -site study. All data collected from the two 
health systems will be securely transferred to Penn and Northwestern, where the Penn and Northwestern teams will 
work collaboratively to mana ge and analyze the data. Data collected at Northwestern will also be securely 
transferred to Penn for management and analysis. All reporting will be in line with the Penn IRB’s reporting 
requirement of unanticipated problems involving risks to participants  or others. The two health systems (KPCO, 
HFH) and Northwestern have requested and received from their IRBs approval to cede to the Penn IRB which 
serves as the Single IRB for this project. [CONTACT_743033], the original lead investigator at Penn, has move d to 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015713] and their respective responsibilities:  
 
• University of Pennsylvania (Penn) . The project team at Penn will provide scientific and administrative oversight 
of the proposed project and all project -related activities coordinated by [CONTACT_743001]. 
They will lead the training in facilitation at both sites and pr ovide ongoing support to facilitators at each site. 
The Penn site will oversee the data analysis and interpretation of findings.   
• Northwestern University  (NU): The project team at NU will support the Penn site at providing scientific and 
administrative oversight of the proposed project and all project -related activities coordinated by [CONTACT_743002]. They will also lead some quanti tative and qualitative data collection 
(e.g., implementation clinician survey; clinician, point people, and leader qualitative interviews), management, 
and analysis. They will provide ongoing support as needed across all sites.  
• Henry Ford Health (HFH) . The project team at HFH will oversee the following activities at the participating 
clinics within their health system: the dissemination of SAFE Firearm  program materials to clinics, brief 
clinician training, the build of the Epic SmartLists, and facilitation provided to clinics randomized to the 
Nudge+ condition. They will also coordinate the collection of quantitative data from parent and clinician 
participants and ensure safe data storage using REDCap.  
• Kaiser Permanente Colorado (KPCO) . The project team at KPCO will oversee the following activities at the 
participating clinics within their health system: the dissemination of SAFE Firearm  program materials to 
clinics, brief clinician training, the build of the Epic SmartLists, and facilitation provided to clinics randomized 
to the Nudge+ condition. They will also coordinate the collection of quantitative data from parent participants 
and e nsure safe data storage using KPCO’s REDCap. They will coordinate wi th Penn and Northwestern 
University for quantitative data collection (surveys) from PCPs which will be stored in Penn’s REDCap and 
qualitative (interview) data collection from PCPs and health system leaders.  
 
5. Subject Follow -up: 
If it is decided that we will follow -up with participants, we will submit a modification and outline our 
reconsenting plan as necessary.  
 
STUDY PROCEDURES:  
 
1. Detailed Description:  
Program and Implementation Strategies . Leadership within both health systems has agreed to deploy 
implementation strategies at their respective health systems, including the SAFE Firearm  program, Nudge  
implementation strategy (EHR SmartList), and Nudge+  implementation strategy (EHR SmartList plus facilitation) 
and thus our assessment is that they are not human subject research activities . As a reminder, half of the clinics will 
be randomized to receive the Nudge implementation strategy and the other half wi ll receive the Nudge+  
implementation strategy. We have provided a brief description of the program and two implementation strategies 
below for context.  
• SAFE Firearm program . SAFE Firearm  is an adapted version of Safety Check , which included: (a) screening 
for firearms; (b) brief counseling based on a motivational interviewing approach; and (c) offering cable locks. 
Our adapted program maintains the mechanisms of the original Safety Check  program (i.e., counseling and 
offering a cable lock) but incorporates stakeholder feedback and principles from behavioral economics to 
further enhance the program. SAFE Firearm  will include: (a) brief PCP counseling provid ed to all parents 
(without screening or documentation of ownership in the EHR) using motivational interviewing about safe 
firearm storage; and b) offering cable locks to all parents.  
• Nudge. Clinics randomized to the Nudge  implementation strategy will receive the EHR SmartList only. During 
the study’s preparation phase, the project teams at HFH and KPCO will work with their respective pediatric 
clinic leadership and Epic information technology specialists to refine the desi gn and functioning of our EHR 
SmartList, and to prototype and pi[INVESTIGATOR_742963], consistent with typi[INVESTIGATOR_742964]. SmartLists are pre -defined lists of 
choices that users can select using their mouse or keyboard and are particularly helpful for documenting values 
that a PCP is required to use repeatedly, thus saving time and keyboard strokes. We will add a SmartList  to the 
standard Well Child Visit workflow to serve as a reminder and allow for tracking of SAFE Firearm  
implementation. For example, the PCP may be required to select a value from a drop -down list to indicate 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015714] will 
remain turned “on” during the implementation period through the sustainment period. Clinics will be 
responsible for making their own decisions about storage and distribution of firearm locks.  
• Nudge+. Clinics randomized to the Nudge+  implementation strategy will receive the Nudge  implementation 
strategy (as described above) as well as facilitation. Facilitation is external support delivered by [CONTACT_743003]. It will be offered for [ADDRESS_1015715] each clinic in setting change and performance 
goals around the implemen tation of SAFE Firearm, and to troubleshoot implementation barriers. Our approach 
to facilitation was informed by [CONTACT_743004] (i.e., Veteran Health Affairs QUERI facilitation 
manual and AHRQ practice facilitati on manual) and includes six stages. First, facilitators will engage in a pre -
implementation readiness assessment for each clinic to identify potential implementation barriers and to 
develop relationships with stakeholders. Second, facilitators will hold ki ck-off meetings that signal the formal 
launch of the implementation strategy activities that include identifying where in the workflow SAFE Firearm  
can be implemented. This includes when SAFE Firearm  will be delivered during the well -child visit, who in th e 
clinic will be responsible for storing the cable locks, where the locks will be stored, and other workflow -related 
matters. Third, in the first [ADDRESS_1015716] 
onsite/virtual visits to engage with practice leadership and PCPs once a month. In this phase, facilitators will 
also start to develop a sustainment plan in collaboration with stakeholders. Fourth, in months [ADDRESS_1015717] the sustainment plan developed in the kick -off meeting. S ixth, in month 12, facilitation 
activities will complete and the clinics will transition to the formal maintenance period. Throughout the course 
of the active implementation period, facilitators will offer expert consultation (i.e., 2 webinars and technica l 
assistance via email and phone as needed); and regular peer -to-peer calls supported by [CONTACT_743005].  
 
Timeline  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  
Quarter  1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
Study planning  ● ● ● ●                 
PCP surveys (Baseline)      ● ●               
PCP surveys 
(Implementation)          ●            
Facilitation        ● ● ● ●           
EHR Nudge        ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●       
Parent surveys (Aims 1 and 
3)     ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●       
Lock Distribution & Cost 
Data (Aim 1)      ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●       
EHR/Admin Data collected 
(Aims 1 & 3)      ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●       
PCP, Point People, and 
Leader interviews (Aim 2)           ● ● ● ● ●       
Blue refers to the pre-implementation period; green refers to the active implementation period; gray refers to the 
sustainment period  
 
The above Timeline outlines the procedures and project periods. As described in the Target Population and 
Accrual section above, participants will include parents, PCPs, and leaders within 41 pediatric clinics across two 
health systems (HFH and KPCO). Parents will be asked to complete surveys 1 -week following their completed well 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015718] fidelity and acceptability (both Aim 1) and firearm storage behavior (Aim 3). PCPs will be 
asked to complete surveys at two time points (Aims 1 and 2): pre -implementation (baseline survey) and during 
active implementation (implementa tion survey). Logs will be collected from clinic staff to collect clinic -level data 
related to cable lock distribution and cost (Aim 1) and EHR data will be collected to measure reach (Aim 1) and 
youth suicide attempts, deaths, and unintentional firearm in jury and mortality (Aim 3). We will conduct qualitative 
interviews during the end of active implementation period and the early part of the sustainment period with a subset 
of PCPs and point people and leaders (Aim 2).  
 
Equity Supplement Procedures : The  Penn interview team will work with the ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_742965]. The 
site PIs and/or Penn team will reach out via email with an invitati on to participate . If clinicians are interested in 
participating, the interview team will schedule a date and time that is convenient to conduct a qualitative interview 
by [CONTACT_743006]. During the call but before the interview begins, the 
interview team will obtain consent (see Informed Consent section below for more details). The interview will not 
take place if the participant does not provide informed consent. The interview will be  audio -recorded. Based on what 
is allowed at each health system, participants will receive a $[ADDRESS_1015719] (or if no gift card is permitted for 
research study incentives by [CONTACT_73733], we will send a personalized thank you email). After a nalyzing the 
interviews, we will use existing, ongoing meetings with clinical stakeholders to gather feedback on our findings. We 
will present our findings, which will allow stakeholders to select specific strategies (e.g., collaborative problem -
solving) w ithin facilitation to target disparities in SAFE Firearm delivery. We expect that this step will prime 
facilitation for trial launch and increase the likelihood of equitable outcomes.  
 
2. Data Collection:  
• Quantitative Survey Data and Qualitative Interview Data . The research teams at HFH and KPCO will work with 
their respective health systems to obtain necessary contact [CONTACT_743007]. KPCO and 
HFH will outreach their respective health system parents for quantitative (survey) data collecti on by [CONTACT_648], 
email, text message, electronic patient portal (e.g., My Chart), and/or mail to recruit them to participate in 
quantitative surveys with outreach frequency consistent with their health system policy. The research team at 
Penn and Northwestern will work with the research teams at HFH and KPCO to contact [CONTACT_21111], point people, and 
Leaders at both health systems by [CONTACT_743008] 
(surveys) and qualitative interviews. During all recruitment  activities with all potential participants, the research 
teams will make clear that participation in the research project is 100% voluntary and not mandatory. We will 
also ensure that leaders are aware that they cannot mandate that employees of their heal th system or that 
patients participate and that any involvement (or decision not to participate) in the proposed work will not have 
an adverse impact on their employment or care. All language used during the consenting process will 
thoroughly describe the procedures to be followed in the study. All language used during the consent process, 
surveys, and interview guides will be submitted to the oversight IRB prior to use. Surveys will collect 
information on clinician demographics. See Administration of Surve ys and/or Process  section above for 
additional details.  
 
• Cost Data . Cost will be measured using a pragmatic method to capture all resources needed to deploy Nudge  
and Nudge+ so that decision makers can have the information they need to take this approach to scale within 
their respective systems. Cost data will be collected from all clinics who are receiving the SAFE Firearm 
program (which, as a reminder, is not a human subject research activity and will be implemented across all 
clinics) using Excel templates collected from clinics on a monthly basis. These cost data will not include any 
identifiable information about any research participants and thus we believe the collection of this cost data is 
not human subject research .  
 
• EHR/Administrative Data (which includes data from the EHR, VDW, and Administrative Data) . By [CONTACT_743009] a part of the Mental Health Research Network (MHRN), both health systems deposit EHR and claims 
data into a virtual data warehouse (VDW). The VDW overcomes privacy concerns using a distributed data -
model with standard variable definiti ons across systems, enabling research on large datasets without the need to 
share identifiable health information. We will collect the number of parent -youth ads who re ceive the program 
from the VDW (i.e., reach). As part of this project, we will also utilize child medical records, claims, and 
administrative data extracted from the local VDW and EHR, as well as other existing health records (e.g., State 
Mortality records) and administrative databases. Although we expect our groups to be balanced with respect to 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015720] data beyond the five years of this 
grant, we will communicate our plan to the IRB prior to collection .  
○ Healthcare Utilization: Inpatient, ER, and outpatient visits, procedures (identified using CPT codes) and 
diagnoses (identified using ICD codes) including but not limited to psychiatric diagnoses, diagnoses 
indicating probable or possible suicide attempt, injury or poisoning, and other medical diagnoses.  Dates of 
utilization, procedure and diagnoses will also be collected. Any 42 CFR Part 2 covered data will be 
collected and used in compliance with those requirements  
○ Pharmacy Data: Ordered and filled prescriptions, including dates  
○ Patient Reported Outcomes Data: Patient reported outcome measures recorded in the EHR (e.g., PHQ, 
GAD -7) 
○ Enrollment: types of insurance coverage, dates of enrollment and unenrollment  
○ Demographics: age, sex, race/ethnicity, census block variables (e.g., income, educational attainment), 
patient language  
○ State or National Mortality Data: date and cause of death  
○ Well -visit firearm safe storage and cable lock documentation  
 
3. Genetic Testing:  
n/a 
 
4. Use of Deception:  
n/a 
 
5. Statistical Analysis:  
• Aim [ADDRESS_1015721] to include data from 
151 PCPs, within 41 clinics. Therefore, we anticipate obtaining EHR reach data for 48,475 patients during the 
one-year active implementation period. We base our power calculations on our study design and prior research 
from our group demonstrating that current PCP use of the SAFE Firearm  program components are 28% for 
brief counseling on safe firearm storage and 2% for offering cable locks.[ADDRESS_1015722] 80% power to detect small effects of the less intensive implementation condition 
(Nudge ) on reach (Cohen’s d = 0.25 and 0.29, respectively).64 Alpha is set at .05 (two -tailed). A small to 
moderate effect is reasonable to expect based on prior research demonstrating that EHR nudges using active 
choice approaches produce effects in this range.[ADDRESS_1015723] in our analyses and 
will explore whether intervention effectiveness varies significantly by [CONTACT_96304]. Our approach is consistent 
with similar work that has been published in leading medical journals (i.e., Navathe et al., 2019, JAMA, Sharma 
et al., 2019, JAMA Oncology ).  In Aim 1, the primary dependent variable is reach. For each observation period 
(active implementation, sustainment) and for each implementation condition ( Nudge, Nudge+ ), we will describe 
the proportion of clinicians who reported having delivered the program with EHR reach. We will calculate EHR 
reach using three binary outcomes: received counseling (yes/no), offered l ock (yes/no), both (yes/no). We will 
then conduct separate models. In the first set of models, we will examine whether the odds of receiving 
components of SAFE Firearm  increased more in the Nudge+  group compared with the Nudge  group between 
the active implementation and sustainment periods. The fixed effects in the model will include implementation 
condition ( Nudge, Nudge+ ), time (active implementation, sustainment), and their interaction; the magnitude and 
statistical significance of the parameter estimate  for the interaction term will be of primary interest. Given the 
nested data (i.e., parent -youth dyads nested within PCPs; PCPs nested within clinics; clinics nested within 
health systems), analyses will rely on 3 -level logistic mixed effects regression mo dels for reach as a 
dichotomous implementation outcome.65,66 Linear mixed effects regression will be used to model continuous 
secondary outcomes (e.g., acceptability). For all models, our independent variable of interest will be a binary 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015724] to patient and PCP characteristics, we will consider including the following variables, extracted from the 
VDW, as relevant covariates: health system (HFH, KPCO); youth demographics (age, gender, r ace and 
ethnicity, patient language); PCP demographics (specialty/degree, gender, year graduated from medical school); 
and public census data (socioeconomic indicators for patients based on geocoded patient addresses). In 
sensitivity analyses, we will exam ine each set of models separately by [CONTACT_743010]. Sex and race/ethnicity, drawn from the EHR and 
survey, will be added to all models as fixed effects to account for the  potential role they may play in 
implementation strategy and intervention effectiveness. We will also investigate whether sex moderates the 
effects of the implementation strategies. Given the potential high non -response to the parent survey following 
the v isit, we will use inverse probability weighting to adjust for parental survey non -response (Skinner, 2011). 
Specifically, inverse probability weighting allows us to use patient, clinician, and clinic information from the 
EHR about both respondents and non -respondents to assign larger weights to survey responses from participants 
who are under -represented in the sample. For example, if we find that parents who are ethnic and/or racial 
minorities have a lower response rate than parents who are not ethnic and/ or racial minorities, inverse 
probability weighting would give more weight in the analysis to survey responses from parents who are 
ethnic/racial minorities.  
 
• Aim [ADDRESS_1015725] (Cohen’s d = .44) through the clinic -level 
mediator (i.e., clinic adaptive reserve). We assume there will be a large effect of the strategy on the mediator 
and of the mediator on the outcome based on previous research.[ADDRESS_1015726] each mechanism in a separate 2 -2-1 mediation 
model.  Path “a” represents the effect of the implementati on strategy ( Nudge, Nudge+ ) at the clinic level on the 
clinic -level mediator (i.e., clinic adaptive reserve). Path “b” represents the relationship between the clinic -level 
mediator (i.e., adaptive reserve) and the three binary reach outcomes (counseling, c able lock, both). We will 
calculate change in reach for each of the two time -points using the [ADDRESS_1015727] of the “a” and “b” paths 
(i.e., a*b) f rom these analyses.70,71,[ADDRESS_1015728].74 We will use Monte Carlo simulation methods to derive confidence intervals.74-77 We 
will repeat this model for our exploratory mediator, motivation. Moderators of the strategies’ effects will be 
tested separately by [CONTACT_743011] [ADDRESS_1015729] 80% interrater reliability 
amongs t our coders (we will have at least two). The structure of our mixed methods approach is sequential 
(quantitative data is collected before qualitative data and quantitative data is weighed more strongly than 
qualitative; QUAN>qual). The function is of comp lementarity (to elaborate upon the quantitative findings to 
understand the how of implementation), and the process is connecting (having the qualitative data set build 
upon the quantitative data set).[ADDRESS_1015730] practices in mixed methods80 as well as our previous experiences with mixed methods implementation 
research.81-84 
 
• Aim [ADDRESS_1015731] reductions in 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015732] of the implementation conditi ons on parent -reported firearm storage behavior, youth suicide 
attempts, deaths, and unintentional firearm injury.  
 
• Equity supplement Analysis : For analysis of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299], we will fit two separate inverse probability weighted 
GEE logistic regression models to analyze the data. We will use a parameter of 10% difference in program 
delivery for youth in either group of interest to explore further.  For analysis of the clinician interviews, we will 
use rapid qualitative analytic techniques, specifically structured summaries and matrix displays. We will begin 
analysis by [CONTACT_743012] (i.e., transcrip ts, field notes) to create an inventory of the most 
contextually meaningful data segments and quotations for each data collection epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865]. We will develop a 
structured template with key domains (i.e., clinical encounter, patient factors) to standardize the  capture of 
interview content and increase the accessibility of the data. After all interviews are transformed onto structured 
templates, we will then transfer the summary points into a matrix, which will expedite recognition of 
similarities, differences, and trends across participants. We will use the matrix to develop barriers for program 
delivery. We will repeat the statistical analysis to descriptively evaluate approximately 6 months of data (i.e., 
from approximately March 2022 -September 2022) in the sa me pi[INVESTIGATOR_46223] (N=4) to confirm the preliminary 
findings from the pre -trial pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  
 
RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT:  
 
1. Risks:  
There are minimal risks to participants in this trial. The SAFE Firearm  program is being implemented at both health 
systems. The program could increase the time PCPs spend with parents discussing firearm storage. However, 
shared -decision making is a high priority and evidence -based practice for pediatric primary care and incr eased time 
on this topic is likely valuable. In prior studies, nudges in the EHR were associated with minimal burden on PCPs. 
There is a risk of breach of data and confidentiality, however we described the precautions in place to securely 
manage this data in the Data Management  section of this protocol.   
 
Equity Supplement Risks: Same as described above. Potential harms to participants are minimal and there are no 
known physical, financial, or legal risks to participating in the study. However, interview participants will be asked 
about their perspectives of the implementation of SAFE Firearm  in their health system. Participants may feel 
temporarily uncomfortable while participating in the interview. [CONTACT_743034] is a licensed clinical psychologist with 
extensive experience conducting qualitative research in community settings, and she will be a vailable to speak with 
any participants who feel unduly distressed and make appropriate referrals as needed. An additional potential risk is 
the potential for loss of confidentiality. Participants may disclose personal sensitive information during intervie ws. 
All information shared during interviews will be kept private and confidential except in the case that disclosure is 
required by [CONTACT_2371]. An exception to confidentiality is if a participant were to report child abuse or neglect, or if they 
report significa nt suicidal or homicidal ideation or intent to the research team. Any information about child abuse or 
intent to harm self or others will be reported to authorities, as required by [CONTACT_2371]. No identifiable information that 
participants provide will be shared w ith any individuals outside of the study procedures outlined in this protocol. 
During the consent process, potential participants will be told about the alternative to participation (i.e. to not 
participate), and that they can withdraw at any time without penalty and can request their data be destroyed by 
[CONTACT_17258] a written request to the research team. Potential participants will also be told that their decision to 
participate will not affect services or employment. This information is also outlined in t he consent form.  
 
2. Benefits:  
Parents, PCPs, point people, and leaders will receive no direct benefits from participating in this study. Participants 
who enroll in this trial will benefit from the knowledge that they are contributing in an important way to potentially 
furthering scient ific knowledge about reducing firearm access and related suicide risk. Both health systems included 
in our study indicated that they would adopt this approach if we can demonstrate its effectiveness in this trial, 
suggesting the sustainability of the propo sed work. Furthermore, the evidence and insights generated can be taken to 
scale in the MHRN which includes 14 healthcare systems which are closely integrated. The knowledge gained on 
how to implement a program like SAFE Firearm  could be applied to other pediatric primary care settings and 
implemented at other health systems.  
 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   18 
 
Equity Supplement Benefits: Participants may find satisfaction in sharing their perspectives with our research team 
as their feedback will be used to inform our facilitation implementation strategy. Their feedback may help the 
research team better understa nd perspectives about the barriers to implementation. The ratio of risks to benefit is 
reasonable given the importance of the information to be gleaned by [CONTACT_31295].  
 
3. Subject Privacy:  
Privacy will be given utmost consideration and is highly valued in the proposed research. No research activities 
involve any direct interaction with subjects that would pose risk to their privacy.  
 
Equity Supplement Subject Privacy: Privacy will be given utmost consideration and is highly valued in the proposed 
research. Participants will complete the interview over the phone or by [CONTACT_743013], 
and so can elect where they take the phone call; the interview will be in a private location where no one can 
overhear the content.   
 
4. Subject Confidentiality:  
Confidentiality refers to the subject’s understanding of, and agreement to, the ways in which identifiable 
information will be stored and shared.   
 
How will confidentiality of data be maintained?  Check all that apply.  
 
 Paper -based records will be kept in a secure location and only be accessible to personnel involved in the 
study.  
 Computer -based files will only be made available to personnel involved in the study through the use of 
access privileges and passwords.  
 Prior to access to any study -related information, personnel will be required to sign statements agreeing 
to protect the security and confidentiality of identifiable information.  
 Whenever feasible, identifiers will be removed from study -related information.  
 A Certificate of Confidentiality will be obtained, because the research could place the subject at risk of 
criminal or civil liability or cause damage to the subject’s financial standing, employability, or liability.  
 A waiver of documentation of consent is being requested, because the only link between the subject and 
the study would be the consent document and the primary risk is a breach of confidentiality.  (This is not an 
option for FDA -regulated research.)  
 Precautions are in place to ensure the data is secure by [CONTACT_71994], because the 
research involves web -based surveys.   
 Audio and/or video recordings will be transcribed and then destroyed to eliminate audible identification 
of subjects.  
 Other (specify):     
 
To protect participant confidentiality, only the research team outlined in this application will have access to review 
identified research records. Confidentiality will be protected to the fullest extent allowable under the law. See the 
Data Management  section for more details.  
 
For data that needs to be transmitted, it will be done through a Penn -approved secure encrypted file transfer solution 
as is described in Penn IRB’s Guidance on Electronic Data Protection Requirements for Research Involving the Use 
of PHI. Records will not  be released without the participant’s consent unless required by [CONTACT_2371] (e.g., imminent risk of 
harm to self suspected) or court order. When results of the research are presented at scientific meetings or published, 
no identifying information will be include d. 
 
All identifiable data, including the master list linking identifiers to the ID number and recordings, will be destroyed 
in 2030, five years after the award period ends.  
 
5. Protected Health Information  
Full details regarding data sharing and data management regarding PHI and PII is outlined in the data sharing and 
management appendix.  
 
6. Compensation:  
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   19 
 
• Parent surveys (Aims 1 and 3).  Parent participants for Part 1 of the parent survey will not receive compensation. 
Parent participants for Part 2 will be eligible for an incentive (i.e., $[ADDRESS_1015733]) via lottery for survey 
completion.  
• PCP surveys (Aims 1 and 2).  If allowed by [CONTACT_743014], PCP participants will receive $20 e -gift 
cards or we will make an altruistic gift ($20 donation to a suicide prevention charity on their behalf) each time 
they complete a survey.   
• PCP, point people, and leader interviews (Aim 2) . If allowed by [CONTACT_743014], PCP, point people, and 
leader participants will receive a $[ADDRESS_1015734] or health system -branded gift of equivalent value for 
participating in an interview.  
○ Equity supplement : Based on what is allowed at each health system, participants will receive a $[ADDRESS_1015735] (or if no gift card is permitted for research study incentives by [CONTACT_73733], we 
will send a personalized thank you email) . 
 
7. Data and Safety Monitoring:  
Diligent data and safety monitoring will be conducted by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_742966], Northwestern, HFH, and 
KPCO throughout the conduct of this study. This monitoring plan includes tracking participant safety and 
demographics, monitoring the safety o f data, and monitoring and appropriately reporting adverse event activity. The 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_742967] -investigators will review data collected to ensure that no study findings warrant immediate 
intervention. We believe this research poses no greater than minimal risk  and have proposed a monitoring plan that 
reflects this risk level.  
 
The Northwestern PI (Beidas) will be responsible for oversight of potential adverse events. An adverse event (AE) is 
any untoward medical occurrence in a subject during participation in the clinical study. We anticipate two potential 
types of AEs that coul d be directly related to study participation. These include distress experienced with regard to 
research participation and breach of confidentiality and privacy. With regard to the former, we have protocols in 
place that include conferring with the PI (who  is a licensed clinical psychologist) or a staff psychologist. With regard 
to the latter, we have appropriate safeguards to reduce risk of breach of confidentiality and privacy. As we are not 
legally mandated by [CONTACT_743015], we do not 
anticipate AEs related to participants sharing information about their firearm storage practices with our research 
team. Additionally, we will defer to the respective health systems’ procedures and policies re lated to any suicidal 
thoughts and/or behaviors identified during the course of this project. We appreciate the sensitive topic of 
discussion, and are committed to taking the appropriate steps if any unanticipated problems are identified during the 
course of this project. Otherwise, any risks related to additional potential AEs are not expected because the program, 
implementation strategies, and assessments pose minimal risk to subjects.  
 
All members of the research team who will be involved in the design and conduct of the study must receive 
education in human research subjects protection from a training program that is approved by a properly constituted 
independent Ethics Committee or Ins titutional Review Board. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_742968]. If new s enior/key personnel and staff become involved in the 
research, documentation that they have received the required education will be included in the annual progress 
reports.  
 
The Penn IRB will serve as the IRB of record for any external ethics review boards or IRBs applicable to 
researchers from other institutions who may have access to human research subjects identified data (i.e. HFH, 
KPCO, Northwestern).  
 
DSMB. Additionally, we have convened a three -member DSMB from faculty outside of the four institutions 
involved in this project (Penn, Northwestern, HFH, KPCO). DSMB composition includes the following: (1) a health 
services researcher with expertise in health sy stems and collection of data through EHR, (2) a biostatistician with 
expertise in longitudinal analysis, field trials, and clinical trial data, (3) an implementation research expert and 
firearm researcher. The DSMB will be an independent group of exp erts charged with reviewing study data for data 
quality and integrity, adherence to the protocol, participant safety, and study conduct and progress. They will also 
make determinations regarding study continuations, modifications, and suspensions/terminati ons. DSMB members 
will be independent from any professional or financial conflict of interest with the research project and/or study 
investigators. The DSMB will meet at least once yearly via phone conference calls for the duration of the project. 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015736] a Chair to moderate the meetings. At the initial meeting, the DSMB will review and approve 
all study protocols before study initiation to ensure participant safety. Protocols will include formal procedures for 
reporting and tracking all  adverse reactions to the NIH and IRBs; tracking progress in the study; and identifying any 
need for premature termination of the protocol. At subsequent meetings, the DSMB will be provided with summary 
study progress reports and adverse events. The DSMB w ill provide a summary report following each meeting. We 
will not require the DSMB to conduct interim analyses of data prior to the end of the study.  
 
8. Investigator’s Risk/Benefit Assessment:  
This study presents minimal risk that is balanced by [CONTACT_155383]. This assessment 
is consistent for the equity supplement.  
 
INFORMED CONSENT:  
 
1. Consent Process:  
We are requesting a waiver of written documentation of consent (see below) from the Penn IRB for participants who 
agree to participate in the surveys (parents, PCPs) and/or interviews (PCPs, point people, leaders). Because surveys 
will be completed via RED Cap or phone and interviews will be conducted remotely, we will not have an opportunity 
to collect a signed copy of the consent form. We will not collect signed consent forms from participants who 
complete the parent survey via mail; these participants wil l receive a consent form to review before completing the 
survey. In the consent form and the introductory letter that they receive in the mail with the survey, they will be 
instructed that their completion and returning of the survey will be considered the ir consent to participate in the 
research study.  
 
For the REDCap, mailed, and phone surveys, the required elements of informed consent will be described to the 
participant and, if they agree to participate, participants will consent by [CONTACT_743016], completing the surve y and returning it to the research team by [CONTACT_2319], or providing verbal consent for surveys 
completed over the phone. Only participants who agree will be able to proceed to the online/verbal survey. 
Participants who complete the mailed survey will be explicit ly instructed in both the mailed letter that accompanies 
the survey and the consent form that their completion of the survey is considered their consent. Additionally, the 
letter specifies that they should not complete the survey before reviewing the conse nt form and deciding to 
participate. For participants who complete the survey over the phone, a member of our research team will conduct 
informed consent remotely. We will review the required elements of informed consent and answer any questions the 
potent ial participant might have. Potential participants will be encouraged to ask questions about the project. 
Participants will be provided with a copy of the IRB approved consent document for their records. If they agree to 
participate, the research team will  document the consent process in REDCap.  
 
For the interviews, a member of our research team will conduct informed consent remotely. We will review the 
required elements of informed consent and answer any questions the potential participant might have. Potential 
participants will be encouraged to a sk questions about the project. Participants will be provided with a copy of the 
IRB approved consent document for their records. If they agree to participate, the interview team will document the 
consent process in REDCap.  
 
All potential participants will be informed that participation is voluntary and provided with the information that they 
need to make an informed choice. We will provide contact [CONTACT_743017], during, or after completing the survey. Potential interview participants will be asked 
if they have any questions and if they agree to participate before any research questions are asked.  All participants 
will be informed that that their decision  to participate or not will not impact their relationship (i.e., services or 
employment) with their health system.  
 
For the equity supplement, we are also requesting a waiver of written documentation of consent from the IRB for 
participants who agree to participate in the qualitative interview. Due to the Covid -19 pandemic and the geographic 
spread of participants (e.g., Colorado, Michigan), we have decided to conduct these interviews by [CONTACT_743018]. Because these meetings will be 
conducted by [CONTACT_45933], we will not have an opport unity to collect a signed copy of the consent 
form. A member of our interview team will conduct informed consent for qualitative interview participants over the 
phone or videoconference. We will review the required elements of informed consent and answer a ny questions the 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015737] their relationship (i.e., services or employment) with their health 
system.  
 
2. Waiver of Informed Consent:  
• Waiver of Informed Consent . The trial is pragmatic in nature, assessing the impact of implementation strategies 
(i.e. Nudge  vs. Nudge+ ) delivered to PCPs through minor adjustments to existing workflow delivered through 
the EHR. Changes to workflow are by [CONTACT_743019]. Further, 
these changes to workflow are being implemented as part of leadership commitment to deploying the SAFE 
Firearm program and EHR Nudges and Facilitation with data collection to allow for evaluation (i.e., SAFE 
Firearm  will be considered standard of practice). Because PCPs will still be free to engage with parents as they 
see fit and the implementation strategies represent minimal risk to PCPs and parents, we have requested a 
waiver of informed consent  for allowing EHR/Administrative data to be collected for Aims 1 and 3. This 
approach will also aid implementation integrity and generalizability by [CONTACT_743020] (i.e., the Hawthorne effect). The PI [INVESTIGATOR_16884] w orked closely with the Nudge Unit in the past on similar 
pragmatic trials that have received this waiver of informed consent, and our study team has designed the study 
with their trials in mind. As such, we believe there are several reasons to justify why a waiver of informed 
consent is requested (and has been granted for similar studies at Penn). First, it is not feasible to consent every 
provider and parent. Second, if consent was obtained from providers and parents, they would know they were 
being studie d and this could change their behavior. This could potentially disrupt the design of the study and 
make interpretation of the findings challenging. Third, clinicians are not forced to implement the SAFE Firearm  
program (which, as a reminder, is an evidence -based practice that is being implemented in both health systems) 
and parents are not forced to engage in a conversation with their provider and they are not forced to take a cable 
lock. In all aims, providers can choose to use their best clinical judgemen t when it comes to the SAFE Firearm  
program. This research involves no more than minimal risk to the participants and will not adversely impact the 
rights and welfare of participants. As described above, the waiver is essential to research as this research could 
not be practicably carried o ut without this waiver.   
 
• Waiver of Documentation of Consent for Online/Mailed/Phone Surveys . All surveys completed by [CONTACT_3654] 
(Aims 1 and 3) and PCPs (Aims 1 and 2) will be completed via phone, mail, or electronic platforms, and thus 
we are requesting waiver of written documentation of consent from the IRB. The required elements of informed 
consent will be described to the participant and, if they agree to participate, participants will consent by 
[CONTACT_743021]/phone survey. Mailed survey participants wi ll be instructed to review 
the consent form before completing the survey. Only participants who agree will be able to proceed to the 
online/phone survey. Mailed survey participants will be instructed not to complete the survey until they have 
reviewed the consent form and decide to participate. For phone surveys, the required elements of consent will 
be described to the potential participant at the beginning of the survey, before any research questions are asked. 
If the participant verbally agrees to be com plete the survey, the research staff who is conducting the interview 
will document the consent process. This research activity presents no more than minimal risk of harm to 
subjects and involves no procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research 
context.  
 
• Partial Waiver of Consent for Part 1 Parent Survey . For the one -question Part 1 parent survey, we will share a 
link to the consent form in the introductory message sent before the survey question text message or in the 
survey invitation sent via email or patient portal message. All the required elements o f consent will be described 
to the participant. In the informed consent form, they will be instructed to review the consent form before 
completing the survey. The consent form will also indicate that their completion of the survey indicates their 
consent t o participate in the research. This research activity presents no more than minimal risk of harm to 
subjects and involves no procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research 
context.  
 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   22 
 
• Waiver of Documentation of Consent for Interviews . All interviews will be completed remotely and audio -
recorded. The required elements of consent will be described to the potential participant at the beginning of the 
interview, before any research questions are asked. If the interview participant verball y agrees to be 
interviewed, the research staff who is conducting the interview will document the consent process. This 
research activity presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects and involves no  procedures for which 
written consent is normally required outside of the research context.  
 
• For the equity supplement, we also request a waiver of written documentation of informed consent  (as 
described above) for the qualitative interview since the research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to 
subjects and involves no procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research 
context. The required elements o f informed consent will be described over the phone or videoconference before 
any study activities occur.  
  
RESOURCES NECESSARY FOR HUMAN RESEARCH PROTECTION:  
Adequate facilities are available at Penn, Northwestern, HFH, and KPCO. The members of the research team are 
outlined in the application and include the Penn and Northwestern PIs, research investigators, full time research 
staff, and part time undergraduat e research assistants. The entire team will be overseen by [CONTACT_7676] (Beidas, Linn). All 
personnel will complete required training before being granted access to any identifying information. This includes 
training on confidentiality through the CITI course. All Penn personnel will also sign confidentiality statements. 
These confidentiality statements will specify the procedures for reporting unintentional breaches in confidentiality to 
the PIs. The confidentiality statements also specify that violations of pa rticipants’ confidentiality, either 
unintentional or deliberate, may result in termination of hire. The PIs will conduct training with all research 
personnel regarding data, limits of confidentiality, maintaining confidentiality, and proper study procedure s. 
Personnel from HFH,KPCO, and Northwestern sign similar confidentiality statements and undergo similar research 
training within their respective systems.   
 
REFERENCES  
 
1. Ruch DA, Sheftall AH, Schlagbaum P, Rausch J, Campo JV, Bridge JA. Trends in suicide among youth 
aged 10 to 19 years in the [LOCATION_002], 1975 to 2016. JAMA Network Open. 2019;2(5):e193886 -e193886.  
2. National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. 10 leading causes of death by [CONTACT_551], [LOCATION_002] 
– 2017.  September 30, [ADDRESS_1015738] of firearm availability and gun regulation on state suicide rates. 
Suicide and Life‐Threatening Behavior. 2016;46(6):678 -696. doi:10.1111/sltb.[ZIP_CODE]  
4. American Academy of Pediatrics. Profile of pediatric visits: annualized estimates 2000 -2004. Elk Grove 
Village, IL:  January 31, 2019 2010.  
5. Ahmedani BK, Simon GE, Stewart C, et al. Health care contacts in the year before suicide death. Journal of 
General Internal Medicine. 2014;29(6):870 -877. doi:10.1007/s11606 -014-2767 -3 
6. Barkin SL, Finch SA, Ip EH, et al. Is office -based counseling about media use, timeouts, and firearm 
storage effective? Results from a cluster -randomized, controlled trial. Pediatrics. 2008;122(1):e15 -e25. 
doi:10.1542/peds.[ADDRESS_1015739] in a 
Hispanic community. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine. 2005;159(11):1049 -1054. 
doi:10.1001/archpedi.159.11.1049  
8. Grossman DC, Cummings P, Koepsell TD, et al. Firearm safety counseling in primary care pediatrics: a 
randomized, controlled trial. Pediatrics. 2000;106(1):22 -26. doi:10.1542/peds.106.1.22  
9. Stevens MM, Olson AL, Gaffney CA, Tosteson TD, Mott LA, Starr P. A pediatric, practice -based, 
randomized trial of drinking and smoking prevention and bicycle helmet, gun, and seatbelt safety 
promotion. Pediatrics. 2002;109(3):490 -497. doi:10.1542/peds.109.3.[ADDRESS_1015740]. Firearm -related injuries affecting the pediatric population. Pediatrics. 
2012;130(5):e1416 -e1423. doi:doi:10.1542/peds.2012 -2481  
11. Institute of Medicine, National Research Council of the National Academies. Priorities for research to 
reduce the threat of firearm -related violence. Washington, DC:  September 30, 2019 2013.  
12. Wintemute GJ, Betz ME, Ranney ML. Yes, you can: physicians, patients, and firearms. Annals of Internal 
Medicine. 2016;165(3):205 -213. doi:10.7326/M15 -2905  
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   23 
 
13. Cunningham RM, Carter PM, Ranney ML, et al. Prevention of firearm injuries among children and 
adolescents: consensus -driven research agenda from the Firearm Safety Among Children and Teens 
(FACTS) consortium. JAMA Pediatr. 2019;173(8):780 -789. doi:doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2019.1494  
14. Beidas RS, Jager -Hyman S, Becker -Haimes E, et al. Acceptability and use of evidence -based practices for 
firearm storage in pediatric primary care. Academic Pediatrics. 2019;19(6):670 -676. 
doi:10.1016/j.acap.2018.11.007  
15. Ngo QM, Sigel E, Moon A, et al. State of the science: a scopi[INVESTIGATOR_742969]. Journal of Behavioral Medicine. 2019;42(4):811 -829. 
doi:10.1007/s10865 -019-[ZIP_CODE] -2 
16. Monuteaux MC, Azrael D, Miller M. Association of increased safe household firearm storage with firearm 
suicide and unintentional death among US youths. JAMA Pediatr. 2019;173(7):657 -662. 
doi:doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2019.1078  
17. Damschroder LJ, Aron DC, Keith RE, Kirsh SR, Alexander JA, Lowery JC. Fostering implementation of 
health services research findings into practice: a consolidated framework for advancing implementation 
science. Implement Sci. 2009;4. doi:10.1186/1748 -5908 -4-50 
18. Jager -Hyman S, Wolk CB, Ahmedani BK, et al. Perspectives from firearm stakeholders on firearm safety 
promotion in pediatric primary care as a suicide prevention strategy: a qualitative study. Journal of 
Behavioral Medicine. 2019;42(4):691 -701. doi:10.1007/s10865 -019-[ZIP_CODE] -9 
19. Wolk CB, Van Pelt AE, Jager -Hyman S, et al. Stakeholder perspectives on implementing a firearm safety 
intervention in pediatric primary care as a universal suicide prevention strategy: A qualitative study. JAMA 
Network Open. 2018;1(7):e185309 -e185309. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2018.[ADDRESS_1015741]. JAMA Internal Medicine. 2016;176(6):847 -
848. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.[ADDRESS_1015742] on unnecessary daily imaging during palliative radiotherapy for adults with cancer: a stepped -wedge 
cluster randomized clinical trial. JAMA Oncology. 2019;5(8):1220 -1222. doi:10.1001/jamaoncol.2019.[ADDRESS_1015743] of behavioral interventions on inappropriate antibiotic 
prescribing among primary care practices: a randomized clinical trial. Journal of the American Medical 
Association. 2016;315(6):562 -570. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.[ADDRESS_1015744].  
February 19, 2018, 2018.  
24. Baskerville NB, Liddy C, Hogg W. Systematic review and meta -analysis of practice facilitation within 
primary care settings. The Annals of Family Medicine. 2012;10(1):63 -74. doi:10.1370/afm.1312  
25. Ritchie MJ, Dollar KM, Miller CJ, et al. Using implementation facilitation to improve care in the Veterans 
Health Administration (version 2). Veterans Health Administration, Quality Enhancement Research 
Initiative (QUERI) for Team -Based Behavioral Health; September 30, 2019 2017.  
26. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. The practice facilitation handbook: training modules for new 
facilitators and their trainers.  September 30, 2019 2013.  
27. Glenn CR, Franklin JC, Nock MK. Evidence -based psychosocial treatments for self -injurious thoughts and 
behaviors in youth. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology. 2015;44(1):1 -29. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25256034 . doi:10.1080/15374416.2014.945211  
28. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Compressed mortality file 1999 -2010 – CDC WONDER 
Online Database.  
29. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_742970], Miller TR. Suicide acts in 8 states: incidence and case fatality rates by [CONTACT_743022]. American journal of public health. 2000;90(12):1885 -1891. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11111261 . Accessed Dec.  
30. Miller M, Azrael D, Barber C. Suicide mortality in the [LOCATION_002]: the importance of attending to 
method in understanding population -level disparities in the burden of suicide. Annual Review of Public 
Health. 2012;33:393 -408. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22224886 . Accessed Apr. 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev -publhealth -031811 -124636  
31. Azrael D, Cohen J, Salhi C, Miller M. Firearm storage in gun -owning households with children: results of a 
2015 national survey. Journal of Urban Health. 2018;95(3):295 -304. doi:doi:10.1007/s11524 -018-[ADDRESS_1015745] G. The accessibility of firearms and risk for suicide and homicide 
victimization among household members: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Annals of Internal 
Medicine. 2014;160(2):101 -110. doi:10.7326/M13 -1301  
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   24 
 
33. Johnson RM, Frank EM, Ciocca M, Barber CW. Training mental healthcare providers to reduce at -risk 
patients' access to lethal means of suicide: evaluation of the CALM project. Archives of suicide research. 
2011;15(3):259 -264. doi:10.1080/13811118.2011.[ADDRESS_1015746] PJ, Duda D, Hirsch JG. Suicide and violence 
prevention: parent education in the emergency department. Journal of the American Academy of Child & 
Adolescent Psychiatry. 1999;38(3):250 -255. doi:10.1097/00004583 -199903000 -[ZIP_CODE]  
35. Coyne -Beasley T, Schoenbach VJ, Johnson RM. Love our kids, lock your guns: a community -based 
firearm safety counseling and gun lock distribution program. Archives of pediatrics & adolescent medicine. 
2001;155(6):659 -664. doi:10.1001/archpedi.155.6.659  
36. Regier DA, Goldberg ID, Taube CA. The de facto US mental health services system: a public health 
perspective. Archives of general psychiatry. 1978;35(6):685 -693. 
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1978.[ADDRESS_1015747] with mental health and primary care providers before suicide: a 
review of the evidence. American Journal of Psychiatry. 2002;159(6):909 -916.  
38. Husky MM, Olfson M, He J -p, Nock MK, Swanson SA, Merikangas KR. Twelve -month suicidal 
symptoms and use of services among adolescents: results from the National Comorbidity Survey. 
Psychiatric services. 2012;63(10):989 -996.  
39. Boggs JM, Simon GE, Ahmedani BK, Peterson E, Hubley S, Beck A. The association of firearm suicide 
with mental illness, substance use conditions, and previous suicide attempts. Annals of internal medicine. 
2017;167(4):287 -288.  
40. Sheftall AH, Asti L, Horowitz LM, et al. Suicide in elementary school -aged children and early adolescents. 
Pediatrics. 2016;138(4):e20160436.  
41. Klein JD, McNulty M, Flatau CN. Adolescents' access to care: teenagers' self -reported use of services and 
perceived access to confidential care. Archives of pediatrics & adolescent medicine. 1998;152(7):676 -682. 
doi:10.1001/archpedi.152.7.676  
42. Ahmedani BK, Westphal J, Autio K, et al. Variation in patterns of health care before suicide: A population 
case-control study. Preventive medicine. 2019;127:105796.  
43. Fiske ST, Taylor SE. Social Cognition: From Brains to Culture.  2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 2013.  
44. Tversky A, Kahneman D. The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice. Science. 
1981;211(4481):453 -458. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7455683 . Accessed 1981/01/30/. 
doi:10.1126/science.[ADDRESS_1015748] theory: an analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica. 
1979;47(2):263 -292. <Go to ISI>://A1979GR75700001 . doi:10.2307/1914185  
46. Beidas RS, Volpp KG, Buttenheim AN, et al. Transforming mental health delivery through behavioral 
economics and implementation science: Protocol for three exploratory projects. JMIR Research Protocols. 
2019;8(2):e12121. doi:10.2196/[ZIP_CODE]  
47. Saghai Y. Salvaging the concept of nudge. Journal of medical ethics. 2013;39(8):487 -493. 
doi:10.1136/medethics -2012 -100727  
48. Doshi JA, Lim R, Li P, et al. A synchronized prescription refill program improved medication adherence. 
Health Affairs. 2016;35(8):1504 -1512. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2015.[ADDRESS_1015749] using active choice 
and peer comparison performance feedback to physicians on statin prescribing: the prescribe cluster 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Network Open. 2018;1(3):e180818 -e180818. 
doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2018.0818  
50. Patel MS, Volpp KG, Asch DA. Nudge units to improve the delivery of health care. New England Journal 
of Medicine. 2018;378(3):214 -216. doi:10.1056/NEJMp1712984  
51. Patel MS, Volpp KG, Small DS, et al. Using active choice within the electronic health record to increase 
influenza vaccination rates. Journal of General Internal Medicine. 2017;32(7):790 -795. 
doi:10.1007/s11606 -017-4046 -6 
52. Patel MS, Volpp KG. Leveraging insights from behavioral economics to increase the value of health -care 
service provision. Journal of General Internal Medicine. 2012;27(11):1544 -1547. doi:10.1007/s11606 -012-
[ADDRESS_1015750] systems among office -based 
physician practices: [LOCATION_002], 2001 -2012. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics; 
September 30, 2019 2012.  
54. Monegain B. More than 80 percent of docs use EHRs. Healthcare IT News.  September 18, 2015, 2015.  
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   25 
 
55. Tabak RG, Khoong EC, Chambers DA, Brownson RC. Bridging research and practice: Models for 
dissemination and implementation research. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2012;43(3):337 -
350. 
56. Strifler L, Cardoso R, McGowan J, et al. Scopi[INVESTIGATOR_742971], models, and frameworks with limited use. Journal of clinical epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. 
2018;100:92 -102. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2018.04.008  
57. Krause J, Van Lieshout J, Klomp R, et al. Identifying determinants of care for tailoring implementation in 
chronic diseases: An evaluation of different methods. Implement Sci. 2014;9:102.  
58. Lewis CC, Klasnja P, Powell BJ, et al. From classification to causality: Advancing understanding of 
mechanisms of change in implementation science. Frontiers in Public Health. 2018;6:136.  
59. Williams NJ, Beidas RS. Annual research review: the state of implementation science in child psychology 
and psychiatry: a review and suggestions to advance the field. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
and Allied Disciplines. 2019;60(4):430 -450. doi:10.1111/jcpp.[ZIP_CODE]  
60. Kazdin AE. Mediators and mechanisms of change in psychotherapy research. Annual Review of Clinical 
Psychology. 2007;3:1 -27. doi:10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.3.022806.091432  
61. Curran GM, Bauer M, Mittman B, Pyne JM, Stetler C. Effectiveness -implementation hybrid designs: 
combining elements of clinical effectiveness and implementation research to enhance public health impact. 
Medical Care. 2012;50(3):217 -226. doi:10.1097/MLR.0b013e3182408812  
62. PASS Power Analysis and Sample Size Software  [computer program]. Kaysville, UT: NCSS, LLC; 2019.  
63. Zyzanski SJ, Flocke SA, Dickinson LM. On the nature and analysis of clustered data. Annals of Family 
Medicine. 2004;2(3):199 -200.  
64. Cohen J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences.  2nd ed. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates; 1988.  
65. Raudenbush SW, Bryk AS. Hierarchical linear models: applications and data analysis methods.  Vol 1. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2002.  
66. Hedeker D, Gibbons RD. Longitudinal Data Analysis.  Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons; 2006.  
67. Molenberghs G, Thijs H, Jansen I, et al. Analyzing incomplete longitudinal clinical trial data. Biostatistics. 
2004;5(3):445 -464. doi:10.1093/biostatistics/kxh001  
68. Nutting PA, Crabtree BF, Stewart EE, et al. Effect of facilitation on practice outcomes in the National 
Demonstration Project model of the patient -centered medical home. The Annals of Family Medicine. 
2010;8(Suppl. 1):S33 -S44. doi:10.1370/afm.1119  
69. Krull JL, MacKinnon DP. Multilevel modeling of individual and group level mediated effects. Multivariate 
behavioral research. 2001;36(2):249 -277. doi:10.1207/S15327906MBR3602_06  
70. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_219937], Murphy DL, Tate RL. Three -level models for indirect effects in school - and class -randomized 
experiments in education. The Journal of Experimental Education. 2009;78(1):60 -95. 
doi:10.1080/00220970903224685  
71. Zhang Z, Zyphur MJ, Preacher KJ. Testing multilevel mediation using hierarchical linear models: problems 
and solutions. Organizational Research Methods. 2009;12(4):695 -719. doi:10.1177/1094428108327450  
72. Williams NJ, Beidas RS. Navigating the storm: how proficient organizational culture promotes clinician 
retention in the shift to evidence -based practice. PloS one. 2018;13(12). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0209745  
73. Glisson C, Williams NJ, Hemmelgarn A, Proctor E, Green P. Aligning organizational priorities with ARC 
to improve youth mental health service outcomes. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 
2016;84(8):713 -725. doi:doi:10.1037/ccp0000107  
74. MacKinnon DP, Lockwood CM, Hoffman JM, West SG, Sheets V. A comparison of methods to test 
mediation and other intervening variable effects. Psychological methods. 2002;7(1):83 -104. 
doi:10.1037/[ADDRESS_1015751]: Distribution of the 
product and resampling methods. Multivariate Behavioral Research. 2004;39(1):99 -128. 
76. Biesanz JC, Falk CF, Savalei V. Assessing mediational models: testing and interval estimation for indirect 
effects. Multivariate Behavioral Research. 2010;45(4):661 -701. doi:10.1080/00273171.2010.[ADDRESS_1015752] in statistical 
mediation analysis: does method really matter? Psychological science. 2013;24(10):1918 -1927. 
doi:10.1177/0956797613480187  
78. Bradley EH, Curry LA, Devers KJ. Qualitative data analysis for health services research: developi[INVESTIGATOR_742972], themes, and theory. Health Services Research. 2007;42(4):1758 -1772. doi:10.1111/j.1475 -
6773.2006.[ZIP_CODE].x  
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   26 
 
79. Palinkas LA, Aarons GA, Horwitz S, Chamberlain P, Hurlburt M, Landsverk J. Mixed method designs in 
implementation research. Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services 
Research. 2011;38(1):44 -53. doi:10.1007/s10488 -010-[ADDRESS_1015753] practices for mixed methods research in the health 
sciences. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences; October 1, 
[ADDRESS_1015754] MO, Barg FK. A complementary marriage of 
perspectives: understanding organizational social context using mixed methods. Implement Sci. 2014;9. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25417095 . Accessed Nov 23. doi:10.1186/s13012 -014-[ADDRESS_1015755] implementation of interventions for children with autism in public schools. Implement Sci. 2016;11. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/[ADDRESS_1015756] 10. doi:10.1186/s13012 -016-0501 -8 
83. Ditty MS, Landes SJ, Doyle A, Beidas RS. It takes a village: a mixed method analysis of inner setting 
variables and dialectical behavior therapy implementation. Administration and Policy in Mental Health. 
2015;42(6):672 -681. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25315183 . Accessed Nov. doi:10.1007/s10488 -
014-0602 -0 
84. Wolk CB, Jager -Hyman S, Marcus SC, et al. Developi[INVESTIGATOR_742973]: a study 
protocol for a mixed -methods implementation study. BMJ Open. 2017;7(6):e014407. 
doi:10.1136/bmjopen -2016 -014407  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   27 
 
Protocol amendments  
 
Submission 
date Change(s)  Details and rationale  
08 March 
2022  Changing primary study outcome 
from parent -reported receipt of 
S.A.F.E. Firearm program (i.e., 
fidelity) to clinician -reported 
delivery of S.A.F.E. Firearm  in 
the electronic health record (i.e., 
reach) and other minor protocol 
revisions ahead of trial launch.  The protocol was updated in this modification to reflect the 
change in primary outcome. A detailed description of the 
rationale for the change in primary study outcome is described 
below in the Statistical Analysis Plan Summary of changes .  
 
Additionally, the protocol was updated in this modification to 
reflect final decisions and details for the study prior to trial 
launch:  
- Final number of clinics participating in the trial (N = 
30) after removal of clinics that no longer met 
eligibility criteria ahead of trial launch  
- Covariates included in covariate -constrained 
randomization of study clinics  
- Finalized measurement plan and measures to be 
included in a survey that collected secondary 
outcomes data from clinicians at participating study 
clinics  
The Data Safety and Monitoring Board approved of the 
primary outcome change and the full study protocol on 02 
March 2022. The study’s National Institute of Mental Health 
Program Officer also approved of the primary outcome change 
on 02 March 2022. These ap provals were received and this 
modification to the protocol was submitted (8 March 2022) to 
the University of Pennsylvania Single Institutional Review 
Board prior to the trial’s launch on [ADDRESS_1015757] funding the main trial (R01 MH123491 -02S1, PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_742974]). The administrative supplement procedures were 
included in the main trial’s IRB protocol. No changes 
pertaining to the main tria l protocol were made as part of this 
modification.  
[ADDRESS_1015758] 
2022  Adding Northwestern University 
as a study site and updating the 
University of Pennsylvania Site PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_742975].  The study’s Principal Investigator, Rinad S Beidas, PhD, left 
the University of Pennsylvania and transitioned to a new 
position at Northwestern University on [ADDRESS_1015759]. Beidas’ 
team would be (a) recruiting participants for a second survey 
that collected secondary outcomes data from clinicians at 
participating study clinics and (b) conducting qualitative 
interviews with study constituents.  
19 October 
2022  Updating health system name [CONTACT_743031].  One of the participating health systems changed its name; the 
protocol was updated with this new name.  
Updating data sharing and 
management details after the PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_742976].  Data management protocols were updated to note that study 
data would be securely shared by [CONTACT_743023], 
consistent with the terms detai led in an updated Data Transfer 
and Use Agreement that was executed between Northwestern 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015760] funding the main trial (R01 MH123491 -02S1, PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_742974]). The administrative supplement procedures were 
included in the main trial’s IRB protocol. No changes 
pertaining to the main tria l protocol were made as part of this 
modification.  
13 December 
2022  Updating protocol with finalized 
plans for qualitative interviews.  This is the final approved study protocol; no further 
changes were made for the duration of the trial. The full 
document is above.  
 
Qualitative interviews were conducted with clinicians, clinic 
change agents, and health system leaders after the active trial 
year ended. These interviews asked constituents about their 
experiences of and perspectives on S.A.F.E. Firearm  and the 
implementation strategies, as well as needs for sustaining 
S.A.F.E. Firearm  in the clinics and health systems long -term. 
The study protocol was updated with the finalized sampling 
and interview plan in preparation for launching the interviews 
(which began in May 2023).  
 
 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   29 
 
Initial approved protocol  
Approved by [CONTACT_742986]: 08 February 2022  
 
Social and Behavioral Sciences Human Research Protocol  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
[INVESTIGATOR_742977], PhD  
ADDRESS  
PHONE; EMAIL ADDRESS  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: A comparative effectiveness trial of strategies to implement firearm safety promotion as a 
universal suicide prevention strategy in pediatric primary care  
 
INTRODUCTION AND PURPOSE:  
The number of young people dying by [CONTACT_742987] U.S.1,[ADDRESS_1015761] 
youth visit primary care each year.4 One study found that 77% of youth who died by [CONTACT_742988], with nearly 40% attending a visit within [ADDRESS_1015762] 
increase in safe firearm storage could prevent up to 32% of firearm -related deaths in youth due to both suicide and 
accidents.[ADDRESS_1015763] (IRB number 824449) conducted in the Mental 
Health Research Network (MHRN), in which we interviewed 70 stakeholders, including pediatric clinicians, health 
system leaders, firearm safety experts , and parents who own firearms. We queried about needed adaptations to 
Safety Check , implementation barriers, and preferred implementation strategies guided by [CONTACT_742989] (CFIR), a leading implementation science framework.17-19 Adaptation 
recommendations included renaming the program (now called SAFE Firearm ), removing the formal screening step 
and any documentation of firearm ownership in the electronic health record (EHR), and offering brief counseling on 
safe storage and cable locks to all families.17,[ADDRESS_1015764] frequent implementation strategy suggestion was to 
integrate the program into the EHR. Studies support the effectiveness and scalability of EHR approaches to make 
implementation of new practices more salient and part of workflow.20-22 Specifically, based on principles of 
behavioral economics, a well -designed EHR order set can ‘nudge’ clinician behavior.23 However, our interviews 
identified implementation barriers that may warrant additional strategies, including clinician comfort with the 
program and clinic workflow.19 Facilitation is an evidence -based implementation approach that focuses on building 
organizational capacity for improvement and directly targets the unique implementation barriers experienced by 
[CONTACT_463871].24-26 We will answer: Is the less costly and scalable EHR -based ‘nudge’ powerful enough to increase 
implementation of SAFE Firearm or is more intensive and expensive facilitation needed to overcome 
implementation barriers?  
 
We will conduct a hybrid type III effectiveness -implementation trial with a longitudinal cluster randomized design 
to answer questions related to implementation strategy and program effectiveness. We will also apply mixed 
methods to investigate implementat ion strategy mechanisms. During the active implementation period, all 32 clinics 
in the two participating health systems will receive SAFE Firearm  materials, including brief training in program 
delivery, cable locks, and the deployment of an EHR implementa tion strategy. Half of the clinics will be randomized 
to only receive the EHR implementation strategy ( Nudge ); the other half will be randomized to receive Nudge plus 1 
year of facilitation to target additional clinician and organizational implementation barriers ( Nudge+ ). We will 
collect the primary implementation outcome for 6 months before exposure to condition and for 1 year following to 
allow for comparisons between (a) the active and pre -implementation periods and (b) the active and sustainment 
period s. Results will guide future efforts to promote firearm safety as a universal suicide prevention strategy.  
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   30 
 
 
EQUITY SUPPLEMENT PURPOSE:  
Prior to launching the full trial, we are pi[INVESTIGATOR_742949] 2 clinics in each health 
system during a 1 -month period. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_742978] (more details are below). After the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], we will conduct this sub -study. Specifically, 
we will explore any signals of disparities and examine SAFE Firearm  delivery by [CONTACT_7683]’s medical complexity 
(per ICD -9 and -10 codes) and race/ethnicity. Bec ause we anticipate that clinicians will provide helpful 
contextualization for the program that will be informative for facilitation for the program and for the broader 
literature on firearm safety counseling, regardless of whether we detect differences in program delivery, we will 
interview KPCO and HFHS clinicians who participated in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_742951], and 
convene key stakeholders (e.g., facilitation leaders, pediatric leadership) for virtual meetings. We expect that this 
step will prime facilitation for trial launch. The goal of this sub -study is to learn more about barriers to delivering the 
SAFE Firearm  program equitably to all patients, regardless of medical complexity and race/ethnicity, and to 
optimize facilitation to address disparities.  
 
An important note about what we are requesting the IRB to review as part of this protocol: Leadership within both 
health systems has agreed to deploy the Evidence -Based Program (i.e. SAFE Firearm) and the Implementation 
Strategies (i.e. EHR Nudges, Facilitation) within their respective systems. They also are in support of conducting the 
Research  Activities (i.e. quantitative surveys, qualitative interviews, and EHR/Administrative data extraction) to 
learn more about the implementation of the SAFE Firearm pr ogram as well as about EHR Nudge and Facilitation 
strategies. We have described the SAFE Firearm program as well as the EHR Nudge and Facilitation strategies in 
this protocol for reference, but we are requesting IRB review and oversight of only the Researc h Activities. The 
SAFE Firearm program is evidence -based and the primary research question isn’t about effectiveness of this 
program but rather about implementation. Parents may receive SAFE Firearm during a pediatric primary care 
appointment and not parti cipate in the research survey and vice versa. Requiring consent from participants to receive 
the SAFE Firearm program, EHR Nudge, and/or facilitation would make this implementation research study 
impossible to conduct because it would create undue bias and  be overly burdensome on health systems. The 
program and strategies are low -risk, evidence -based, and prevention oriented, and ultimately the decision to deliver 
the SAFE Firearm program is left to the individual clinicians for each family. We are looking to answer pragmatic 
questions about the implementation strategies in a healthcare setting, i.e. is the less costly and scalable EHR -based 
‘nudge’ powerful enough to increase implementation of SAFE Firearm or is more intensive and expensive 
facilitation nee ded to overcome implementation barriers? The purpose of this study is not to establish SAFE Firearm 
as an effective program, because that has already been done, but rather to study which strategy improves clinician 
fidelity to the program in a healthcare s etting (as reported by [CONTACT_3654]).  
 
OBJECTIVES:  
• Aim [ADDRESS_1015765] the comparative effectiveness of two active 
implementation strategies, Nudge  (EHR) vs. Nudge+  (EHR + facilitation).  
• Aim 2 . To use mixed methods to identify implementation strategy moderators and mediators.  
• Aim 3 . To examine the effects of SAFE Firearm on patient clinical outcomes.  
 
Primary outcome variables:  
• Aim 1 . Parent -reported PCP fidelity  
• Aim 2 . Staff -reported clinic adaptive reserve  
• Aim 3 . Parent -reported firearm storage behavior  
 
Secondary/Other outcome variables (Moderators and mediators to be measured):  
• Aim [ADDRESS_1015766]  
• Aim 2 .  
- Moderators : Clinic implementation climate and leadership, clinician attitudes to suicide prevention  
- Mediators : Clinician motivation, clinic adaptive reserve  
• Aim 3 . Youth suicide attempts, deaths, and unintentional firearm injury and mortality  
 
BACKGROUND:  
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   31 
 
Youth suicide deaths are on the rise in the [LOCATION_002] (U.S.). Firearms are a common and lethal method of suicide 
attempt. Reducing access to lethal means is a promising yet underused suicide prevention strategy.[ADDRESS_1015767] manner: locked and unloaded. Approximately 4.6 million U.S. 
children (7%) live in homes in which at least one firearm is stored un locked and loaded.[ADDRESS_1015768] increase in safe 
firearm storage could prevent as many as 32% of youth firearm deaths due to suicide and acc idents.[ADDRESS_1015769] no known psychiatric history,39,40 underscoring the 
importance of universal prevention. With 90% of youth visiting primary care annually41 and a high rate of primary 
care visits among youth who die by [CONTACT_742990],42 primary care provides an excellent opportunity for 
universal firearm safety intervention.  
 
Safety Check  is an evidence -based, pediatric primary care program targeting parental safe firearm storage as part of 
a bundle of violence prevention strategies.6 The program includes screening for firearms in the home, brief 
counseling around safe storage, and providing cable locks. A large clinical trial in 137 pediatric practices found that 
parents receiving Safety Check  reported double the odds of safe storage (OR = 2.0, p < .011) compared to the control 
group. The intervention group showed a 10% increase in use of cable locks, while there was a 12% decrease in safe 
storage in the control group ( p < .001). While these results led major professional organizations  to recommend 
implementation of safe firearm storage programs like Safety Check , they have not been routinely implemented.14 
There are a number of potential explanations for slow uptake. One potential reason may be the fit of the program for 
primary care (i.e., program -setting fit).[ADDRESS_1015770] been advances in implementation science and an 
increasingly sensitive national debate about firearms, including an evolving role of professional medical associations 
in advocating for firearm safety as a public health appr oach. Our preliminary work allowed us to gather key 
information about barriers and facilitators to the implementation of Safety Check  in primary care as a universal 
suicid e prevention strategy within the current national context, including primary care provider (PCP) attitudes 
about discussing firearm safety with parents and firearm stakeholders’ attitudes about PCPs raising this topic.14,[ADDRESS_1015771] the potential to increase 
use of SAFE Firearm  in routine pediatric practice. Behavioral economics focuses on the power of context and an 
individual’s limited resources (e.g., time, attention) in shapi[INVESTIGATOR_742952],[ADDRESS_1015772] yielded promising effects when applied to mental health in our NIMH -funded P50 Penn ALACRITY 
Center (MPIs: Beidas, Mandell, Buttenheim).[ADDRESS_1015773] (EHR) have 
the capacity to prompt and shape medical decision -making in unobtrusive ways that do not disrupt workflow or add 
more tasks and have the potential to be effective and low -cost.20,22,51,52 Given that more than 90% of U.S. hospi[INVESTIGATOR_742979]: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015774] ementation 
strategy costs to inform national scale -up efforts.  
 
CHARACTERISTICS OF THE STUDY POPULATION:  
  
1. Target Population and Accrual:  
• Setting : all participants will be recruited from one of a maximum 41  pediatric clinics  within two Mental Health 
Research Network (MHRN) systems ([ADDRESS_1015775] Health System [HFHS] in 
Michigan; up to 27 pediatric clinics within Kaiser Permanente Colorado [KPCO] in Colorado). Both systems 
use the Epic Electronic H ealth Record (EHR) system.  
 
• Parents of youth seen in pediatric primary care (parents) . We will include parents and/or legal guardians 
(referred to as parents going forward) at participating pediatric clinics who have a child aged [ADDRESS_1015776] ivity and Study 
Period.  
- For the EHR/Administrative data extraction (i.e., which includes data from the EHR, VDW, and 
Administrative systems; see Data Collection  section for more details), we anticipate HFHS and KPCO to 
pull data from 74,080 unique clinic encounters each year (based on health system numbers from 2018).  As 
such, we anticipate extracting data from about 37,040 clinic encounters in the 6 -month pre -implementation 
period, 74,080 clinic encounters in the 1 -year implementation period, and 74,080 clinic encounters in the 1-
year sustainment period. In order to make this number we will pull approximately 100,000 from KPCO and 
100,000 from HFHS.  
- For the parent surveys, we will recruit eligible participants from the extracted EHR/Administrative data 
each study period. We estimate a 31.58% response rate, with our main goal of 23,[ADDRESS_1015777] 11,697 surveys in the 6 -month pre -implementation 
period and 23,394 surveys in the 1 -year sustainment period.  
 
Study Phase  Pre-implementation  
(6 mo)  Implementation  
(1 yr)  Sustainment  
(1 yr)  Total maximum 
enrollment  
EHR/Admin data  37,040  74,080  74,080  185,2001 
Survey data (31.58% response rate)2 11,697  23,394  23,394  58,4851 
1This is the total maximum enrollment (i.e. if all data came from unique patients at each period)   
2 The participants who complete the surveys will be identified from the EHR/Admin data above  
 
• Primary Care Providers (PCPs) . There are currently 137 pediatric physicians and 14 non -physician PCPs (N = 
151) in the two systems. Two surveys will be administered to these PCPs: one during the 6 -month pre -
implementation period (baseline survey) and one during the 1 -year active impleme ntation period 
(implementation survey). We expect response rates of 50% at each of these two time points, so our target 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015778] 
Health System or Kaiser Permanente Colorado for qualitative interviews. The key attendees for our 
stakeholder meeting will include ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_742980] (N=3), facilitation leaders (N=6), and 
pediatric leadership (N=4). Note, we are not conceptualizing the stakeholder meeting as a research activity.  
 
• Health System Leaders (leaders) . There are currently 20 health system leaders (i.e., clinic, department chiefs, 
and health plan directors) in the two systems. We expect response rates of 70% for our health system leader 
qualitative interviews per Aim 2, so our target accrual for interview s is 14 leaders .   
 
2. Key Eligibility Criteria:  
• Parents (Aims 1 and 3) . Parents and/or legal guardians at participating pediatric clinics who have a child aged [ADDRESS_1015779] 18 years old to participate. Lastly, at HFHS, 
parents who are not US residents or do not speak English will not be eligible to participate. There are no other 
exclusion criteria to optimize ecological validity. A sm all number of patients may be excluded who previously 
requested to not be outreached for research studies.  
 
To avoid erroneously making parents aware of their teen’s confidential visit at KPCO, parents of teens whose 
well-visits are tagged with a confidential diagnostic code (Z02.9) or the administrative type indicator of 
“Confidential Accounts – Do Not Use Insu rance” by [CONTACT_742991]. (Only youth ages [ADDRESS_1015780] confidential visits or confidential diagnostic codes in the EHR.) Youth 
under 18 at HFHS always need parental permission for visits. The one exceptio n is teen sexual health visits 
(which can be confidential), but these visits are not well -visits, and therefore we will not be contact[CONTACT_742992]. Therefore, this issue of parents not being aware of their children’s well -visits cannot happen at 
HFHS.  
 
• PCPs (Aims 1 and 2) . Pediatric physicians and non -physician PCPs employed within the participating pediatric 
clinics are eligible to participate in surveys per Aims [ADDRESS_1015781] Health System or Kaiser Colorado.  
 
• Leaders (Aim 2) . Health system leaders (i.e., clinic, department chiefs, and health plan directors) employed 
within the [ADDRESS_1015782] Recruitment and Screening:  
• Parents (Aims 1 and 3) . Parents who attend a well visit with a child aged 5 -17 years will be eligible to 
participate in surveys per Aims 1 and 3. See Procedures  section below for details about recruitment and 
enrollment.  
 
• PCPs (Aims 1 and 2) . Leadership within both health systems has agreed to deploy these implementation 
strategies at their respective health systems. Half of the clinics will be randomized to receive only the EHR 
implementation strategy ( Nudge ), and the other half will be randomized to receive the EHR implementation 
strategy plus 1 year of facilitation to target additional clinician and organizational implementation barriers 
(Nudge+ ). All PCPs employed within the 41 pediatric clinics will receive either the Nudge  or the Nudge+ , and 
as such they will all be eligible to complete the baseline and active implementation surveys (per Aims 1 and 2). 
They will also be eligible to participate in an interview per Aim 2. See Procedures  section below for details 
about recruitment and enrollment.  
- Equity Supplemen t. We will partner with each site’s principal investigators (PIs) to recruit interview 
participants and will send invitations by [CONTACT_6968].  
 
• Leaders (Aim 2) . All leaders will be eligible to participate in an interview per Aim 2. See Procedures  section 
below for details about recruitment and enrollment.  
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   34 
 
 
4. Early Withdrawal of Subjects:  
For Aim 1 ( Nudge  or Nudge+ ), we are requesting waiver of informed consent, so the option to early withdraw from 
this study is not applicable. For all surveys and interviews administered across aims, the steps to withdraw early 
from participation will be outlined during the consent process. See the Consent Process  section below for more 
details.  
 
5. Vulnerable Populations:   
We are not targeting any vulnerable populations as part of this study.  
 
6. Populations vulnerable to undue influence or coercion:  
We will not be targeting participants who are likely to be vulnerable to undue influence or coercion . 
 
STUDY DESIGN:  
We will conduct a hybrid type III effectiveness -implementation trial with a longitudinal cluster randomized design 
to answer questions related to implementation strategy and program effectiveness. We will also apply mixed 
methods to investigate implementat ion strategy mechanisms. During the active implementation period, all 41 clinics 
in the two participating health systems will receive SAFE Firearm  materials, including brief training in program 
delivery, cable locks, and the deployment of an EHR implementa tion strategy. Half of the clinics will be randomized 
to only receive the EHR implementation strategy ( Nudge ); the other half will be randomized to receive Nudge plus 1 
year of facilitation to target additional clinician and organizational implementation barriers ( Nudge+ ). We will 
randomize clinics to the active implementation conditions, as cluster randomization is more appropriate for 
organization -level implementation strategies134 and because there is high potential for contamination if we were to 
randomize at the PCP level.135 To ensure balance across conditions, we will use covariate -constrained 
randomization.136 Covariates, weighted in order of importance, include health system (HFHS, KPCO), clinic 
characteristics (implementation climate, firearm activities already taking place, location [urban vs. non -urban]), and 
clinician characteristics (burnout).   
 
Based on historical precedent, we expect minimal staff turnover at the participating clinics during the study. If this 
does occur, we will follow procedures used in prior clinic -level cluster randomized trials, which involved brief 
training of new provider s as part of their onboarding process at the clinic.  
 
EQUITY SUPPLEMENT STUDY DESIGN :  
Prior to launching the full trial, we are pi[INVESTIGATOR_742949] [ADDRESS_1015783] this sub -study. Specifically, we will exp lore any 
signals of disparities and examine SAFE Firearm  delivery by [CONTACT_7683]’s medical complexity (per ICD -9 and -10 
codes) and race/ethnicity. SAFE Firearm  delivery will b e captured by [CONTACT_7620] -visit parent survey described in this 
protocol (below; see Parent Surveys [Aims 1 and 3]), which will be confirming receipt of the program; consistent 
with the primary outcome measure for the ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_246390] (as described in this protoc ol), parents must report “yes” to 
both program components (i.e., counseling and cable lock offer) to have received the program. Medical complexity 
will be determined by [CONTACT_48334] -9 and -10 codes in the EHR, and race/ethnicity also be from the EHR (as described i n the 
Data Collection section of this protocol). We will fit two separate inverse probability weighted GEE logistic 
regression models to analyze the data. We will use a parameter of 10% difference in program delivery for youth in 
either group of interest t o explore further. Regardless of whether we detect differences in program delivery, we will 
conduct qualitative interviews with up to [ADDRESS_1015784] Health System or Kaiser Permanente 
Colorado to identify barriers to SAFE Firearm  delivery.  We will use the Health Equity Implementation Framework 
(HEIF) as a theoretical framework for the interviews, analysis, and interpretation of findings. The HEIF is a 
multilevel framework that assesses health equity determinants to identify factors that pro mote or hinder 
implementation of new interventions. The HEIF is well -suited for this inquiry given its explicit attention to the 
clinical encounter in which the intervention is delivered and emphasis on facilitation as essential process to address 
implemen tation problems, specifically disparities. Following analysis of the interview data, we will convene key 
stakeholders (e.g., facilitation leaders, pediatric leadership) for virtual meetings to optimize facilitation to address 
disparities. We will use exist ing, ongoing meetings with clinical stakeholders to gather feedback. Note that we are 
not conceptualizing stakeholder meeting as a research activity.  
 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   35 
 
Study Duration:  
We propose to conduct this project from 08/01/2020 through 06/30/2025, with human subject research activities 
starting no earlier than 01/01/2021 and data collection ending no later than 12/31/2024. After pi[INVESTIGATOR_742957] 
(planned for approximately Apri l-May 2021 for parent survey pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], and Fall 2021 [approximately October; duration 
of 1 month] for SAFE Firearm program pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268]), we plan to start in July [ADDRESS_1015785] analysis and prepare manuscripts.  
 
Equity Supplement Study Duration :  
S.A.F.E. Firearm pi[INVESTIGATOR_742958] [ADDRESS_1015786] interviews 
from January 2022 -February 2022 (approximately 6 weeks) and convene stakeholders during existing, ongoing 
virtual meetings in approximately Febr uary 2022.  
 
METHODS:  
 
1. Study Instruments:  
• Parent surveys (Aims 1 and 3) . 
○ These surveys will be administered three times, during a [ADDRESS_1015787] of two parts:  
○ Part 1 : One -question fidelity survey. To maximize response rate, we will only ask one question of parents; 
we are prioritizing the fidelity (Aim 1) questions. Half of parents will receive each fidelity question 
(regarding the clinician discussing firearm storage  with them or being offered a cable lock). The survey will 
be sent via a text message that the parent can respond directly to with their multiple -choice response. We 
will use Twilio and REDCap for this text messaging (consistent with how text messagi ng for REDCap 
surveys has been done for this and other studies in the health systems; both are approved for use in the 
HFHS and KPCO health systems and are HIPAA compliant). Responses will not be stored by [CONTACT_742993]. We w ill also recruit parents to participate in the one -question survey via 
email and/or patient portal message. For both, we will send a survey link for the parents to complete the 
survey in REDCap. Finally, we will offer participants the option to respond to the one -question survey 
directly over email. For this method, the survey question will be sent in the body of the email and 
participants will be instructed to reply via email with the number corresponding with their response. 
Language alerting patients not  to send confidential or identifying information in their email response will 
be included with the email survey message.  
○ Part 2 : Based on our learnings about response rates from pi[INVESTIGATOR_742960], we are 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_742981] (Part 1 survey) to maximize response rate. Then, we will collect 
other secondary outcomes via the longer survey (Part 2, described below), understanding that the response 
rate will be lower for this second survey. After recruiting parents for the one -question survey (Part 1), we 
will invite them to participate in the longer parent survey (Part 2). We anticipate Part 2 parent surveys will 
take about 1 -3 minutes for parents to complete.  
- Aim 1 measures will ask questions about PCP fidelity to the two steps of the SAFE Firearm  program 
(whichever question was not answered during Part 1; e.g. did your child’s PCP talk to you about 
firearm safety, did your child’s PCP offer you a cable lock?). Aim 1 measures may also include 
questions about acceptability of the SAFE Firearm  program and parents’ reactions to the firearm 
discussions with providers.  
- Aim 3 measures will ask questions about firearm storage behavior (e.g. if they took a cable lock, if all 
firearms are stored with a gun lock on them, if bullets are stored separate from all firearms, etc.).  
- For NIH reporting purposes, we will also collect parent demographics (e.g., gender, race, ethnicity); 
disclosure of this information will be optional.  
 
• PCP surveys (Aims 1 and 2) . We anticipate PCP surveys will take about 15 minutes for PCPs to complete. Two 
surveys will be administered: one will be completed during the 6 -month pre -implementation period (baseline 
survey) and one will be completed during the 1 -year active implement ation period. Each of the surveys will 
include questions related to some or all of the following constructs below:   
○ Aim 1 measures will ask questions about acceptability and use of the SAFE Firearm  program and of the 
implementation strategies. PCPs will also be offered the opportunity to disclose whether they are firearm 
owners; we will make it clear that disclosure is entirely voluntary.  
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   36 
 
○ Aim 2 moderator measures will ask questions about PCP attitudes and experiences (e.g., attitudes towards 
firearm counseling, burnout).  
○ Aim 2 mediator measures will also ask about PCP attitudes and experiences (e.g., clinic -level adaptive 
reserve and PCP motivation to implement SAFE Firearm ). 
○ Demographic questions  
 
• PCP and Leader interviews (Aim 2) . We anticipate interviews with PCPs and leaders will last about 30 minutes. 
These interviews will be administered once, during the sustainment period. Development of the interview 
guides will be guided by [CONTACT_743024] (CFIR) and will ask 
questions about other additional mechanisms through which implementation strategies might operate (e.g. 
clinician self -efficacy, psychological safety).  
○ Equity Supplement . We will use a semi -structured interview guide to conduct interviews. The interview 
guide is based on the HEIF, with domains specific to recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840] (patient and provider factors), clinical 
encounter, and organizational level. The interview guide will incl ude several questions, e.g., “During this 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_49149], how did you prioritize SAFE Firearm  delivery?”; “How do you prioritize preventative 
counseling in the clinical encounter?”; “How did patients’ medical needs impact SAFE Firearm  delive ry?” 
The guide will be structured to ensure consistent data collection and pi[INVESTIGATOR_31219].  
 
 
2. Administration of Surveys and/or Process:  
• Parent surveys (Aims 1 and 3) . Parents will be asked to complete surveys up to [ADDRESS_1015788] method(s) are 
preferred and have been shown to work in previous research at each health system. For Part 1 (one -question 
survey), parents will be as ked the survey question directly via text message and/or email (and they will respond 
with their multiple -choice answer) and/or will be invited via email and/or patient portal message to access the 
one-question survey via a REDCap link. For Part 2 (longer parent survey; after the Part 1 survey), parents will 
receive a message that will invite them to complete a brief survey via KPCO/HFHS REDCap, a secure, web -
based application for collecting and managing survey data that can be completed via computer or mob ile 
device. Parents will be contact[CONTACT_65312], email, text message, online patient portal (e.g., My Chart) message, 
and/or mail, sent by [CONTACT_743025]. We will contact [CONTACT_742995] [ADDRESS_1015789] the option to 
complete a mailed version of the survey. For Part 1, parents will not be compensated for participating. For Pa rt 
2, participants will be eligible for an incentive via lottery for survey completion (e.g., $[ADDRESS_1015790]). Note that 
parents who receive the Part [ADDRESS_1015791] read the consent form. Parents who receive the Part 1 survey via text message will be 
sent a link to the consent form in the introductory text message  before the survey question. For people 
participating in Part 1 via email or patient portal message, a link to the consent form will be included within the 
invitation message. The Part 1 survey consent form indicates that participants should review it befo re 
completing the survey, and completion of the survey indicates their consent to participate.  
 
• PCP surveys (Aims 1 and 2) . PCPs will be asked to complete surveys 2 times: once during the pre -
implementation period (baseline survey) and once during the implementation period (implementation survey). 
They will be contact[CONTACT_742996]/or research specialists from their respective health 
systems and by [CONTACT_743026]. We have used 
this method in prior survey research with clinical staff. Surveys will be admini stered via  Penn’s REDCap. If 
allowed by [CONTACT_742999], PCPs will receive $20 e -gift cards or an altruistic gift ($20 donation to a 
suicide prevention charity on their behalf) at each time point they complete a survey.  
 
• PCP and Leader interviews (Aims 2) . PCPs and leaders will also be asked to engage in a brief qualitative 
interview. We will purposively sample PCP survey respondents (equally distributed across health system and 
randomized arm), to obtain more detailed information from those demonstrating high and low SAFE Firearm  
fidelity. We will oversample for PCPs who chose to self -report firearm ownership on the survey. Additionally, 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   37 
 
we will interview all leaders who agree to participate. If allowed by [CONTACT_742999], PCPs and leaders 
will receive $25 for interview participation. Data management will be decided between HFHS/KPCO/Penn 
once a management plan has been finalized.   
 
o Equity Supplement . A trained research coordinator or team member will administer the one -time qualitative 
interview to participants verbally over the phone, or through videoconferencing software if the participant 
prefers. The interview will be audio -recorded. Demographics  and audio recordings will be entered into and 
stored on REDCap, and transcribed interview data will be loaded into Nvivo (see Data Management section 
below for more details). Based on what is allowed at each health system, participants wi ll receive a $[ADDRESS_1015792] (or if no gift card is permitted for research study incentives by [CONTACT_73733], we will 
send a personalized thank you email). We anticipate the interview will take about [ADDRESS_1015793] these 
activities during a portion of existing, ongoing meetings with stakeholders. As currently conceptualized, the 
stakeholder meetings are not a research activity as no data will be collected for research purposes – the stakeholder 
feedback is meant to simply inform the design of the facili tation strategy. If the research team decides they want to 
collect any research data during these stakeholder meetings, we will submit a modification to the IRB outlining our 
research procedures and any applicable documents prior to implementing.  
 
3. Data Management:  
A Data Use Agreement will be established between University of Pennsylvania and the two health systems in 
partnership with Penn’s Office of Research Services and the respective offices at the two health systems.  
 
At the University of Pennsylvania, we will use secure, encrypted servers to host the data and conduct the analysis to 
minimize the risk of breach of data and confidentiality. The Penn Medicine Academic Computing Services 
(PMACS) will be the hub for the har dware and database infrastructure that will support the project. The PMACS 
provides a secure computing environment for a large volume of highly sensitive data, including clinical, genetic, 
socioeconomic, and financial information. PMACS requires all users of data or applications on PMACS servers to 
complete a PMACS -hosted cybersecurity awareness course annually, which stresses federal data security policies 
under data use agreements with the university. The curriculum includes Health Insurance Portability a nd 
Accountability Act (HIPAA) training and covers secure data transfer, passwords, computer security habits and 
knowledge of what constitutes misuse or inappropriate use of the server. We will implement multiple, redundant 
protective measures to guarantee the privacy and security of the participant data. All investigators and research staff 
with direct access to the identifiable data will be required to undergo annual responsible conduct of research, 
cybersecurity, and HIPAA certification in accordance with  University of Pennsylvania regulations. Data will be 
stored, managed, and analyzed on a secure, encrypted server behind the University of Pennsylvania Health System 
(UPHS) firewall. All study personnel that will use this data are listed on the Penn IRB ap plication and have 
completed training in HIPAA standards and the Collaborative IRB Training Initiative (CITI) human subjects 
research. Data access will be password protected. Whenever possible, data will be de -identified for analysis.  
 
Equity Supplement Data Management : 
All data management will be overseen by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Beidas. Quantitative data management for the pi[INVESTIGATOR_742982]. Demographic data from the qualitative interviews will be entered 
into Research Electronic Dat a Capture (REDCap), a HIPAA -compliant web -based survey platform which is 
supported by [CONTACT_128802]  (PMACS). REDCap provides secure, web -based 
applications that are flexible enough to be used for a variety of types of resear ch, provide an intuitive interface for 
users to enter data and have real time validation rules (with automated data type and range checks) at the time of 
entry. These systems offer easy data manipulation with audit trails for reporting, monitoring and quer ying patient 
records, as well as an automated export mechanism to common statistical packages (SPSS, SAS, Stata, R/S -Plus). 
REDCap servers are housed in a local data center at the University of Pennsylvania and all web -based information 
transmission is enc rypted. REDCap was developed specifically around HIPAA Security guidelines.  
 
Audio recordings from the interviews will be digitally recorded and stored in REDCap. Audio recordings will be 
sent to TranscribeMe, a professional transcription service. TranscribeMe services include multiple safeguards 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015794] the privacy and security of personal health information, along with utilizing workers specifically 
cleared to work with this type of sensitive information. TranscribeMe maintains crowd worker teams that are vetted, 
trained, and authoriz ed to work on content containing PHI/PII.  Data submitted to TranscribeMe is stored on servers 
located inside secure, dedicated Microsoft Azure data centers, with state -of-the-art physical and online intrusion 
prevention measures in place. Data is submitte d and maintained through a secure file transfer protocol (SFTP) 
platform that has been set up specifically for HIPAA compliance. The service limits the amount of internal staff that 
has access to customer data within this SFTP only to essential personnel. Transcripts will be loaded into Nvivo 
qualitative data analysis software for management and analysis. Qualitative analysis is described in the Statistical 
Analysis section below.  
 
A number of procedures will be utilized to ensure confidentiality of participant data. First, all qualitative interview 
participants will be assigned a random ID number. This ID number will be used on all data collected from 
participants. The names that co rrelate to those ID numbers will be kept separate, i.e. identifiable data will be stored 
in one file and de -identified research data will be kept in a separate file.  Given COVID -19 and the geographic 
spread of our participants (e.g., Colorado, Michigan), this study is designed to be deployed remotely and virtually. 
The key linking ID numbers to participant names will only be kept in REDCap. Only the research team outlined in 
this application will have access to the participant’s identifiable data. Electron ic records (e.g., digital audio files) 
will be stored in REDCap as well as on a PMACS HIPAA -compliant server. All requests to use the data will be 
reviewed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Beidas. Any data files provided to other individuals will be de -identified and contain only t he 
random ID numbers. Participants will be notified of the above procedures during informed consent.  
 
4. Management of Information for Multi -Site Research where a Penn Investigator is the Lead Investigator of a 
Multi -Site Study:   
[CONTACT_743033] (Penn) is the lead investigator of this multi -site study. All data will be collected from the two 
health systems, securely transferred to Penn, where it will be managed and analyzed. All reporting will be in line 
with the Penn IRB’s report ing requirement of unanticipated problems involving risks to participants or others. The 
two health system have requested and received from their IRBs approval to cede to the Penn IRB which serves as 
the Single IRB for this project, and an IRB Authorizatio n Agreement will be established once this protocol is 
reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_372482]. We have outlined below each institution involved in this project and their 
respective responsibilities:  
 
• University of Pennsylvania (Penn) . The project team at Penn will provide scientific and administrative oversight 
of the proposed project and all project -related activities coordinated by [CONTACT_743001]. 
They will lead the training in facilitation at both sites and pr ovide ongoing support to facilitators at each site. 
They will also lead the qualitative data collection, management and analysis. The Penn site will oversee the data 
analysis and interpretation of findings.   
• Henry Ford Health System (HFHS) . The project team at HFHS will oversee the following activities at the 
participating clinics within their health system: the dissemination of SAFE Firearm  program materials to 
clinics, brief clinician training, the build of the Epic SmartLists, and facilitation provided to clinics randomized 
to the Nudge+ condition. They will also coordinate the collection of all quantitative data from parent and 
clinician participants and ensure safe data storage using REDCap.  
• Kaiser Permanente Colorado (KPCO) . The project team at KPCO will oversee the following activities at the 
participating clinics within their health system: the dissemination of SAFE Firearm  program materials to 
clinics, brief clinician training, the build of the Epic SmartLists, and facilitation provided to clinics randomized 
to the Nudge+ condition. They will also coordinate the collection of all quantitative data from parent 
participants a nd ensure safe data storage using KPCO’s REDCap. They will coordinat e with Penn for 
quantitative data collection (surveys) from PCPs which will be stored in Penn’s REDCap and qualitative 
(interview) data collection from PCPs and health system leaders.  
 
5. Subject Follow -up: 
If it is decided that we will follow -up with participants, we will submit a modification and outline our 
reconsenting plan as necessary.  
 
STUDY PROCEDURES:  
 
1. Detailed Description:  
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   39 
 
Program and Implementation Strategies . Leadership within both health systems has agreed to deploy 
implementation strategies at their respective health systems, including the SAFE Firearm  program, Nudge  
implementation strategy (EHR SmartList), and Nudge+  implementation strategy (EHR SmartList plus facilitation) 
and thus our assessment is that they are not human subject research activities . As a reminder, half of the clinics will 
be randomized to receive the Nudge implementation strategy and the other half will receive the Nudge+  
implementation strategy. We have provided a brief description of the program and two implementation strategies 
below for context.  
• SAFE Firearm program . SAFE Firearm  is an adapted version of Safety Check , which included: (a) screening 
for firearms; (b) brief counseling based on a motivational interviewing approach; and (c) offering cable locks. 
Our adapted program maintains the mechanisms of the original Safety Check  program (i.e., counseling and 
offering a cable lock) but incorporates stakeholder feedback and principles from behavioral economics to 
further enhance the program. SAFE Firearm  will include: (a) brief PCP counseling provid ed to all parents 
(without screening or documentation of ownership in the EHR) using motivational interviewing about safe 
firearm storage; and b) offering cable locks to all parents.  
• Nudge. Clinics randomized to the Nudge  implementation strategy will receive the EHR SmartList only. During 
the study’s preparation phase, the project teams at HFHS and KPCO will work with their respective pediatric 
clinic leadership and Epic information technology specialists to refine the des ign and functioning of our EHR 
SmartList, and to prototype and pi[INVESTIGATOR_742963], consistent with typi[INVESTIGATOR_742983]. SmartLists are pre -defined lists of 
choices that users can select using their mouse or keyboard and are particularly helpful for documenting values 
that a PCP is required to use repeatedly, thus saving time and keyboard strokes. We will add a SmartLis t to the 
standard Well Child Visit workflow to serve as a reminder and allow for tracking of SAFE Firearm  
implementation. For example, the PCP may be required to select a value from a drop -down list to indicate 
whether they provided the SAFE Firearm progra m to the family or offered a cable lock. This Smart List will 
remain turned “on” during the implementation period through the sustainment period. Clinics will be 
responsible for making their own decisions about storage and distribution of firearm locks.  
• Nudge+. Clinics randomized to the Nudge+  implementation strategy will receive the Nudge  implementation 
strategy (as described above) as well as facilitation. Facilitation is external support delivered by [CONTACT_743003]. It will be offered for [ADDRESS_1015795] each clinic in setting change and performance 
goals around the implemen tation of SAFE Firearm, and to troubleshoot implementation barriers. Our approach 
to facilitation was informed by [CONTACT_743004] (i.e., Veteran Health Affairs QUERI facilitation 
manual and AHRQ practice facilitat ion manual) and includes six stages. First, facilitators will engage in a pre -
implementation readiness assessment for each clinic to identify potential implementation barriers and to 
develop relationships with stakeholders. Second, facilitators will hold k ick-off meetings that signal the formal 
launch of the implementation strategy activities that include identifying where in the workflow SAFE Firearm  
can be implemented. This includes when SAFE Firearm  will be delivered during the well -child visit, who in t he 
clinic will be responsible for storing the cable locks, where the locks will be stored, and other workflow -related 
matters. Third, in the first [ADDRESS_1015796] 
onsite/virtual visits to engage with practice leadership and PCPs once a month. In this phase, facilitators will 
also start to develop a sustainment plan in collaboration with s takeholders. Fourth, in months [ADDRESS_1015797] the sustainment plan developed in the kick -off meeting. Sixth, in month 12, facilitation 
activities will complete and the clinics will transition to th e formal maintenance period. Throughout the course 
of the active implementation period, facilitators will offer expert consultation (i.e., 2 webinars and technical 
assistance via email and phone as needed); and regular peer -to-peer calls supported by [CONTACT_743027].  
 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   40 
 
Timeline  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  Year 5  
Quarter  1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
Study planning  ● ● ● ●                 
PCP surveys (Baseline)      ● ●               
PCP surveys 
(Implementation)          ●            
Facilitation        ● ● ● ●           
EHR Nudge        ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●       
Parent surveys (Aims 1 and 
3)     ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●       
Lock Distribution & Cost 
Data (Aim 1)      ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●       
EHR/Admin Data collected 
(Aims 1 & 3)      ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ● ●       
PCP and Leader interviews 
(Aim 2)            ● ● ● ●       
Blue refers to the pre -implementation period; green refers to the active implementation period; gray refers to the 
sustainment period  
 
The above Timeline outlines the procedures and project periods. As described in the Target Population and 
Accrual section above, participants will include parents, PCPs, and leaders within 41 pediatric clinics across two 
health systems (HFHS and KPCO). Parents will be asked to complete surveys [ADDRESS_1015798] fidelity and a cceptability (both Aim 1) and firearm storage behavior (Aim 3). PCPs will be 
asked to complete surveys at two time points (Aims 1 and 2): pre -implementation (baseline survey) and during 
active implementation (implementation survey). Logs will be collected from clinic staff to collect clinic -level data 
related to cable lock distribution and cost (Aim 1) and EHR data will be collected to measure r each (Aim 1) and 
youth suicide attempts, deaths, and unintentional firearm injury and mortality (Aim 3). We will conduct qualitative 
interviews during the sustainment period with a subset of PCPs and leaders (Aim 2).  
 
Equity Supplement Procedures : The  Penn interview team will work with the ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_742965]. The 
site PIs and/or Penn team will reach out via email with an invitati on to participate . If clinicians are interested in 
participating, the interview team will schedule a date and time that is convenient to conduct a qualitative interview 
by [CONTACT_743006]. During the call but before the interview begins, the 
interview team will obtain consent (see Informed Consent section below for more details). The interview will not 
take place if the participant does not provide informed consent. The interview will be  audio -recorded. Based on what 
is allowed at each health system, participants will receive a $[ADDRESS_1015799] (or if no gift card is permitted for 
research study incentives by [CONTACT_73733], we will send a personalized thank you email). After a nalyzing the 
interviews, we will use existing, ongoing meetings with clinical stakeholders to gather feedback on our findings. We 
will present our findings, which will allow stakeholders to select specific strategies (e.g., collaborative problem -
solving) w ithin facilitation to target disparities in SAFE Firearm delivery. We expect that this step will prime 
facilitation for trial launch and increase the likelihood of equitable outcomes.  
 
2. Data Collection:  
• Quantitative Survey Data and Qualitative Interview Data . The research teams at HFHS and KPCO will work 
with their respective health systems to obtain necessary contact [CONTACT_743007]. KPCO 
and HFHS will outreach their respective health system parents for quantitative (survey) data collec tion by 
[CONTACT_648], email, text message, electronic patient portal (e.g., My Chart), and/or mail to recruit them to participate 
in quantitative surveys with outreach frequency consistent with their health  system policy. The research team at 
Penn will work with the research teams at HFHS and KPCO to contact [CONTACT_743028] (surveys) and qualitative 
interv iews. During all recruitment activities with all potential participants, the research teams will make clear 
that participation in the research project is 100% voluntary and not mandatory. We will also ensure that leaders 
are aware that they cannot mandate that employees of their health system or that patients participate and that 
any involvement (or decision not to participate) in the proposed work will not have an adverse impact on their 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015800] information on clinician demographics and 
clinician specialty. See Administration of Surveys and/or Process  section above for additional details.  
 
• Cost Data . Cost will be measured using a pragmatic method to capture all resources needed to deploy Nudge  
and Nudge+ so that decision makers can have the information they need to take this approach to scale within 
their respective systems. Cost data will be collected from all clinics who are receiving the SAFE Firearm 
program (which, as a reminder, is not a human subject research activity and will be implemented across all 
clinics) using Excel templates collected from clinics on a monthly basis. These cost data will not in clude any 
identifiable information about any research participants and thus we believe the collection of this cost data is 
not human subject research .  
 
• EHR/Administrative Data (which includes data from the EHR, VDW, and Administrative Data) . By [CONTACT_743009] a part of the Mental Health Research Network (MHRN), both health systems deposit EHR and claims 
data into a virtual data warehouse (VDW). The VDW overcomes privacy concerns using a distributed data -
model with standard variable definiti ons across systems, enabling research on large datasets without the need to 
share identifiable health information. We will collect the number of parent -youth dyads who receive the 
program from the VDW (i.e., reach). As part of this project, we will also utilize child medical records, claims, 
and administrative data extracted from the local VDW and EHR, as well as other existing health records (e.g., 
State Mortality records) and administrative databases. Although we expect our groups to be balanced with 
respect to patient and clinician characteristics, we may also extract the below data elements as relevant 
covariates at multiple time points over the course of the project.  If we would like to collect data beyond the five 
years of this grant, we will communicate our plan to the IRB prior to collection .  
○ Healthcare Utilization: Inpatient, ER, and outpatient visits, procedures (identified using CPT codes) and 
diagnoses (identified using ICD codes) including but not limited to psychiatric diagnoses, diagnoses 
indicating probable or possible suicide attempt, injury or poisoning, and other medical diagnoses.  Dates of 
utilization, procedure and diagnoses will also be collected. Any 42 CFR Part 2 covered data will be 
collected and used in compliance with those requirements  
○ Pharmacy Data: Ordered and filled prescriptions, including dates  
○ Patient Reported Outcomes Data: Patient reported outcome measures recorded in the EHR (e.g., PHQ, 
GAD -7) 
○ Enrollment: types of insurance coverage, dates of enrollment and unenrollment  
○ Demographics: age, sex, race/ethnicity, census block variables (e.g., income, educational attainment), 
patient language  
○ State or National Mortality Data: date and cause of death  
○ Well -visit firearm safe storage and cable lock documentation  
 
3. Genetic Testing:  
n/a 
 
4. Use of Deception:  
n/a 
 
5. Statistical Analysis:  
• Aim [ADDRESS_1015801] to include data from 
151 PCPs, within 41 clinics. Based on a 31.58% response rate to parent surveys, we anticipate obtaining parent -
reported PCP fid elity ratings from 23,394 parents during the one year active implementation period. We base 
our power calculations on our study design and prior research from our group demonstrating that current PCP 
use of the SAFE Firearm  program components are 28% for brief counseling on safe firearm storage and 2% for 
offering cable locks.[ADDRESS_1015802] 80% power to detect 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   42 
 
small effects of the less intensive implementation condition ( Nudge ) on fidelity (Cohen’s d = 0.25 and 0.29, 
respectively).64 Alpha is set at .05 (two -tailed). A small to moderate effect is reasonable to expect based on prior 
research demonstrating that EHR nudges using active choice approaches produce effects in this range.[ADDRESS_1015803] in our analyses and will explore whether intervention effectiveness 
varies significantly by [CONTACT_96304]. Our approach is consistent wi th similar work that has been published in 
leading medical journals (i.e., Navathe et al., 2019, JAMA, Sharma et al., 2019, JAMA Oncology ).  In Aim 1, 
the primary dependent variable is fidelity. For each observation period (pre -implementation, active 
implementation, sustainment) and for each implementation condition ( Nudge, Nudge+ ), we will describe the 
proportion of parents who reported having received the program with fidelity. We will calculate fidelity using 
three binary outcomes: received counseling (yes/no), offered lock (yes/no), both (yes/no). We will then conduct 
separate models. In the first set of models, we will examine whether the odds of receiving components of SAFE 
Firearm  increased more between the pre -implementation and active implementation periods in the Nudge+  
group compared with the Nudge  group. In the second se t of models, we will repeat the analysis using the active 
implementation and sustainment periods. The fixed effects in the model will include implementation condition 
(Nudge, Nudge+ ), time (pre -implementation, active implementation, sustainment), and their interaction; the 
magnitude and statistical significance of the parameter estimate for the interaction term will be of primary 
interest. Given the nested data (i.e., parent -youth dy ads nested within PCPs; PCPs nested within clinics; clinics 
nested within h ealth systems), analyses will rely on 3 -level logistic mixed effects regression models for fidelity 
as a dichotomous implementation outcome.65,66 Linear mixed effects regression will be used to model 
continuous secondary outcomes (e.g., acceptability). For all models, our independent variable of interest will be 
a binary indicator of implementation condition assigned at the clinic level. All analys es will be conducted using 
MPlus to appropriately estimate multilevel regression models.[ADDRESS_1015804] to patient and PCP characteristics, we will consider including the following variables, extracted 
from the VDW, as relevant covariates: health system (HFHS, KPCO); youth demographics (age, gender, race 
and ethnicity, patient language); PCP demographics (specialty/degree, gender, year graduated from medical 
school); and public census data (socioeconomic indicators for patients based on geocoded patient addresses). In 
sensitivity analyses, we will exa mine each set of models separately by [CONTACT_743010]. Sex and race/ethnicity, drawn from the EHR and 
survey, will be added to all models as fixed effects to account for th e potential role they may play in 
implementation strategy and intervention effectiveness. We will also investigate whether sex moderates the 
effects of the implementation strategies. Given the potential high non -response to the parent survey following 
the visit, we will use inverse probability weighting to adjust for parental survey non -response (Skinner, 2011). 
Specifically, inverse probability weighting allows us to use patient, clinician, and clinic information from the 
EHR about both respondents and non -respondents to assign larger weights to survey responses from participants 
who are under -represented in the sample. For example, if we find that parents who are ethnic and/or racial 
minorities have a lower response rate than parents who are not ethnic and /or racial minorities, inverse 
probability weighting would give more weight in the analysis to survey responses from parents who are 
ethnic/racial minorities.  
 
• Aim [ADDRESS_1015805] (Cohen’s d = .44) through the clinic -level 
mediator (i.e., clinic adaptive reserve). We assume there will be a large effect of the strategy on the mediator 
and of the mediator on the outcome based on previous research.[ADDRESS_1015806] each mechanism in a 
separate 2 -2-1 mediation model.  Path “a” represents the effect of the implementati on strategy ( Nudge, Nudge+ ) 
at the clinic level on the clinic -level mediator (i.e., clinic adaptive reserve). Path “b” represents the relationship 
between the clinic -level mediator (i.e., adaptive reserve) and the three binary fidelity outcomes (counseling , 
cable lock, both). We will calculate change in fidelity for each of the three time -points using the 6 month period 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015807] of 
the “a” and “b” paths (i.e., a*b) from these analyses.70,71,[ADDRESS_1015808].74 We will use Monte Carlo simulation methods to derive 
confidence intervals.74-77 We will repeat this model for our exploratory mediator, motivation. Moderators of the 
strategies’ effects will be tested separately by [CONTACT_743029] [ADDRESS_1015809] 80% 
interrater reliability amongs t our coders (we will have at least two). The structure of our mixed methods 
approach is sequential (quantitative data is collected before qualitative data and quantitative data is weighed 
more strongly than qualitative; QUAN>qual). The function is of comp lementarity (to elaborate upon the 
quantitative findings to understand the how of implementation), and the process is connecting (having the 
qualitative data set build upon the quantitative data set).[ADDRESS_1015810] practices in mixed methods80 as well as our previous experiences with mixed 
methods implementation research.81-84 
 
• Aim [ADDRESS_1015811] of the implementation conditions on parent -reported firearm storage behavior, youth suicide 
attempts, deaths, and unintentional firearm injury.  
 
• Equity supplement Analysis : For analysis of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299], we will fit two separate inverse probability weighted 
GEE logistic regression models to analyze the data. We will use a parameter of 10% difference in program 
delivery for youth in either group of interest to explore further.  For analysis of the clinician interviews, we will 
use rapid qualitative analytic techniques, specifically structured summaries and matrix displays. We will begin 
analysis by [CONTACT_743012] (i.e., transcrip ts, field notes) to create an inventory of the most 
contextually meaningful data segments and quotations for each data collection epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865]. We will develop a 
structured template with key domains (i.e., clinical encounter, patient factors) to standardize the  capture of 
interview content and increase the accessibility of the data. After all interviews are transformed onto structured 
templates, we will then transfer the summary points into a matrix, which will expedite recognition of 
similarities, differences, and trends across participants. We will use the matrix to develop barriers for program 
delivery.  
 
RISK/BENEFIT ASSESSMENT:  
 
1. Risks:  
There are minimal risks to participants in this trial. The SAFE Firearm  program is being implemented at both health 
systems. The program could increase the time PCPs spend with parents discussing firearm storage. However, 
shared -decision making is a high priority and evidence -based practice for pediatric primary care and incr eased time 
on this topic is likely valuable. In prior studies, nudges in the EHR were associated with minimal burden on PCPs. 
There is a risk of breach of data and confidentiality, however we described the precautions in place to securely 
manage this data in the Data Management  section of this protocol.   
 
Equity Supplement Risks: Same as described above. Potential harms to participants are minimal and there are no 
known physical, financial, or legal risks to participating in the study. However, interview participants will be asked 
about their perspectives of the implementation of SAFE Firearm  in their health system. Participants may feel 
temporarily uncomfortable while participating in the interview. [CONTACT_743034] is a licensed clinical psychologist with 
extensive experience conducting qualitative research in community settings, and she will be a vailable to speak with 
any participants who feel unduly distressed and make appropriate referrals as needed. An additional potential risk is 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015812], or if they 
report significant suicidal or homicidal ideation or intent to the research team. Any information about child abuse or 
intent to harm self or others will be reported to authorities, as required by [CONTACT_2371]. No identifiable information that 
participants provide will be shared with any individuals outside of the study procedures outlined in this protocol. 
During the consent process, potential participants will be tol d about the alternative to participation (i.e. to not 
participate), and that they can withdraw at any time without penalty and can request their data be destroyed by 
[CONTACT_17258] a written request to the research team. Potential participants will also be tol d that their decision to 
participate will not affect services or employment. This information is also outlined in the consent form.  
 
2. Benefits:  
Parents, PCPs, and leaders will receive no direct benefits from participating in this study. Participants who enroll in 
this trial will benefit from the knowledge that they are contributing in an important way to potentially furthering 
scientific knowledge  about reducing firearm access and related suicide risk. Both health systems included in our 
study indicated that they would adopt this approach if we can demonstrate its effectiveness in this trial, suggesting 
the sustainability of the proposed work. Furt hermore, the evidence and insights generated can be taken to scale in 
the MHRN which includes 14 healthcare systems which are closely integrated. The knowledge gained on how to 
implement a program like SAFE Firearm  could be applied to other pediatric primary care settings and implemented 
at other health systems.  
 
Equity Supplement Benefits: Participants may find satisfaction in sharing their perspectives with our research team 
as their feedback will be used to inform our facilitation implementation strategy. Their feedback may help the 
research team better understa nd perspectives about the barriers to implementation. The ratio of risks to benefit is 
reasonable given the importance of the information to be gleaned by [CONTACT_31295].  
 
3. Subject Privacy:  
Privacy will be given utmost consideration and is highly valued in the proposed research. No research activities 
involve any direct interaction with subjects that would pose risk to their privacy.  
 
Equity Supplement Subject Privacy: Privacy will be given utmost consideration and is highly valued in the proposed 
research. Participants will complete the interview over the phone or by [CONTACT_743013], 
and so can elect where they take the phone call; the interview will be in a private location where no one can 
overhear the content.   
 
4. Subject Confidentiality:  
Confidentiality refers to the subject’s understanding of, and agreement to, the ways in which identifiable information will 
be stored and shared.   
 
How will confidentiality of data be maintained?  Check all that apply.  
 
 Paper -based records will be kept in a secure location and only be accessible to personnel involved in the 
study.  
 Computer -based files will only be made available to personnel involved in the study through the use of 
access privileges and passwords.  
 Prior to access to any study -related information, personnel will be required to sign statements agreeing 
to protect the security and confidentiality of identifiable information.  
 Whenever feasible, identifiers will be removed from study -related information.  
 A Certificate of Confidentiality will be obtained, because the research could place the subject at risk of 
criminal or civil liability or cause damage to the subject’s financial standing, employability, or liability.  
 A waiver of documentation of consent is being requested, because the only link between the subject and 
the study would be the consent document and the primary risk is a breach of confidentiality.  (This is not an 
option for FDA -regulated research.)  
 Precautions are in place to ensure the data is secure by [CONTACT_71994], because the 
research involves web -based surveys.   
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   45 
 
 Audio and/or video recordings will be transcribed and then destroyed to eliminate audible identification 
of subjects.  
 Other (specify):     
 
To protect participant confidentiality, only the research team outlined in this application will have access to review 
identified research records. Confidentiality will be protected to the fullest extent allowable under the law. See the 
Data Management  section for more details.  
 
For data that needs to be transmitted, it will be done through a Penn -approved secure encrypted file transfer solution 
as is described in Penn IRB’s Guidance on Electronic Data Protection Requirements for Research Involving the Use 
of PHI. Records will not  be released without the participant’s consent unless required by [CONTACT_2371] (e.g., imminent risk of 
harm to self suspected) or court order. When results of the research are presented at scientific meetings or published, 
no identifying information will be include d. 
 
All identifiable data, including the master list linking identifiers to the ID number and recordings, will be destroyed 
in 2030, five years after the award period ends.  
 
5. Protected Health Information  
Full details regarding data sharing and data management regarding PHI and PII is outlined in the data sharing and 
management appendix.  
 
6. Compensation:  
• Parent surveys (Aims 1 and 3).  Parent participants for Part 1 of the parent survey will not receive compensation. 
Parent participants for Part 2 will be eligible for an incentive (i.e., $[ADDRESS_1015813]) via lottery for survey 
completion.  
• PCP surveys (Aims 1 and 2).  If allowed by [CONTACT_743014], PCP participants will receive $20 e -gift 
cards or we will make an altruistic gift ($20 donation to a suicide prevention charity on their behalf) each time 
they complete a survey.   
• PCP and leader interviews (Aim 2) . If allowed by [CONTACT_743014], PCP and leader participants will 
receive a $[ADDRESS_1015814] for participating in an interview.  
○ Equity supplement : Based on what is allowed at each health system, participants will receive a $[ADDRESS_1015815] (or if no gift card is permitted for research study incentives by [CONTACT_73733], we 
will send a personalized thank you email). . 
 
7. Data and Safety Monitoring:  
Diligent data and safety monitoring will be conducted by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_742966], HFHS, and KPCO 
throughout the conduct of this study. This monitoring plan includes tracking participant safety and demographics, 
monitoring the safety of data, and m onitoring and appropriately reporting adverse event activity. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_742984] -investigators will review data collected to ensure that no study findings warrant immediate 
intervention. We believe this research poses no greater than minimal risk  and have proposed a monitoring plan that 
reflects this risk level.  
 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_742985]. An adverse event (AE) is any untoward medical 
occurrence in a subject during participation in the clinical study. We anticipate two potential types of AEs that could 
be directly related to study participation. These include distress experienced with regard to research participation 
and breach of confidentiality and privacy. With regard to the former, we have protocols in place that include 
conferring with the PI (who is a licensed clinica l psychologist) or a staff psychologist. With regard to the latter, we 
have appropriate safeguards to reduce risk of breach of confidentiality and privacy. As we are not legally mandated 
by [CONTACT_743030], we do not anticipate AEs related 
to participants sharing information about their firearm storage practices with our research team. Additionally, we 
will defer to the respective health systems’ procedures and policies related to any suicidal thoughts and/or behaviors 
identified during the course of this project. We appreciate the sensitive topic of discussion, and are committed to 
taking the appropriate steps if any unanticipated problems are identified during the course of this project. Other wise, 
any risks related to additional potential AEs are not expected because the program, implementation strategies, and 
assessments pose minimal risk to subjects.  
 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015816] privacy and confidentiality and will monitor and 
document that these individuals are properly certified. If new s enior/key personnel and staff become involved in the 
research, documentation that they have received the required education will be included in the annual progress 
reports.  
 
The Penn IRB will serve as the IRB of record for any external ethics review boards or IRBs applicable to 
researchers from other institutions who may have access to human research subjects identified data (i.e. HFHS, 
KPCO).  
 
DSMB. Additionally, we have convened a three -member DSMB from faculty outside of the three institutions 
involved in this project (Penn, HFHS, KPCO). DSMB composition includes the following: (1) a health services 
researcher with expertise in health systems and co llection of data through EHR, (2) a biostatistician with expertise in 
longitudinal analysis, field trials, and clinical trial data, (3) an implementation research expert and firearm 
researcher. The DSMB will be an independent group of experts charged  with reviewing study data for data quality 
and integrity, adherence to the protocol, participant safety, and study conduct and progress. They will also make 
determinations regarding study continuations, modifications, and suspensions/terminations. DSMB me mbers will be 
independent from any professional or financial conflict of interest with the research project and/or study 
investigators. The DSMB will meet at least once yearly via phone conference calls for the duration of the project. 
The DSMB will elect a Chair to moderate the meetings. At the initial meeting, the DSMB will review and approve 
all study protocols before study initiation to ensure participant safety. Protocols will include formal procedures for 
reporting and tracking all adverse reactions t o the NIH and IRBs; tracking progress in the study; and identifying any 
need for premature termination of the protocol. At subsequent meetings, the DSMB will be provided with summary 
study progress reports and adverse events. The DSMB will provide a summar y report following each meeting. We 
will not require the DSMB to conduct interim analyses of data prior to the end of the study.  
 
8. Investigator’s Risk/Benefit Assessment:  
This study presents minimal risk that is balanced by [CONTACT_155383]. This assessment 
is consistent for the equity supplement.  
 
INFORMED CONSENT:  
 
1. Consent Process:  
We are requesting a waiver of written documentation of consent (see below) from the Penn IRB for participants who 
agree to participate in the surveys (parents, PCPs) and/or interviews (PCPs, leaders). Because surveys will be 
completed via REDCap or phone a nd interviews will be conducted remotely, we will not have an opportunity to 
collect a signed copy of the consent form. We will not collect signed consent forms from participants who complete 
the parent survey via mail; these participants will receive a co nsent form to review before completing the survey. In 
the consent form and the introductory letter that they receive in the mail with the survey, they will be instructed that 
their completion and returning of the survey will be considered their consent to participate in the research study.  
 
For the REDCap, mailed, and phone surveys, the required elements of informed consent will be described to the 
participant and, if they agree to participate, participants will consent by [CONTACT_743016], completing the surve y and returning it to the research team by [CONTACT_2319], or providing verbal consent for surveys 
completed over the phone. Only participants who agree will be able to proceed to the online/verbal survey. 
Participants who complete the mailed survey will be explicit ly instructed in both the mailed letter that accompanies 
the survey and the consent form that their completion of the survey is considered their consent. Additionally, the 
letter specifies that they should not complete the survey before reviewing the conse nt form and deciding to 
participate. For participants who complete the survey over the phone, a member of our research team will conduct 
informed consent remotely. We will review the required elements of informed consent and answer any questions the 
potent ial participant might have. Potential participants will be encouraged to ask questions about the project. 
Participants will be provided with a copy of the IRB approved consent document for their records. If they agree to 
participate, the research team will  document the consent process in REDCap.  
 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   [ADDRESS_1015817] their relationship (i.e., services or 
employment) with their health system.  
 
For the equity supplement, we are also requesting a waiver of written documentation of consent from the IRB for 
participants who agree to participate in the qualitative interview. Due to the Covid -19 pandemic and the geographic 
spread of participants (e.g., Colorado, Michigan), we have decided to conduct these interviews by [CONTACT_743018]. Because these meetings will be 
conducted by [CONTACT_45933], we will not have an opport unity to collect a signed copy of the consent 
form. A member of our interview team will conduct informed consent for qualitative interview participants over the 
phone or videoconference. We will review the required elements of informed consent and answer a ny questions the 
potential participant might have. Potential participants will be encouraged to ask questions about the project. 
Participants will be offered a copy of the IRB approved consent form for their records. If they agree to participate, 
the inter view team will document the consent process in REDCap. All potential qualitative interview participants 
will be asked to confirm that they understand the information provided, understand that participation is voluntary, 
and feel able to make an informed ch oice. All participants will be assured during the informed consent process that 
their decision to participate or not will not impact their relationship (i.e., services or employment) with their health 
system.  
 
2. Waiver of Informed Consent:  
• Waiver of Informed Consent . The trial is pragmatic in nature, assessing the impact of implementation strategies 
(i.e. Nudge  vs. Nudge+ ) delivered to PCPs through minor adjustments to existing workflow delivered through 
the EHR. Changes to workflow are by [CONTACT_743019]. Further, 
these changes to workflow are being implemented as part of leadership commitment to deploying the SAFE 
Firearm program and EHR Nudges and Facilitation with data collection to allow for evaluation (i.e., SAFE 
Firearm  will be considered standard of practice). Because PCPs will still be free to engage with parents as they 
see fit and the implementation strategies represent minimal risk to PCPs and parents, we have requested a 
waiver of informed consent  for allowing EHR/Administrative data to be collected for Aims 1 and 3. This 
approach will also aid implementation integrity and generalizability by [CONTACT_743020] (i.e., the Hawthorne effect). The PI [INVESTIGATOR_16884] w orked closely with the Nudge Unit in the past on similar 
pragmatic trials that have received this waiver of informed consent, and our study team has designed the study 
with their trials in mind. As such, we believe there are several reasons to justify why a waiver of informed 
consent is requested (and has been granted for similar studies at Penn). First, it is not feasible to consent every 
provider and parent. Second, if consent was obtained from providers and parents, they would know they were 
being studie d and this could change their behavior. This could potentially disrupt the design of the study and 
make interpretation of the findings challenging. Third, clinicians are not forced to implement the SAFE Firearm  
program (which, as a reminder, is an evidence -based practice that is being implemented in both health systems) 
and parents are not forced to engage in a conversation with their provider and they are not forced to take a cable 
lock. In all aims, providers can choose to use their best clinical judgemen t when it comes to the SAFE Firearm  
program. This research involves no more than minimal risk to the participants and will not adversely impact the 
rights and welfare of participants. As described above, the waiver is essential to research as this research could 
not be practicably carried o ut without this waiver.   
 
• Waiver of Documentation of Consent for Online/Mailed/Phone Surveys . All surveys completed by [CONTACT_3654] 
(Aims 1 and 3) and PCPs (Aims 1 and 2) will be completed via phone, mail, or electronic platforms, and thus 
we are requesting waiver of written documentation of consent from the IRB. The required elements of informed 
consent will be described to the participant and, if they agree to participate, participants will consent by 
[CONTACT_743021]/phone survey. Mailed survey participants wi ll be instructed to review 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   48 
 
the consent form before completing the survey. Only participants who agree will be able to proceed to the 
online/phone survey. Mailed survey participants will be instructed not to complete the survey until they have 
reviewed the consent form and decide to participate. For phone surveys, the required elements of consent will 
be described to the potential participant at the beginning of the survey, before any research questions are asked. 
If the participant verbally agrees to be complete the survey, the resea rch staff who is conducting the interview 
will document the consent process. This research activity presents no more than minimal risk of harm to 
subjects and involves no procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research 
context. 
 
• Partial Waiver of Consent for Part 1 Parent Survey . For the one -question Part 1 parent survey, we will share a 
link to the consent form in the introductory message sent before the survey question text message or in the 
survey invitation sent via email or patient portal message. All the required elements o f consent will be described 
to the participant. In the informed consent form, they will be instructed to review the consent form before 
completing the survey. The consent form will also indicate that their completion of the survey indicates their 
consent t o participate in the research. This research activity presents no more than minimal risk of harm to 
subjects and involves no procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research 
context.  
 
• Waiver of Documentation of Consent for Interviews . All interviews will be completed remotely and audio -
recorded. The required elements of consent will be described to the potential participant at the beginning of the 
interview, before any research questions are asked. If the interview participant verball y agrees to be 
interviewed, the research staff who is conducting the interview will document the consent process. This 
research activity presents no more than minimal risk of harm to subjects and involves no  procedures for which 
written consent is normally required outside of the research context.  
 
• For the equity supplement, we also request a waiver of written documentation of informed consent  (as 
described above) for the qualitative interview since the research presents no more than minimal risk of harm to 
subjects and involves no procedures for which written consent is normally required outside of the research 
context. The required elements o f informed consent will be described over the phone or videoconference before 
any study activities occur.  
  
RESOURCES NECESSARY FOR HUMAN RESEARCH PROTECTION:  
Adequate facilities are available at Penn, HFHS, and KPCO. The members of the research team are outlined in the 
application and include the PI, research investigators, full time research staff, and part time undergraduate research 
assistants. The entire te am will be overseen by [CONTACT_978]. All personnel will complete required training before being 
granted access to any identifying information. This includes training on confidentiality through the CITI course. All 
Penn personnel will also sign confidentiality st atements. These confidentiality statements will specify the procedures 
for reporting unintentional breaches in confidentiality to the PI. The confidentiality statements also specify that 
violations of participants’ confidentiality, either unintentional or deliberate, may result in termination of hire. The PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_155375], limits of confidentiality, maintaining 
confidentiality, and proper study procedures. Personnel from HFHS and KPCO sign similar confident iality 
statements and undergo similar research training within their respective systems.   
 
REFERENCES  
 
1. Ruch DA, Sheftall AH, Schlagbaum P, Rausch J, Campo JV, Bridge JA. Trends in suicide among youth 
aged 10 to 19 years in the [LOCATION_002], 1975 to 2016. JAMA Network Open. 2019;2(5):e193886 -e193886.  
2. National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. 10 leading causes of death by [CONTACT_551], [LOCATION_002] 
– 2017.  September 30, [ADDRESS_1015818] of firearm availability and gun regulation on state suicide rates. 
Suicide and Life‐Threatening Behavior. 2016;46(6):678 -696. doi:10.1111/sltb.[ZIP_CODE]  
4. American Academy of Pediatrics. Profile of pediatric visits: annualized estimates 2000 -2004. Elk Grove 
Village, IL:  January 31, 2019 2010.  
5. Ahmedani BK, Simon GE, Stewart C, et al. Health care contacts in the year before suicide death. Journal of 
General Internal Medicine. 2014;29(6):870 -877. doi:10.1007/s11606 -014-2767 -3 
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   49 
 
6. Barkin SL, Finch SA, Ip EH, et al. Is office -based counseling about media use, timeouts, and firearm 
storage effective? Results from a cluster -randomized, controlled trial. Pediatrics. 2008;122(1):e15 -e25. 
doi:10.1542/peds.[ADDRESS_1015819] in a 
Hispanic community. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine. 2005;159(11):1049 -1054. 
doi:10.1001/archpedi.159.11.1049  
8. Grossman DC, Cummings P, Koepsell TD, et al. Firearm safety counseling in primary care pediatrics: a 
randomized, controlled trial. Pediatrics. 2000;106(1):22 -26. doi:10.1542/peds.106.1.22  
9. Stevens MM, Olson AL, Gaffney CA, Tosteson TD, Mott LA, Starr P. A pediatric, practice -based, 
randomized trial of drinking and smoking prevention and bicycle helmet, gun, and seatbelt safety 
promotion. Pediatrics. 2002;109(3):490 -497. doi:10.1542/peds.109.3.[ADDRESS_1015820]. Firearm -related injuries affecting the pediatric population. Pediatrics. 
2012;130(5):e1416 -e1423. doi:doi:10.1542/peds.2012 -2481  
11. Institute of Medicine, National Research Council of the National Academies. Priorities for research to 
reduce the threat of firearm -related violence. Washington, DC:  September 30, 2019 2013.  
12. Wintemute GJ, Betz ME, Ranney ML. Yes, you can: physicians, patients, and firearms. Annals of Internal 
Medicine. 2016;165(3):205 -213. doi:10.7326/M15 -2905  
13. Cunningham RM, Carter PM, Ranney ML, et al. Prevention of firearm injuries among children and 
adolescents: consensus -driven research agenda from the Firearm Safety Among Children and Teens 
(FACTS) consortium. JAMA Pediatr. 2019;173(8):780 -789. doi:doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2019.1494  
14. Beidas RS, Jager -Hyman S, Becker -Haimes E, et al. Acceptability and use of evidence -based practices for 
firearm storage in pediatric primary care. Academic Pediatrics. 2019;19(6):670 -676. 
doi:10.1016/j.acap.2018.11.007  
15. Ngo QM, Sigel E, Moon A, et al. State of the science: a scopi[INVESTIGATOR_742969]. Journal of Behavioral Medicine. 2019;42(4):811 -829. 
doi:10.1007/s10865 -019-[ZIP_CODE] -2 
16. Monuteaux MC, Azrael D, Miller M. Association of increased safe household firearm storage with firearm 
suicide and unintentional death among US youths. JAMA Pediatr. 2019;173(7):657 -662. 
doi:doi:10.1001/jamapediatrics.2019.1078  
17. Damschroder LJ, Aron DC, Keith RE, Kirsh SR, Alexander JA, Lowery JC. Fostering implementation of 
health services research findings into practice: a consolidated framework for advancing implementation 
science. Implement Sci. 2009;4. doi:10.1186/1748 -5908 -4-50 
18. Jager -Hyman S, Wolk CB, Ahmedani BK, et al. Perspectives from firearm stakeholders on firearm safety 
promotion in pediatric primary care as a suicide prevention strategy: a qualitative study. Journal of 
Behavioral Medicine. 2019;42(4):691 -701. doi:10.1007/s10865 -019-[ZIP_CODE] -9 
19. Wolk CB, Van Pelt AE, Jager -Hyman S, et al. Stakeholder perspectives on implementing a firearm safety 
intervention in pediatric primary care as a universal suicide prevention strategy: A qualitative study. JAMA 
Network Open. 2018;1(7):e185309 -e185309. doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2018.[ADDRESS_1015821]. JAMA Internal Medicine. 2016;176(6):847 -
848. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.[ADDRESS_1015822] on unnecessary daily imaging during palliative radiotherapy for adults with cancer: a stepped -wedge 
cluster randomized clinical trial. JAMA Oncology. 2019;5(8):1220 -1222. doi:10.1001/jamaoncol.2019.[ADDRESS_1015823] of behavioral interventions on inappropriate antibiotic 
prescribing among primary care practices: a randomized clinical trial. Journal of the American Medical 
Association. 2016;315(6):562 -570. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.[ADDRESS_1015824].  
February 19, 2018, 2018.  
24. Baskerville NB, Liddy C, Hogg W. Systematic review and meta -analysis of practice facilitation within 
primary care settings. The Annals of Family Medicine. 2012;10(1):63 -74. doi:10.1370/afm.1312  
25. Ritchie MJ, Dollar KM, Miller CJ, et al. Using implementation facilitation to improve care in the Veterans 
Health Administration (version 2). Veterans Health Administration, Quality Enhancement Research 
Initiative (QUERI) for Team -Based Behavioral Health; September 30, 2019 2017.  
26. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. The practice facilitation handbook: training modules for new 
facilitators and their trainers.  September 30, 2019 2013.  
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   50 
 
27. Glenn CR, Franklin JC, Nock MK. Evidence -based psychosocial treatments for self -injurious thoughts and 
behaviors in youth. Journal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology. 2015;44(1):1 -29. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25256034 . doi:10.1080/15374416.2014.945211  
28. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Compressed mortality file 1999 -2010 – CDC WONDER 
Online Database.  
29. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_742970], Miller TR. Suicide acts in 8 states: incidence and case fatality rates by [CONTACT_743022]. American journal of public health. 2000;90(12):1885 -1891. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11111261 . Accessed Dec.  
30. Miller M, Azrael D, Barber C. Suicide mortality in the [LOCATION_002]: the importance of attending to 
method in understanding population -level disparities in the burden of suicide. Annual Review of Public 
Health. 2012;33:393 -408. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/22224886 . Accessed Apr. 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev -publhealth -031811 -124636  
31. Azrael D, Cohen J, Salhi C, Miller M. Firearm storage in gun -owning households with children: results of a 
2015 national survey. Journal of Urban Health. 2018;95(3):295 -304. doi:doi:10.1007/s11524 -018-[ADDRESS_1015825] G. The accessibility of firearms and risk for suicide and homicide 
victimization among household members: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Annals of Internal 
Medicine. 2014;160(2):101 -110. doi:10.7326/M13 -1301  
33. Johnson RM, Frank EM, Ciocca M, Barber CW. Training mental healthcare providers to reduce at -risk 
patients' access to lethal means of suicide: evaluation of the CALM project. Archives of suicide research. 
2011;15(3):259 -264. doi:10.1080/13811118.2011.[ADDRESS_1015826] PJ, Duda D, Hirsch JG. Suicide and violence 
prevention: parent education in the emergency department. Journal of the American Academy of Child & 
Adolescent Psychiatry. 1999;38(3):250 -255. doi:10.1097/00004583 -199903000 -[ZIP_CODE]  
35. Coyne -Beasley T, Schoenbach VJ, Johnson RM. Love our kids, lock your guns: a community -based 
firearm safety counseling and gun lock distribution program. Archives of pediatrics & adolescent medicine. 
2001;155(6):659 -664. doi:10.1001/archpedi.155.6.659  
36. Regier DA, Goldberg ID, Taube CA. The de facto US mental health services system: a public health 
perspective. Archives of general psychiatry. 1978;35(6):685 -693. 
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1978.[ADDRESS_1015827] with mental health and primary care providers before suicide: a 
review of the evidence. American Journal of Psychiatry. 2002;159(6):909 -916.  
38. Husky MM, Olfson M, He J -p, Nock MK, Swanson SA, Merikangas KR. Twelve -month suicidal 
symptoms and use of services among adolescents: results from the National Comorbidity Survey. 
Psychiatric services. 2012;63(10):989 -996.  
39. Boggs JM, Simon GE, Ahmedani BK, Peterson E, Hubley S, Beck A. The association of firearm suicide 
with mental illness, substance use conditions, and previous suicide attempts. Annals of internal medicine. 
2017;167(4):287 -288.  
40. Sheftall AH, Asti L, Horowitz LM, et al. Suicide in elementary school -aged children and early adolescents. 
Pediatrics. 2016;138(4):e20160436.  
41. Klein JD, McNulty M, Flatau CN. Adolescents' access to care: teenagers' self -reported use of services and 
perceived access to confidential care. Archives of pediatrics & adolescent medicine. 1998;152(7):676 -682. 
doi:10.1001/archpedi.152.7.676  
42. Ahmedani BK, Westphal J, Autio K, et al. Variation in patterns of health care before suicide: A population 
case-control study. Preventive medicine. 2019;127:105796.  
43. Fiske ST, Taylor SE. Social Cognition: From Brains to Culture.  2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 2013.  
44. Tversky A, Kahneman D. The framing of decisions and the psychology of choice. Science. 
1981;211(4481):453 -458. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7455683 . Accessed 1981/01/30/. 
doi:10.1126/science.[ADDRESS_1015828] theory: an analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica. 
1979;47(2):263 -292. <Go to ISI>://A1979GR75700001 . doi:10.2307/1914185  
46. Beidas RS, Volpp KG, Buttenheim AN, et al. Transforming mental health delivery through behavioral 
economics and implementation science: Protocol for three exploratory projects. JMIR Research Protocols. 
2019;8(2):e12121. doi:10.2196/[ZIP_CODE]  
47. Saghai Y. Salvaging the concept of nudge. Journal of medical ethics. 2013;39(8):487 -493. 
doi:10.1136/medethics -2012 -100727  
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   51 
 
48. Doshi JA, Lim R, Li P, et al. A synchronized prescription refill program improved medication adherence. 
Health Affairs. 2016;35(8):1504 -1512. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2015.[ADDRESS_1015829] using active choice 
and peer comparison performance feedback to physicians on statin prescribing: the prescribe cluster 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Network Open. 2018;1(3):e180818 -e180818. 
doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2018.0818  
50. Patel MS, Volpp KG, Asch DA. Nudge units to improve the delivery of health care. New England Journal 
of Medicine. 2018;378(3):214 -216. doi:10.1056/NEJMp1712984  
51. Patel MS, Volpp KG, Small DS, et al. Using active choice within the electronic health record to increase 
influenza vaccination rates. Journal of General Internal Medicine. 2017;32(7):790 -795. 
doi:10.1007/s11606 -017-4046 -6 
52. Patel MS, Volpp KG. Leveraging insights from behavioral economics to increase the value of health -care 
service provision. Journal of General Internal Medicine. 2012;27(11):1544 -1547. doi:10.1007/s11606 -012-
[ADDRESS_1015830] systems among office -based 
physician practices: [LOCATION_002], 2001 -2012. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics; 
September 30, 2019 2012.  
54. Monegain B. More than 80 percent of docs use EHRs. Healthcare IT News.  September 18, 2015, 2015.  
55. Tabak RG, Khoong EC, Chambers DA, Brownson RC. Bridging research and practice: Models for 
dissemination and implementation research. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2012;43(3):337 -
350. 
56. Strifler L, Cardoso R, McGowan J, et al. Scopi[INVESTIGATOR_742971], models, and frameworks with limited use. Journal of clinical epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. 
2018;100:92 -102. doi:10.1016/j.jclinepi.2018.04.008  
57. Krause J, Van Lieshout J, Klomp R, et al. Identifying determinants of care for tailoring implementation in 
chronic diseases: An evaluation of different methods. Implement Sci. 2014;9:102.  
58. Lewis CC, Klasnja P, Powell BJ, et al. From classification to causality: Advancing understanding of 
mechanisms of change in implementation science. Frontiers in Public Health. 2018;6:136.  
59. Williams NJ, Beidas RS. Annual research review: the state of implementation science in child psychology 
and psychiatry: a review and suggestions to advance the field. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 
and Allied Disciplines. 2019;60(4):430 -450. doi:10.1111/jcpp.[ZIP_CODE]  
60. Kazdin AE. Mediators and mechanisms of change in psychotherapy research. Annual Review of Clinical 
Psychology. 2007;3:1 -27. doi:10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.3.022806.091432  
61. Curran GM, Bauer M, Mittman B, Pyne JM, Stetler C. Effectiveness -implementation hybrid designs: 
combining elements of clinical effectiveness and implementation research to enhance public health impact. 
Medical Care. 2012;50(3):217 -226. doi:10.1097/MLR.0b013e3182408812  
62. PASS Power Analysis and Sample Size Software  [computer program]. Kaysville, UT: NCSS, LLC; 2019.  
63. Zyzanski SJ, Flocke SA, Dickinson LM. On the nature and analysis of clustered data. Annals of Family 
Medicine. 2004;2(3):199 -200.  
64. Cohen J. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences.  2nd ed. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates; 1988.  
65. Raudenbush SW, Bryk AS. Hierarchical linear models: applications and data analysis methods.  Vol 1. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2002.  
66. Hedeker D, Gibbons RD. Longitudinal Data Analysis.  Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons; 2006.  
67. Molenberghs G, Thijs H, Jansen I, et al. Analyzing incomplete longitudinal clinical trial data. Biostatistics. 
2004;5(3):445 -464. doi:10.1093/biostatistics/kxh001  
68. Nutting PA, Crabtree BF, Stewart EE, et al. Effect of facilitation on practice outcomes in the National 
Demonstration Project model of the patient -centered medical home. The Annals of Family Medicine. 
2010;8(Suppl. 1):S33 -S44. doi:10.1370/afm.1119  
69. Krull JL, MacKinnon DP. Multilevel modeling of individual and group level mediated effects. Multivariate 
behavioral research. 2001;36(2):249 -277. doi:10.1207/S15327906MBR3602_06  
70. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_219937], Murphy DL, Tate RL. Three -level models for indirect effects in school - and class -randomized 
experiments in education. The Journal of Experimental Education. 2009;78(1):60 -95. 
doi:10.1080/00220970903224685  
71. Zhang Z, Zyphur MJ, Preacher KJ. Testing multilevel mediation using hierarchical linear models: problems 
and solutions. Organizational Research Methods. 2009;12(4):695 -719. doi:10.1177/1094428108327450  
PROTOCOL: Adolescent and child Suicide Prevention In Routine clinical Encounters (ASPI[INVESTIGATOR_21392])   52 
 
72. Williams NJ, Beidas RS. Navigating the storm: how proficient organizational culture promotes clinician 
retention in the shift to evidence -based practice. PloS one. 2018;13(12). doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0209745  
73. Glisson C, Williams NJ, Hemmelgarn A, Proctor E, Green P. Aligning organizational priorities with ARC 
to improve youth mental health service outcomes. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 
2016;84(8):713 -725. doi:doi:10.1037/ccp0000107  
74. MacKinnon DP, Lockwood CM, Hoffman JM, West SG, Sheets V. A comparison of methods to test 
mediation and other intervening variable effects. Psychological methods. 2002;7(1):83 -104. 
doi:10.1037/[ADDRESS_1015831]: Distribution of the 
product and resampling methods. Multivariate Behavioral Research. 2004;39(1):99 -128. 
76. Biesanz JC, Falk CF, Savalei V. Assessing mediational models: testing and interval estimation for indirect 
effects. Multivariate Behavioral Research. 2010;45(4):661 -701. doi:10.1080/00273171.2010.[ADDRESS_1015832] in statistical 
mediation analysis: does method really matter? Psychological science. 2013;24(10):1918 -1927. 
doi:10.1177/0956797613480187  
78. Bradley EH, Curry LA, Devers KJ. Qualitative data analysis for health services research: developi[INVESTIGATOR_742972], themes, and theory. Health Services Research. 2007;42(4):1758 -1772. doi:10.1111/j.1475 -
6773.2006.[ZIP_CODE].x  
79. Palinkas LA, Aarons GA, Horwitz S, Chamberlain P, Hurlburt M, Landsverk J. Mixed method designs in 
implementation research. Administration and Policy in Mental Health and Mental Health Services 
Research. 2011;38(1):44 -53. doi:10.1007/s10488 -010-[ADDRESS_1015833] practices for mixed methods research in the health 
sciences. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences; October 1, 
[ADDRESS_1015834] MO, Barg FK. A complementary marriage of 
perspectives: understanding organizational social context using mixed methods. Implement Sci. 2014;9. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25417095 . Accessed Nov 23. doi:10.1186/s13012 -014-[ADDRESS_1015835] implementation of interventions for children with autism in public schools. Implement Sci. 2016;11. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/[ADDRESS_1015836] 10. doi:10.1186/s13012 -016-0501 -8 
83. Ditty MS, Landes SJ, Doyle A, Beidas RS. It takes a village: a mixed method analysis of inner setting 
variables and dialectical behavior therapy implementation. Administration and Policy in Mental Health. 
2015;42(6):672 -681. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25315183 . Accessed Nov. doi:10.1007/s10488 -
014-0602 -0 
84. Wolk CB, Jager -Hyman S, Marcus SC, et al. Developi[INVESTIGATOR_742973]: a study 
protocol for a mixed -methods implementation study. BMJ Open. 2017;7(6):e014407. 
doi:10.1136/bmjopen -2016 -014407  
 
 