1 
 
 Using IT to improve access, communication, and  asthma in African American and 
Hispanic/Latino Adults  
NCT 02086565   
June 25, 2018  
METHODS AND DATA ANALYSIS  
Study Overview   
The overall study design has been previously published.1 We describe methods in full 
here, and in more detail in the attached appendix  (Appendix A) .  Adults  with  uncontrolled  
asthma, generally unfamiliar with the patient portal,  were  recruited  from  outpatient  primary 
care  and specialty  clinics of two health systems that serve  predominantly but not exclusively 
low-inco me urban neighborhoods. Participants were trained in the use of the portal : Portal 
Training (PT) . Participants were then randomized 1:1 to home visits  (HV) , from a Community 
Health Worker (CHW, described below), to encourage use of the portal and to facilitat e care 
coordination or no home visits. The project was approved by [CONTACT_162343].gov  ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED] ).  
Study design    
 We chose a  randomized controlled  trial (HV + PT versus PT) because  randomization  
reduces  the likelihood  of bias from both known and unknow n conf ounders .[ADDRESS_188349]  controls and the multicenter  recrui tment  
also enhances  the generalizability to a  diversi ty of social  circumstances.  
 The choices for the randomized trial, portal training  (PT) and home visits  (HV) , were 
inspi[INVESTIGATOR_162318] -AIM conceptualization framework3 and the need for implementation 
research.4  Implementation of portal training and home visits were hypothesized to improve 
access and communication result ing in improved patient -centered outcomes including asthma 
control and asthma -related quality of life.   
Those  rando mized to PT+HV w orked  with  the same  CHW  who  conducted both portal 
training sessions.   At each home visit, the CHW  ensured  care  coordination,  includ ing obtaining  an 
asthma action  plan  that linked  patien ts’ home and community with  the clinic. The CHW  
provided  standard  asthma  education,  promoted  communication  with providers,  encouraged  
appointment keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007] , and facilitated  familiarity  with  health  information  technology.  
[ADDRESS_188350] diverse group of patients who satisfied 
enrollment criteria and whose clinical experience was diverse (primary care versus 
specialist care, diffe rent health practices (University of Pennsylvania and Temple). 
Participating sites included two  family medicine,  two gener al internal  medicine,  two 
pulmonary,  and one allerg y-immunology  outpatient  practice  from the University  of 
Penn sylvania  Health  System  (UPHS). Recruiting from these practices in the past had 
consistently yielded a population that was more than 65% African American and more than 
65% female. More than 1000 patients with asthma, prescribed inhaled steroids, and living 
in low income neighborh oods were identified in initial screening.  Because University of 
Pennsylvania clinics are not in Hispanic/Latino areas of Philadelphia, we recruited and 
enrolled patients from Hunting Park Adult Medicine,  a primary  care  practice  serving  mainly  
Spanish -speaking patients,  more than  85%  Hispanic/ Latino,  and with more than  700 
patients with  asthma  on their  probl em lists.   
Participants  
 We planned  to identify  300 adul ts living  in low-income  neighborhoods  with  moderate 
to severe  asthma requir ing urgent  care and little previous exposure to the portal.  
             Inclusion criteria : We recruited adults, only one from a household:  
 18 years  or older .   
 living  in a Philadelphia  neighbo rhood in  which  at least  20%  of households h ave 
      incomes  below the federal  pover ty level. 
 having a doct or’s diagnosis  of asthma.  
 prescribed  an inhaled  corticosteroid -containing medication.   
 who required  prednisone  or had  an ED visit or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_162319].   
 who  had not previous ly signed in to a portal more than 3 times.  
 who were patients in a participating clinic . 
Exclusion  criteria  
3 
 
 Severe  psychiatric  or cognitive  problems  (e.g.,  obvious mania,  schizophrenia,  significant 
mental  retar dation)  that would  make it impossible  to understand  and carryout this protocol.   
 Recruitment   
Using guidance and policies of the supervising institutional review board and the 
participating health care systems, we recruited patients as follows. After explaining the 
protocol in staff meetings of participating sites, we received lists of potentially eligible 
patients (age > [ADDRESS_188351], prescribed an 
inhaled corticosteroid, having an address in one of the low -income neighborhoods) for whom 
further screening was needed. First we sent “opt -out” letter s to clinicians asking for 
permission to contact [CONTACT_75054]. If providers either did not respond to two letters or gave 
permission, we sent letters to potential participant patients asking to contact [CONTACT_162344]. If patients gave permission, or did not respond, we called the potential participant 
or approached them at a clinic visit to explain the study and ask for permission to screen for 
eligibility .  According to their preference, we screened potential participants at their clinic or 
in their home. Data collectors completed a screening form for each patient contact[CONTACT_162345] a section to document reasons for declining. The following are 
reasons for declining: inability to commit to study timeline, disinterest in resea rch 
participation, and patient illness . Participants all signed informed consent to enroll in the 
study and to undergo Portal Training and data collection. Those randomized to home visits 
signed a second consent form informing them they were also randomized to  home visits and 
giving permission for these visits.  
 Randomization and allocation concealment  
Randomization was stratified by [CONTACT_68566].  To maintain allocation concealment, we 
implemented randomly permuted blocks with varying block sizes (2 to 4). For each clinic we 
prepared opaque envelopes and instructions on how to preserve allocation conce alment 
until the patient gave consent and the envelope was unsealed.  Randomization programs and 
envelopes were prepared under the supervision of one of the project statisticians.  
 
4 
 
 Interventions and Comparators : Portal Training and Home Visit with Communi ty Health 
Worker  
Community Health Worker (CHW)   
CHWs live in the community  and are  familiar with  the environment;  are accep table  to 
patients; and  connect  patients  to health  education,  services,  and the health  care  setting.5-7   In 
our C ommunity  Asthma Prevention  Program  (CAPP),  we identified and trained  CHWs as lay 
health educators to provide ho me asthma education  and environ mental  intervention.  Over  [ADDRESS_188352] visited  3000+  families with children8 in both  African American (West  
Philadelphia)  and Hispanic/ Latino  (North  Philadelphia)  com munities, the same communities 
for the current project.   These  CHWs  have  a high  school  education or greater with  at least  
three  years’  work  experience  and personal  knowledge  of asthma.   They  bring  their  knowledge  
as a community resident to suggest local resourc es to meet  daily  needs.  CHWs  are able  to 
establish  relationships  with  participants  and their  families  to promote better  asthma self-
man agement, connection  with c ommunity  resources,  communication  with  providers  and 
mitigation  of asth ma triggers.   CAPP’s CHWs  have functioned  not only as home  visitors,  but 
also as ast hma navigators  who  have  been  integrated  into the health  care  team, providing  a 
direct  link between  families  and clinicians.   Our experience  has allowed  us to develop  an 
excellent  support  system  including  supervision , training , and systems for scheduling  visits  and 
data  entr y.9  The retention  rate of participat ing families  in CAPP has been  above  90%. 10 Home 
visits  for children with asthma often in clude tailored asthma education and environmental 
remediation of allergen  and irritant  environ mental  exposures.  
In the current intervention, e ach home visit included  1) reinforcement of the use of the 
portal  and 2) care  coordinatio n (Table 1).  Our activities  were unique in utilizing CHWs for home 
visits  for promotion of portal use with the intention of  linking the patient  to the medical  
practice,  thereby [CONTACT_162346] -physician communication, a known contributor to asthma 
disparities.  The home visits  focused  on communication  and access,  the same  goals  as potential ly 
achievable  through  portal use.  
  
5 
 
 Table 1. Activities and  data c ollection (DC) for PT+HV and PT groups.  
 
 Time                        PT+HV  PT 
DC- Week  0 Participant  meets  with a mem ber of the rese arch team  for consent,  enrollment,  
randomization,  and baseline  data collection.  This data collector  is not the CHW  who  
provides PP1,  PP2 or HVs (if participant  is randomized  to HV). 
PP1 
(within  2 weeks of 
enrol lment) A CHW  demons trates  accessing  internet  if necessa ry, ensur es patient’s  internet  access  and 
request  for an activation code  for PP, and demonstrates  use of PP with a “test” patient.  
Participants  are shown how to complete  7 tasks  and how to  ask for on-line help  and to read 
FAQs.  
PP2 
(within  2 weeks of 
enrol lment) Patient  activates  their  PP and goes through  exercises  with the same  CHW,  using  the PP to 
obtain  and ask for informati on (the  7 tasks  demonstrated  at PP1). Participants  are again  
shown how to ask for help & to read  FAQs . They are given  a printed  card  with a phone  
number for the Help  Line.  They are shown how to access  medical  information  through  the 
PP. 
HV1  
(within  2-4 weeks of 
enrol lment) Re-Introductions  & conversation - CHW  is the same  CHW  who 
supervised  PP1 and PP2.  
CHW  meets  patient and fami ly and asks  how  they are doing. Care  
Coordinati on. The CHW:  
 asks  patient  to produce  medications  and explain  doses  
 asks  about  smo kers in home  and offers  a QUIT  number  if needed  
 revie ws participant’s  baseline  environmental  surv ey 
 asks  where  emergen cy medical  information  is kept,  emergen cy 
telephone  numb ers 
 assis ts as needed  as patient  drafts an asthma  action  plan  for 
review/revision  by [CONTACT_4676]’s asthma  care  provider 
 asks  when next appointment  with asthma  doctor  is & assis ts with 
scheduling  if necessary  
 asks  about  refills  needed  
 asks  about  patient  Care  Coordin ation goals  
CHW revi ews use of PP and how to access  it and the internet  
including  access  to health information  resources  
 shows how to access  asth ma education  materials with the PP Email/phone  to 
patient  
encouraging  sign in to 
PP. 
HV2  
(between weeks 4 -
7) CHW  inquires  how patient  and family  are doing.  THEN  CHW  and 
participant:  
 review  Action  Plan and care  coordination  goals,  medications,  
refills,  appointments  etc. 
CHW and patient revi ew use of tablet  and PP:  
 Problems  with use 
 Complete  at least  2 tasks  with PP 
 CHW  demonstra tes how  to “google”  for information  Email/phone  to 
patient  
encouraging  sign in to 
PP. 
HV3  
(between weeks 6 -
11) CHW  inquires  how patient  and family  are doing.  
Review  care coordination,  action  plan,  goals,  medications,  and 
relevant  communi ty resources.  
Review  use of tablet and PP: 
 Problems  with use addressed  
 Complete  at least  2 tasks  with PP 
 Show how to email if not known already Email/phone  to 
patient  
encouraging  sign in to 
PP. 
DC-week 12 Participant  called  by a member of the  research  team for data  collection.  
6 
 
 Table 1  (continued) . Activities and  data c ollection (DC) for PT+HV and PT groups.  
 
 
CHW= community health worker, DC= data collection, PP= patient portal, PT= patient portal training, PT+HV= 
patient portal training plus home visits, HV1= first home visit, etc.  
 
  Time  PT+HV  PT 
HV4  
(between weeks 23 -
27) CHW  inquires  how patient  and family  are doing.  
Review  care coordination,  action  plan,  goals,  medications,  and 
relevant  communi ty resources.  
Review  use of tablet and PP: 
 Problems  with use addressed  
 Review  how to “google”,  email,  and how to get weather  and 
latest  news on the internet Email/phone  to 
patient 
encouraging  sign 
in to PP.  
DC – week [ADDRESS_188353] patient -clinician  communication;  infor ming clinicians  of 
important  environ mental,  social,  and medical  barriers to asthma self -management;  and 
reinforcing  medical  infor mation from  clinic ians to patient .11  We also hypothesized  that the 
home visit  may be  especially  effective  for those  who speak  English  as a second  language, in 
our sample, mostly Spanish -speaking patients, or  those  with  low numeracy and health  
literac y.  We had pi[INVESTIGATOR_162320]8 and the activities to be 
perform ed in home visits in adults.10 
 All participants r eceived Patient Portal Training (PT) and those randomized to home 
visits additionally were scheduled for four Home Visits by a CHW to take place over 6 months: 
at 2-[ADDRESS_188354] a year (Figure 1).  
Figure 1. Planned time course for participation and data collection.  
 

8 
 
 Patient Portal Training (PT)   
We ascertained portal familiarity and interest through focus groups of patients and 
providers exploring their knowledge of and use of the portal.[ADDRESS_188355]  portal  access to register  for it 
with  our help.11   All were able  to use the point  and click  mechani sm within  the portal  to 
accomplish 7 tasks:  1) locate a laboratory  test result,  2) look  up an  upco ming docto r’s 
appointment, 3) learn  how  to schedule  an appointment with  their  provider (the oppor tunity to 
actually  make the appoint ment was offered),  4) locate  their  medication  list, 5) locate their  
immunization  record,  6) dete rmine how  to request  a refill,  and 7) send  a secure  message  to their  
care  team. All were  positive  that they could  accomplish the tasks  and found  them useful.  This 
protocol  beca me the basis  for the two portal training sessions, PP1 and PP2 (Table 1).  At PP1 a 
CHW inquired whether internet  access  by [CONTACT_162347],  tablet, or smart  phone  was available  at 
home, work,  community  hot spots,  or participating  clinics and together the participant and CHW 
confirmed which was closest and most convenient (Figure 1).  
  The CHW  descr ibed the portal  and its functions, and  assisted participants  in requesting  
an activat ion code.  PP2, originally planned for a second visit, often followed PP1 on the same 
day as more convenient for participants.  At PP2,  working with  the same CHW, participants  
activated  and accessed  the portal and  performed  exerc ises in using  it. 
Internet access  
To ensure internet access at home,  we originally contemplated  providing  a tablet  to all 
participants.  Stakeholders concluded that even with vendor discounts, tablets would 
require costly internet access not affordable to many and would be subject to theft.   Our 
infor mation techno logy specialists  pointed to the challenges of installation in older homes .  
Although the Philadelphia  Housing  Authority, a provider of subsidized housing for low -
income city residents, provides internet  access,  not all  participants  live in these  homes.  
Philadelphia also has high speed internet  discounts to low income families with children, but not 
all participants  lived  with  school -age children. From  patient  focus groups  and our pi[INVESTIGATOR_162321],  we estimated  that half of potential  participants  had co mputer  access at 
home or work.  Of those with  access,  only  half of these  checked  email regularl y.  
9 
 
 We insured  internet  access  for participants  at primary  care  and asthma specialty  clinics  
and in the NIH-funded  Clinical  and Translational  Research  Center. The medical  facilities  of 
the participating practices  are “hot  spots.”  At enroll ment we recommended  ways to access  
the internet:  nearest  librar y, nearest  hot spot (recognizing  low inco me communities  have  
fewer),  and if desir ed for those  with  smart phones,  using  smartphone  apps.  
 Home Visit (HV) Protocol  
Those  rando mized to PT+HV w orked  with  the same  CHW  who  conducted both portal 
training sessions.   At each home visit, the CHW  ensured  care  coordination,  includ ing obtaining  
an asthma action  plan  that linked  patien ts’ home and community with  the clinic. The CHW  
provided  standard  asthma  education,  promoted  communication  with providers,  encouraged  
appoint ment keepi[INVESTIGATOR_007],  and facilitated  familiarity  with  health  information  technology. Home 
visits  were intended to link the  adult patient  to the medical  practice through the portal, to 
provide  tailored care  coordination  and coaching  on portal  use, and to communica te and 
hopefully improve asthma control.9 These activities were selected after conducting focus 
groups of patients15 and pi[INVESTIGATOR_28882].10,16  The CHW was to empower patients  to com municate  
with  their  health  care  providers via the portal,  to follow asthma guidelines, reconcile  
medications,  facilitate  appoin tment scheduling,  and also control  envir onmental exposures  
(e.g.  tobacco).9 Each home visit had two parts: 1) care coordination using the portal and 2) 
improving familiarity with health information technology (Table 1). For care  coordination t he 
CHW  and participant  drafted  an asthma action  plan  for review/revision/approval by [CONTACT_162348]’s  asth ma care provider and the participant was asked to schedule  through  the 
portal  an appointment with the provider in which  this plan  would  be discussed.  The  American 
Lung Association Asthma Action Plan format was used and included contact [CONTACT_162349], preventative and emergency medications .17 The CHW  helped  patien ts identi fy specific 
care  coordination  goals  that could improve asthma control and quality of life and that with  
patients’  permission  could  be shared  with  providers.  
In previous home visits  for children living  in the same  urban  Philad elphia 
neighbor hoods, we found  that half of  families had at least  one smoker  in the home.18 
Residential  expo sures  to allergens  and pollutants  contri buted to asthma morbidit y.  CHWs  
10 
 
 facilitated patients’ com munication  through the portal with their  asthma clinician  about  
exposures  to tobacco  smoke,  pollutants,  potentially  relevant  allergens,  and about 
comorbidities.  CHWs were knowledgeable  in com munity resources  and had access  to a 
resource  database which includes smoking cessation programs and housing opportunities.   
 At the first home visit, HV1,  designed to occur as early as within 2  weeks  of the second 
portal training session, PP2,  the CHW became  further  acquainted  with  the participant,  if possible  
met the family, collected  information,  and conducted  a needs assessment.  The CHW gathered 
information on medications in the home to coordinate with the participant’s clinician, 
facilitated  appoin tment scheduling,  and if applicable encouraged smoking cessation and 
reduction of secondhand smoke exposure.  From  the needs assessment  the CHW  and the patient 
created  care  coordination  goals.  Examples of these goals chosen by [CONTACT_162350], to stop smoking or to exercise more. The action  plan was then 
drafted  by [CONTACT_162351],  amendment,  and approval  
by [CONTACT_2299]’s  asth ma care  provider. At the second  home visit,  HV2,  intended to take  place  
within  2-[ADDRESS_188356] approximately 6 months after enrollment, the home visitor 
and patient reviewed care coordination and all  portal and internet skills (Table 1).   
To improve familiarity with health information technology, CHWs reviewed use of the 
portal as the second part of each visit. In addition, at each visit they taught a relevant 
activity such as using the internet to access health information, how to obtain e ducational 
materials through the portal, how to “Google,” how to email, and how to get a weather 
report.  
At the end of each visit the participant and CHW completed a report to the clinician of 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_139431] (e.g. action plan, medications, other topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]) . Although use of the portal was 
encouraged, CHWs and patients found it more feasible to use paper, which the CHW gave to 
clinic personnel for the clinician’s mailbox. Goals for the participant to pursue with the 
asthma doctor to achieve asthma control wer e also reported.  
11 
 
 Quarterly phone calls for the remaining 6 months were planned with information on 
portal training to be reviewed along with information from the prior home visits. The use of the 
portal was encouraged.  
Study Outcomes  
The outco mes selected  to be  meaningful  to patients, were among the  outcomes 
recommended  by [CONTACT_162352] (Table 2).[ADDRESS_188357]  week,  was measured  by [CONTACT_941]  7-item  Juniper 
Asthma  Control  Questionnaire  (ACQ).20-22 The score  is the mean  of all responses  (0=total  
control,  6=extr emely uncontrolled ). The minimally  important  clinical  difference  is or change is 
0.5. A score  >1.5  is considered  inadequate  control .23 Asthma -related quality  of life (AQOL)  was 
measured  with  the Mini Ast hma Quality  of Life Questionnaire  (AQLQ) .24-26 This 15-item  
questionnaire  has a 7-point  response  scale that provid es a mean summary  score.  A 0.5-unit 
change  is considered  clinically  meaningful.26 The AQLQ  has been  shown to be a useful 
indicator  of AQOL  in low-income  adults.27 Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_162322],  ED visits, 
urgent  medical visits  (scheduled  < 24 hours  in advance),  prednisone  bursts  (a new  prescription  
of prednisone  or an  increase  in an  alread y-prescribed  dose  for an asthma  exacerbati on), and 
other  medical  visits were obtained by [CONTACT_6270] -report because not all such events occur within our 
health system.  The medical  records  were examined for docu mentation as feasible.  Spi[INVESTIGATOR_162323]1  and FVC.28  
  
12 
 
 Table 2. Summary of data c ollection. 
 
Meas ure At 
enrollment 
(Baseline)  Quarterl y* 12 
months  
& final  
Visit**  Outc omes    Asthma contr ol X X X 
Asthma-related  quality  of life X X X 
ED visits  for asthma or any cause  X X X 
FEV1++  X X X 
Prednisone  bursts+  X X X 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_162324] X X X 
Mediators     Appoint ments  kept  with  asthma doctor  X X X 
Use of patient portal  X X X 
Inhaler Adherence Scale#  X X X 
Moderators  (Baseline)     Sociode mographics  X   Computer  at home X   Convenience  of internet access  X   Educational  attain ment X   Health  literacy  –S-TOFHLA, ANQ, eHealth  Literacy Scale X   Comorbidities  X   Depressive  thoug hts X   Primary language  X   
 
*Quarter ly data  collection  occurs  at months  3, 6, 9, and 12 and every  3 months  after  month  12 until  the end of the 
study.  
** We collect  outc omes quarter ly, at 12  months,  and every 3 months  until  the study  ends.  Final  visit is the final  visit 
of data  collection  that occurs  after the 12 -month  collecti on. 
+Prednisone  bursts  are defined as a new  prescri ption or an increase  in dose  of predni sone. 
++FEV1 could be collected for only 203 patients owing to non -availability of spi[INVESTIGATOR_162325].  
#The Inhaler Adherence Scale asks participant’s report of non -adherence .29,30  It is a 6 -item scale with each item 
scored 1 (non -adherence) or 0 (adherence. The range is [ADDRESS_188358]  1 
year (please see the Home Visitor Protocol sub -section and Figure 1). We chose a 3 -month 
interval for data collection, as the Expert Panel Report uses 3 months for making a change 
such as “steppi[INVESTIGATOR_148520].”[ADDRESS_188359]. Bryant -
Stephens’ experience with home visits in children. She found it was im portant to have home 
visits early in participation.[ADDRESS_188360] to  follow -up, please see Figure 2.   
Data collection and sources  
The IRB-approved  consent  and all communications were  read/spoken in  English  or Spanish  
as preferred  by [CONTACT_162353]. Data collection was  accomplished  by a CHW, called a 
Data Collector, who  did not act as  the home  visitor  if the patient  was so assigned.  This choi ce of 
Data Collector reduced any pressure  on the patient  to answer  in a way to please  the resea rcher 
CHW.  Baseline  questionnaires  assessed  socio -demographics,  asthma seve rity, health  literacy, 
and comorbidities  (Table  2). The  first and  last data collection visits  were  in person  so that  
spi[INVESTIGATOR_162326].  For the other  data  colle ction times, we offered a phone  or email  
or in -person visit to minimize the burden  of and  effect  on participation  in a stud y. The Data 
Collector  entered  responses  either directly  into a secure,  encr ypted,  web -based database  
REDCap  (Research Electronic  Data  Capture) or on paper for transfer to REDCap later.33 Data 
Collectors used tablets (iPads) equipped with Wi -fi but internet access was difficult at times 
and CHWs noted many patients were not comfortable with having the ir information entered 
onto an iPad. 
For each patient we collected their  contact [CONTACT_162354]. We 
also were able to read the electronic record to determine when patients had appointments 
and to meet them there. Additionally, we wrote letters, visited homes, and left postcards.  
  
14 
 
 Data  management      
   REDCap (http://www.project -redcap.org/)  allows  data  attribution  and audit  capabilities, 
integrity checks, real -time validation, data  storage  and backu p, and export  functions.[ADDRESS_188361] rules for interpreting any of the 
questions that presen ted difficulties for patients to answer.    
A set of 30 tables stored in the REDCap database contain data from interviews and 
phone assessments of patients over time (Table 2 and Appendix A1).  
Analytical and Statistical Approaches  
Patient Portal usage   
Portal usage data came from two sources:  Penn Medicine and Temple Health. Details on 
our data management approach to the Portal system appear in Appendix A2.      
Patient activity within Patient Portal Epi[INVESTIGATOR_162327] s from the two participating institutions, 
there were 61 activities that appeared for the pa tients in our sample (Appendix A 2, Tables 1 and 
2). These activities we then combined into a set that corresponded to the basic Portal usage 
that participating pati ents  were trained to use (Appendix A 2, Table 3). Finally, we calculated the 
frequency of Portal usage epi[INVESTIGATOR_162328]’s study involvement from 
randomization to the last data collection (subtracting off any Portal usage that coin cided with 
patient connecting with the community health workers or study personnel). We also calculated 
the frequency of all portal usage by [CONTACT_162355].   
Mediation  
Media tors explain  how  the interventions  influence asthma outc omes. For this study we 
designed three candidate mediators to measure communication, access to the health care system, and 
improved inhaler usage: (1) the rate of portal use over time, (2) appointments kept within 6 months 
15 
 
 of a data collection time, and (3) inha ler use according to best practices.[ADDRESS_188362] estimated the association between the 
randomized assignment (portal only versus portal + home visits) and the hypothesized 
mediator.  In the absence of an association, there could be no indirect ef fect and no mediation. 
Details appear in Appendices D3 and D4.  
(1) Portal usage  as a potential mediator. Because patient follow -up varied 
depending on the time from randomization to last data collection interview, portal use was 
based as a rate or intensit y over time. We hypothesized that the home visitor would lead to 
greater use of the portal, and that with greater portal use, the patient would have better 
outcomes.    
(2)  Appointments kept . For health care usage, we hypothesized that access to medical 
care would improve in that patients assigned to home visitors would be more likely to make 
and keep regular appointments. According to prevailing guidelines,[ADDRESS_188363] using data on appointments, we merged the data on appointments with the dates of 
the data collections and then determined for each collection interview whether the patient had 
kept an appointment in the 6 prior months. Using appointments kept a s a time -varying 
exposure, we estimated the difference in expected value of asthma control at 0 months (date 
of randomization) and at 12 months assuming alternatively that patients had kept regular 
appointments versus had never kept regular appointments. D etails of these analysis (and 
results) appear in Appendix A 4.    
(3)  Use of inhaler . The inhaler adherence scale30 is scored from [ADDRESS_188364] —identification of subgroups : Effect modifiers 
are baseline  variables or groups of factors,  gleaned  from  the literature, h ypothesized  to 
affect  the intervention -outco mes relationships.35,[ADDRESS_188365] 
modification of the association of the intervention (home visitors) and the key outcome 
(asthma control) was estimated for each candidate modifier group by [CONTACT_162356].   For those 
candidate effect modifiers that approached conventional levels of statistical significant, we 
estimated the intervention effect and 95% confidence intervals for each level of the effect 
modifier. The nine pre -specified candi date effect modifier groupi[INVESTIGATOR_162329]  3. 
Details appear in Appendix A 6. 
  
17 
 
 Table 3. Relevant patient subgroups for targeting the initiative and their data elements .  
Relevant subgroup  Data Elements  
(1) Primary language  Primary language is Spanish  
(2) Primary care vs specialty practices  Internal medicine or family medicine versus 
allergy -immunology or pulmonary  
(3) Age 18-39 years, 40 -49 years, > 50 years  
(4) Skills that would support use of portal 
and asthma self -management  Numeracy * 
Literacy * 
Education  
Computer literacy * 
Inhaler technique  
(5) Social Community barriers  Food or clothing inadequacy  
MOS Social Support ** 
Violence  
(6) Trust of medical personnel  Patient portal preserves privacy  
(7) Depression and chronic disease load  Depression  
 Diabetes  
 Hypertension  
 High cholesterol  
 Obesity  
  Cancer  
 Current Smoker  
(8) Asthma severity  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_162330] (Days/week)  
(9) Home environment  Crowding at home (number of rooms, number 
of people at home)  
 Been without housing in last [ADDRESS_188366] 12 months  
 Exposure to second hand smoke  
 
*Three literacy measures were used: Asthma Numeracy Questionnaire,[ADDRESS_188367] of Functional Health 
Literacy in Adults,40 and Electronic Health Literacy.41 Electronic  health  literacy  was measured with  the eHEALS,  the 
eHealth  Literacy  Scale,  an 8-item  measu re of knowledge,  comfort,  and perceived  skills  at finding and  evaluating  
electronic  health  infor mation.41 It has been  used  in low-income  patients.42 Each item is measured with a 5 -point 
likert scale and the  eHEALS score is  the mean of each item.     
**The Medical Outcomes Study Social Support Survey.43,44 
18 
 
 Our working hypothesis was that patients with comorbidities and with limited 
computer literacy might (a) not benefit from portal education at all, and (b) might ha ve 
additional benefit with the home visitor intervention. Further details appear in Appendix  
A6. 
Statistical Analysis plan  
Testing within -group effects over the time of the study allowed us to assess the effect of 
each intervention. In brief, the within -group change in the PT group allowed measurement of 
PT alone. Subtracting any change over time in the PT+HV group from the PT  group allowed 
estimates of the additional effect of home visits.  
Intention to treat approach –primary analysis  
The primary analysis was “as randomized” (intent to treat), with the assumption that 
any dropout visits were missing completely at random (MCAR).  The estimand of interest 
was the difference between the home -visitor versus portal -only groups in the change in 
outcomes over time.  We attempted to use mixed effects models, which make less strong 
missing at random (MAR) assumptions, with varying success. (Details appear below and in 
the analysis -specific appendix, Appendix A).  
Modeling approach – flexible mode ling of time  
   Irregular data collection times (see results) required models that used outcome time as a 
continuous measure. For that reason, analysis models implemented spline based marginal (GEE) 
(MCAR assumption) and mixed effects (MAR assumption) long itudinal models, both 
identity/Gaussian, log/Poisson, and log/gamma with marginal splines to estimate expected 
values of outcomes at [ADDRESS_188368] (estimator) of interest was the difference between the treatment 
groups in the changes in expected values fr om 0 months to 12 months. Examples in the 
statistical literature support this approach.45  All confidence bounds were estimated using 999 
bootstrap resamples (percentile -based).  By [CONTACT_2329] [ADDRESS_188369] models (noted below). [ADDRESS_188370].    
For the primary outcome  of asthma control, the skewed distribution of outcomes 
necessitated that we use log gamma models.  The treating clinic was a stratifying factor in all 
models to account for the stratified randomization.  
Alternative approaches for estimating asthma contro l 
Differences between intervention groups in expected values at given follow up 
times, although statistically appropriate for comparing groups, lacks an immediate 
connection to the manner in which clinicians might want to interpret results. For that 
reason , we pre -planned two methods for translating findings into clinically useful metrics.  
 (1) Fraction of patients who have achieved asthma control (a level below 1.5 on the 
scale):   
 We avoided dichotomizing data, an ad hoc approach, but instead used mixed effects 
linear model and predictions to report the change in the fraction of patients who achieved 
adequate control. This prediction accounts for patient variation about the expected  value and in 
theory represents a better estimate of the patient’s true outcome (asthma control) than does 
the patient’s observed value.  Once we estimated each patient’s predictions at baseline and at 
12 months, we dichotomized these model -based predicted  values to estimate the fraction of 
patients who achieved asthma control at baseline and at 12 months in each group. This is not 
the primary analysis, however, but represents an alternative demonstration of intervention 
effectivene ss. Details appear in App endix A 8. 
       (2)  Minimally important improvement:  For estimates of the improvements at the patient 
level on the asthma control (Juniper) scale, the minimally important difference is 0.5.23,[ADDRESS_188371] 0.5.  
Methodological details appear in Appendix A 8. 
Sensitivity analyses  
We planned the following sensitivity analyses, and pre -specified the endpoint for 
these analyses to be the between - group differences of the change over time of asthma 
control from baseline to 12 months.       
  Sensitivity analysis #1. Selection bias from  loss to follow -up – covariate adjustment  
In keepi[INVESTIGATOR_162331], 48,49  we included in our long itudinal analysis model 
(described previously), in addition to the randomized treatment assignment and the pre -
planned stratification variable (clinical site), the covariates that might be related to dropout and 
the primary outcome.  Appendix A 9. 
             Sensitivity Analysis #2. Nonignora ble timing of data collection -- Global sensitivity 
analysis to irregular visit times and dropout  
The sensitivity analyses we have described (#1) make assumptions that the dropout and 
visit times are not related to the values of outcomes, i.e., that dropout is at random and th at 
visit times are ignorable. Our dropout was limited, but irregula r interview times were 
common. Global sensitivity analyses are now available but only when visit times are regular.50 
Methods for irregular visits a re awaiting methodological development (Daniel Scharfstein, 
personal communications 04/2017) .   Details appear in Appendix A 7. 
Sensitivity Analysis #[ADDRESS_188372] of a treatment under 
full adherence,  51-53  we could not adopt these methods because they assum e regular 
observation times. Use of weighting approach for irregular outcome times awaits 
methodologic al development.  For that reason, we implemented an alternative based on 
instrumental variab les. 
Instrumental variable methods adjusted for differences in the characteristics of patients 
who received all home visits and those who did not.54  In our case the instrument was 
21 
 
 randomization at baseline . These methods require several assumptions.55 Details along with the 
specific method we used (two - stage residual inclusion) appear in Appendix A 10. 
Missing Data  
Missing baseline data  
Missing covariate data were infrequent,  but some patients were missing an element of a 
questionnaire, or responded “did not know”.   We created latent classes of covariates for both 
confounder control and for estimating effect modification (please see below).  
Missing data for effect modifiers  
Latent class modeling was used both to reduce the number of covariates used to adjust 
for baseline factors and to examine possible moderators of the exposure outcome relationship 
(Table 3). If we were treating each covariate as a potential confounder or as an individual effect 
modifier, we would need to perform formal imputation of missing data elements of an item that 
contributes to a latent class or drop patients who had one or more missing items.  By [CONTACT_22242], 
latent class modeling does not require comple te data on every factor that contributes to a class.  
Mixture models generated latent classes and probabilities of class membership for all patients 
which were used to assign patients to these classes even if some data elements used in the 
mixture model we re missing.  This approach assumed missingness completely at random 
(MCAR), or at least missingness at random given the values of other covariates.  In addition, the 
latent class method allows for the high degree of collinearity among the candidate factors . In 
short, latent class modeling both accomplished data reduction (too many covariates for 
adjustment) and facilitated identification and testing of patient subgroup differences in 
treatment effect.    
Statistical power   
Estimates of power for longitudinal data must account for the added power of following 
individuals over time. To estimate power of our somewhat complex design, we resorted to 
statistical simulations, implemented in Stata v 13 (StataCorp, College Station, T X), in which we 
varied the correlations of outcome within individual over time.  Using the asthma control 
measure as an example, we estimated that power of a balanced design with 300 evaluable 
subjects was adequate (from 0.82 to 0.87) to detect a differenc e between groups of 1/[ADDRESS_188373] deviation of asthma control.   According to Juniper’s work on asthma control, this 
detectable difference is less than the minimally important clinical difference.22,[ADDRESS_188374] modification, suggested good power (0.9) to demonstrate a greater 
improvement among low literacy patients with home visitors.  For all results, confidence 
intervals reflect the post hoc power.  
Programs and software   
Analyses were performed in SAS v9.4 (SAS Institute Cary NC), Stata v 15.0 and 15.1 
(College Station [LOCATION_007]), and M Plus v7.0 (Los Angeles CA).    
Trial monitoring    
An external Data Safety Monitoring Board reviewed progress and data every six months 
and mon itored adverse events and serious adverse events (unexpected ED visits and 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]). Because patients had moderate or severe asthma, it was expected that ED 
visits and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_162332]’ co -morbid conditions would occur but 
perhaps change as a result to the interventions.  
Changes to the original study protocol  
There were no substantive changes to the original study protocol. Small changes made it 
easier for patients to adhere to the protocol. For example, if it were easier for  the patient, we 
went to their home for enrollment. For some patients the first portal training session and the 
second were given on the same day for those for whom a single training session was more 
convenient.  
 
  
23 
 
 REFERENCES  
 
1. Apter AJ, Bryant -Stephens T, Morales KH, et al. Using IT to improve access, 
communication, and asthma in African American and Hispanic/Latino Adults: Rationale, design, 
and methods of a randomized controlled trial. Contemporary clinical trials 2015;44:119 -28. 
2. Rothman K, Greenland S. Modern Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. Philadelphia: Lippi[INVESTIGATOR_162333]; 1998.  
3. Glasgow RE, Vogt TM, Boles SM. Evaluating the public health impact of health 
promotion interventions: the RE -AIM framework. American journal of public hea lth 
1999;89:1322 -7. 
4. Glasgow RE, Vinson C, Chambers D, Khoury MJ, Kaplan RM, Hunter C. National 
Institutes of Health approaches to dissemination and implementation science: current and future 
directions. American journal of public health 2012;102:1274 -81. 
5. Singh N, Squier C, Sivek C, Wagener M, Nguyen MH, Yu VL. Determinants of 
compliance with antiretroviral therapy in patients with human immunodeficiency virus: 
prospective assessment with implications for enhancing compliance. AIDS Care 1996;8:[ADDRESS_188375] M. Community health 
workers as drivers of a successful community -based disease management initiative. American 
journal of public health 2012;102:[ADDRESS_188376]: a randomized, controlled trial of a community health worker intervention to decrease 
exposure to indoor asthma triggers. American journal of public health 2005;95:[ADDRESS_188377] of a household environmental 
intervention delivered by [CONTACT_162357], disadvantaged 
children with asthma. American journal of public health 2009;[ADDRESS_188378] 3:S657 -65. 
9. Krieger JW, Philby [CONTACT_142860], Brooks M Z. Better home visits for asthma lessons learned from 
the Seattle -King County Asthma Program. American journal of preventive medicine 
2011;41:S48 -51. 
10. Apter AJ, Wan F, Reisine S, et al. Feasibility, acceptability and preliminary effectiveness 
of patient  advocates for improving asthma outcomes in adults. J Asthma 2013;50:850 -60. 
11. Black HL, Gonzalez R, Priolo C, et al. True Meaningful Use: Technology meets both 
patient and provider needs. Am J Managed Care 2015;21:e329 -e37. 
12. Goel MS, Brown TL, Willia ms A, Cooper AJ, Hasnain -Wynia R, Baker DW. Patient 
reported barriers to enrolling in a patient portal. Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association : JAMIA 2011;[ADDRESS_188379] 1:i8 -12. 
13. Goel MS, Brown TL, Williams A, Hasnain -Wynia R, Thompson JA, Baker DW. 
Disparities in enrollment and use of an electronic patient portal. Journal of general internal 
medicine 2011;26:1112 -6. 
14. Seidman J, Wolf MS. The role of health literacy in health information technology.  
Innovations in Health Literacy Research . Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 
2011:23 -32. 
15. Black HL, Priolo C, Akinyemi D, et al. Clearing clinical barriers: enhancing social 
support using a patient navigator for asthma care. J Asthma 2010;47:913 -9. 
16. Black HL, Gonzalez R, Priolo C, et al. True "Meaningful Use": Technology Meets Both 
Patient and Provider Needs. The American journal of managed care 2015;in press:In press.  
17. Asthma Action Plan. American Lung Association, 2015. (Accessed July 8, 2015, at 
http://www.lung.org/associations/states/colorado/asthma/asthma -action -plan.html .) 
24 
 
 18. Bryant -Stephens T. Asthma disparities in urban environments. The Journal of allergy and 
clinical immun ology 2009;123:1199 -206; quiz 207 -8. 
19. Busse WW, Morgan WJ, Taggart V, Togias A. Asthma outcomes workshop: overview. 
The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology 2012;129:S1 -8. 
20. Juniper EF, O'By[CONTACT_21143], Roberts JN. Measuring asthma control in group s tudies: do we 
need airway calibre and rescue beta2 -agonist use? Respi[INVESTIGATOR_65527] 2001;95:319 -23. 
21. Juniper EF, O'By[CONTACT_21143], Ferrie PJ, King DR, Roberts JN. Measuring asthma control. 
Clinic questionnaire or daily diary? American journal of respi[INVESTIGATOR_4447] 
2000;162:1330 -4. 
22. Juniper EF, O'By[CONTACT_21143], Guyatt GH, Ferrie PJ, King DR. Development and validation of 
a questionnaire to measure asthma control. Eur Respir J 1999;14:902 -7. 
23. Juniper EF, Bousquet J, Abetz L, Bateman ED. Ide ntifying 'well -controlled' and 'not 
well-controlled' asthma using the Asthma Control Questionnaire. Respi[INVESTIGATOR_65527] 
2006;100:[ADDRESS_188380]. Development and validation of the 
Mini Asthma Quality of Life Q uestionnaire. Eur Respir J 1999;14:[ADDRESS_188381] 1999;115:1265 -70. 
26. Juniper EF, Guyatt GH, Willan A, Griffith LE. Determining a minimal important change 
in a disease -specific Quality of Life Questionnaire. Journal of clinical epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] 1994;47:81 -
7. 
27. Leidy KN, Chan KS, Coughlin C. Is the asthma quality of life questionnaire a useful 
measure for low -income asthma tics? American journal of respi[INVESTIGATOR_4447] 
1998;158:1082 -90. 
28. Standarization of Spi[INVESTIGATOR_038], 1994 Update. American journal of respi[INVESTIGATOR_162334] 1995;152:1107 -36. 
29. Morisky DE, Green LW, Levine DM. Concurrent a nd predictive validity of a self -
reported measure of medication adherence. Medical care 1986;24:[ADDRESS_188382] 1991; 99:837 -41. 
31. Expert Panel Report 3:  Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of asthma 
Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; 2007.  
32. Bryant -Stephens T, Reed -Wells S, Canales M, et al. Home visits ar e needed to address 
asthma health disparities in adults. The Journal of allergy and clinical immunology 
2016;138:1526 -30. 
33. Research Electronic Data Capture. 2015. (Accessed 3/26/2015, at http://project -
redcap.o rg/.) 
34. Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R, Payne J, Gonzalez N, Conde JG. Research electronic 
data capture (REDCap) --a metadata -driven methodology and workflow process for providing 
translational research informatics support. Journal of biomedical informati cs 2009;42:[ADDRESS_188383] terminological, conceptual, and statistical clarity in the study of 
mediators and moderators: examples from the child -clinical and pediatric psychology literatures. 
J Consulting and Clinical Psychology 1997;65:599 -610. 
36. VanderWeele TJ. Explanation in Causal Inference: Methods for Mediation and 
Interaction. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2015.  
37. Alosh M, Huque MF, Bretz F, D'Agostino RB, Sr. Tutorial on statistical considerations 
on subgroup analysis in confi rmatory clinical trials. Statistics in medicine 2017;36:1334 -60. 
25 
 
 38. McCutcheon AL. Latent Class Analysis. Beverly Hill, CA: Sage University Press Series 
on Quantiative Applications in the Social Sciences; 1987.  
39. Apter AJ, Cheng J, Small D, et al. Asthm a Numeracy Skill and Health Literacy. J Asthma 
2006;43:[ADDRESS_188384] to measure functional health literacy. Patient education and counseling 1999;38:33 -42. 
41. Norman CD, Skinner HA. eHEALS: The eHealth Literacy Scale. Journal of medical 
Internet research 2006;8:e27.  
42. Knapp C, Madden V, Wang H, Sloyer P, Shenkman E. Internet use and eHealth literacy 
of low -income parents whose children have special health care needs. Jou rnal of medical Internet 
research 2011;13:e75.  
43. Ware JE, Jr., Sherbourne CD. The MOS 36 -item short -form health survey (SF -36). I. 
Conceptual framework and item selection.PG - 473-83. Medical care 1992;30.  
44. Sherbourne CD, Stewart AL. The MOS social su pport survey. Social science & medicine 
(1982) 1991;32:705 -14. 
45. Howe LD, Tilling K, Matijasevich A, et al. Linear spline multilevel models for 
summarising childhood growth trajectories: A guide to their application using examples from 
five birth cohorts . Statistical methods in medical research 2016;25:[ADDRESS_188385] NM, J.H. W. Applied Longitudinal Analysis, 2nd Edition. 
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons; 2011.  
47. Juniper EF, Svensson K, Mork AC, Stahl E. Measurement properties and inte rpretation of 
three shortened versions of the asthma control questionnaire. Respi[INVESTIGATOR_65527] 2005;99:553 -
8. 
48. Council NR. The Prevention and Treatment of Missing Data in Clinical Trials. Panel on 
Handling Missing Data in Clinical Trials. Committee on  National Statistics, Division of 
Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: The National Academies 
Press.; 2010:106.  
49. Council NR. The Prevention and Treatment of Missing Data in Clinical Trials  
Washington, DC: The National Academies  Press.; 2010:ISBN: 978 -0-309-[ZIP_CODE] -5. 
50. Scharfstein DO, McDermott A, Olson W, Wiegand F. Global Sensitivity Analysis for 
Repeated Measures Studies With Informative Dropout: A Fully Parametric Approach. . Statistics 
in Biopharmaceutical Research 2014;6:3 38-48 Taylor and Francis  
51. Toh S, Hernan MA. Causal inference from longitudinal studies with baseline 
randomization. The international journal of biostatistics 2008;4:Article 22.  
52. Toh S, Hernandez -Diaz S, Logan R, Robins JM, Hernan MA. Estimating abs olute risks in 
the presence of nonadherence: an application to a follow -up study with baseline randomization. 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] 2010;21:528 -39. 
53. Toh S, Hernandez -Diaz S, Logan R, Rossouw JE, Hernan MA. Coronary heart disease in 
postmenopausal recipi[INVESTIGATOR_22880] e strogen plus progestin therapy: does the increased risk ever 
disappear? A randomized trial. Annals of internal medicine 2010;152:211 -7. 
54. Nagelkerke N, Fidler V, Bernsen R, Borgdorff M. Estimating treatment effects in 
randomized clinical trials in the pr esence of non -compliance. Statistics in medicine 
2000;19:1849 -64. 
55. Jo B. Statistical power in randomized intervention studies with noncompliance. 
Psychological methods 2002;7:178 -93. 
  
26 
 
   
27 
 
 Appendix A:  Additional description of data analyses and accompanying tables.  
Appendix A1. PCORI Visit Schedule and list of case report forms used in REDCap.  
 
  

[ADDRESS_188386] in a given order and at pr eset 
times. Then one investigator (ARL), using his own patient Portal account and this protocol, 
systemically executed each step with pre -specified time delays (in seconds ) between each menu 
selection. The investigator repeated this process for both the EPIC Portal designed for the 
personal computer, a nd the EPIC Portal designe d for the iPad and smartphone. Then, we 
notified the investigator who had access to the Portal database (JTH) to retri eve the database 
transactions. Finally, we compared the protocol -based menu selection with the resulting data 
entries to identify what menu selection result in different recorded activities.   
The Clarity  database is a large subset of data that comes from the PennChart ( Epic) 
application. The Portal data from the University of Pennsylvania system entered the  PennCha rt 
Chronicles dataset.  We transferred the Portal data from the PennChart Chronicles database 
to Clarity , a Microsoft SQL Server database comprised of over 18,000 tables.  After several 
trials, the “MS data only” option seemed to work best in Crystal Repor ts in creating a smaller 
report that can be used as data for analysis.    
A special challenge with these types of data arises when the medical record number, 
which ideally should remain unchanged, does in fact change during the course of the study.  
Althou gh our study followed patients for a limited time (almost all patients for less than 2  
years), we found that medical record numbers did change, and communications with the 
information technology departments requested multiple searches of data for individu al 
patients.  
29 
 
 Appendix A2 (continued). Patient portal in EPIC - Data management details.  
Each line of data contained the following fields:  Patient name, patient medical record 
number, date -time of a transaction, the transaction activity, and the transactio n action (read or 
write).   The raw data consisted of more than 71,[ADDRESS_188387] 
been associated with tra ining and practice during a visit with the patient.   
 Sixty -one activities appeared for the patients in our sample  (Appendi x A2, Tables 1 and 
2).  These activities we then combined into a set that corresponded to the basic Portal usage 
that participati ng patients were trained to use (Appendix A 2, Table 3 ). 
 The portal data file proceeded through several programs to define four groups of Portal 
usages : 
(a) Pre-study portal activity – prior to the date of randomization  
(b) Training portal activity – Porta l usage that coincided with a study training session in 
which the home visitors were working with the patients to show them how to use the portal.  
(c) Portal usage during the study – from randomization up to the last visit date (acon_date: 
the date of an A sthma Control Questionnaire was considered the date of an associated data 
collection date)  
(d) Portal usage after the study – After the last visit date (acon_date)  
Two types of data share the same database in EPIC portal functions. Portal data and 
Welcome data exist on the same database at Penn.  Welcome data result from questionnaires 
given in the clinics as part of a clinic visit.  These might be on pain, for example. The 
questionnaires are administered at a clinic kiosk. Our analysis identified and exclu ded Welcome 
data in two ways. First, we inspected the raw portal data to identify examples in which patients’ 
data in the portal file corresponded with their visits to the health clinics. We discovered that 
during those visits the patients’ portal data lis ted the activity field of “questionnaire”. This  
  
30 
 
 Appendix A2 (continued). Patient portal in EPIC - Data management details.  
activity field then became a flag for data entries that corresponded to the Welcome function of 
the database as contrasted with the Portal system. The existence of these Welcome data did not  
become evident until well after the start of the study and as pa rt of our investigation of the 
Portal data.   Welcome data do not represent patient -initiated Portal use.  These data were 
excluded for analysis.   
 We then had a mixture of binary outcomes (used the patient portal vs did not use) and 
for those who used th e Portal, we had distilled the information into “epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841].”  
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_162335] “epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865]” was characterized by [CONTACT_4868] : 
(1) It occurred between the randomization data and the last data collection time  
(2) It did not oc cur during a visit day  
(3) It did not occur at a clinic visit (Welcome data)  
(4) It includes all activities beginning with a log on and ending with a log out (or a 
lapse of 30 minutes).  We determined lapses by [CONTACT_162358] e-time stamp.   
Using this information, we counted the number of epi[INVESTIGATOR_162336].  Then we calculated the number of epi[INVESTIGATOR_11629] 3 months.   Finally, we 
categorized epi[INVESTIGATOR_162337].   
(1)  no usage at all  
(2)  <  1 per quarter  
(3) 1 per quarter up to 1 per month  
(4) 1 per month or more  
This approach to the analysis of raw portal transaction data resulted in 4 categories with 
acceptable numbers of patients in each category.  
  
31 
 
 Appendi x A4. Appointments kept among asthma patients.  
Background  
The goals of this analysis were:  first, to use treatment assignment as the exposure of 
interest, in an as -randomized analysis, to estimate the association of treatment assignment and 
appointments kept over time; and second, in  an exploratory observational analysis, to examine 
the possible association of the time -varying factor of having regular appointments (with 
treating physicians) and asthma control.    The underlying hypothesis was that the home -visitors 
might be a positive  influence in reminding patients to keep regular appointments, and that 
regular appointments might in turn lead to improved asthma control among patients.   
Data Management Methods  
We obtained data on appointments from the two participating health systems (Penn 
Medicine and Temple Health) on the enrolled patients for the time during their study 
participation.   With these data, we then identified all appointments that were made and kept 
by [CONTACT_162359]. Then we determined  whether a patient 
had kept an appointment within 6 months of the date of interview.    This variable was binary 
(0/1) and repeated for each patient over time.    We allowed a kept appointment to satisfy the 
condition of "appointment within 6 months" for m ore than one interview date.      
Statistical Methods  
The proportion of patients with [ADDRESS_188388] 
of association.   
Using a longitudinal model similar to that used for the main analysis of the association 
of treatment assignment (home visitor versus portal only) we adjusted for baseline covariates 
(including treatment assignment). An appointment kept within six months (yes/no) was the 
time -varying exposu re of interest. Time in the model was again fit with marginal splines.    
Together with a main effect for kept appointment, we added time -by-kept appointment 
interaction terms.  We used a marginal model (generalized estimating eq uations) with a log link 
and a gamma family, to be consistent with the other models for asthma control.   
  
32 
 
 Appendix A4 (continued) . Appointments kept among asthma patients.  
Our estimates of interest were the expected values of asthma cont rol at 0 months a nd 
12 months. Because of the irregular visit times, few patients had visits at exactly 12 months.  
For that reason, we used predictions from the longitudinal model as of 12 months and then 
compared them with predictions as of 0 months (date of randomizatio n).     
To answer the question of the effect of kept appointments we compared the two 
scenarios:  kept appointments within [ADDRESS_188389] any 
appointments kept with in 6 months of the interview. This analysis reflects the mor e common 
paradigm for comparing "always exposed" versus "never exposed", where scheduling 
appoint ments serves as the exposure. We accomplished this contrast by [CONTACT_162360] -datasets, one with all binary values for appoint ments kept set 
to 0 and the second with all binary values o f appointments kept set to 1. This approach, using  
data augmentation, is a form of marginal standardization (or predictive margins) as outlined by 
[CONTACT_162361] (1999) and as further described  by [CONTACT_162362] (2012).  
This simplistic approach does not account for several possible sources of confounding.  
First, we do not factor in time -varying confounders – we adjust only for baseline covariates.    
Second, we assume that the direction of causation is always from appoi ntment kept to asthma 
control. The direction of causation could reverse; poorer control could lead to in creased need 
for appointments. We attempted to address that potential problem in two ways.  (a) We use 
the appointment kep t from a prior (lookback) period in evaluating it as an exposure for the 
subsequently reported level of asthma control. (b)  We use only a binary indicator for having 
kept one appointment in a [ADDRESS_188390] 
every 6 months. In this fashion we attempted to distinguish patients by [CONTACT_162363], and then to determine the association of that measure with 
asthma control.   
  
33 
 
 Appendix A5 . Association of treatment assignment (home visitor versus portal only) and 
adherence to recommended regimens for inhaler adherence.  
 
Background  
One predefined longitudinal measure of the effectiveness of the home visitor versus 
portal only intervention was inhaler adh erence as estimated by [CONTACT_162364] (Dolce 1991, Table 
1).   This validated scale rates adherence based on the following six items.  
1. During the last [ADDRESS_188391] you at times been careless about using your [insert 
name [CONTACT_162387], e.g. Advair , Flovent, Pulmicort, Beclovent, Vanceril, Aerobid 
Azmacort, QVar]?  
2. During the last [ADDRESS_188392] you ever forgotten to use your [insert name [CONTACT_162388]]?  
3. During the last [ADDRESS_188393] you ever stopped using your [insert name [CONTACT_162388]] because you felt better?  
4. During the last [ADDRESS_188394] you ever used your [insert name [CONTACT_162387]] 
less than the doctor prescribed because you felt better?  
5. During the last [ADDRESS_188395] you ever stopped using your [insert name [CONTACT_162388]] because you felt worse?  
6. During the last [ADDRESS_188396] you ever used your [insert name [CONTACT_162387]] 
more than the doctor prescribed because you felt you were having breathing problems?  
A no response to an item receives a score o f 1, and a yes a score of 0, the items are summed, 
and the total score ranges from 0 (worst) to 6 (best) adherence.  
The pre -specified hypothesis was that the intervention might operate on asthma control 
through improve d adherence to inhaler use, i.e.  that inhaler use was a potential mediator of 
the effect of the intervention.  
Statistical methods  
Using this 7 -point scale as the outcome in a longitudinal model that we used for both 
asthma control and quality of life (time measured by [CONTACT_162365]), we estimated the differences between intervention groups (home visitor versus  
 
34 
 
 Appendix A5 (continued) . Association of treatment assignment (home visitor versus portal 
only) and adherence to recommended regimens for inhaler adherence.  
 
portal use only) in the change in expected values (means of adherence scores) from [ADDRESS_188397]. 1991 ; 99(4):837 -41. [PMID: 2009784]  
Appendix A6 . Effect modification and identification of subgroups.  
Over several team meetings, candidate effect modifiers were discussed and a list was 
generated based on prior knowledge and clinical expertise.  The candidate measures include 
self-reported:  Spanish as primary language; specialty or primary care practice site; age group 
(18-39 years, 40 -49 years, > 50 years); education attainment; comorbidities (diabetes, 
hypertension, high cholesterol, and cancer); hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]; ED visits; intu bation; years taking 
ICS; prednisone usage; food or clothing inadequacy; crowding at home;  exposure to violence; 
lack of housing; lack of utilities; housing instability; smoking status; exposure to second hand 
smoke; numeracy measured with the ANQ  (Apter et al., 2006)  reading comprehension 
measured with S-TOFHLA (Baker et al., 1999)  inhaler technique measured using a 7 -point scale 
for a metered dose inhaler and a 6 -point scale for a dry powder inhaler, testing the patient on 
the inhaler used for their inhaled steroid; social support assessed with the Medical Outcome 
Study Social Supp ort Survey  (Sherbourne et al., 1991)  privacy concerns with the patient portal 
assessed using the Portal Use Baseline Survey; depression as measured by [CONTACT_162366][INVESTIGATOR_6328], a validated 20 -item scale (Radloff, 1977) and obes ity 
measured by [CONTACT_43658].  El ectronic  health  literacy  was measured with  the eHEALS,  the 
eHealth  Literacy  Scale,  an 8-item  measu re of knowledge,  comfort,  and perceived  skills  at finding 
and evaluating  electronic  health  infor mation (Norman et al., 2006). It has been  used  in low-
income  patients (Knapp, 2011). Each item is measured with a 5 -point likert scale and the  
35 
 
 eHEALS score is  the mean of each item. The Scale was administered at the baseline and final data 
collection.  Computer literacy was measured using one question from this scale (“I feel confident 
in using information from the internet to make health decisions”).   
Since one -by-one testing or est imation of candidate effect modifiers has been heavily 
criticized, the team decided upon groupi[INVESTIGATOR_162338] 
(see main report, Table 3).   For each theme or group of candidate measures, we implemented a 
latent class a nalysis with the goal of reducing the data and the number of candidates.   
Estimating latent classes  
Latent class analysis was implemented for each group of candidate measures which will 
distinguish profiles of common responses to the set of variables  (McC utcheon, 1987 ). Latent  
class regression or finite mixture modeling is concerned with deriving information about a 
categorical latent variable from observed multivariate response patterns. The method takes 
advantage of the full data likelihood; therefore, subjects with missing elements contribute to 
the classification model unless all elements are missing.     Full information maximum likelihood, 
the underlying algorithm, functions with missing data with comparable effectiv eness as 
multiple imputation. The a mount of missing data in baseline covariates was small.     
Data analysis was performed using Mplus version 7.4, which uses an efficient 
estimation -maximization algorithm for maximum likelihood estimation (Dempster et al., 1997).  
The number of latent clas ses was determined through examination of fit indices and in relation 
to clinical interpretation of results.  Specifically, the Lo -Mendell -Rubin Adjusted Likelihood Ratio 
Test of model fit (Lo, Mendell, Rubin, 2001) offered a formal comparison of a model w ith its 
reduced form.  Model estimation yields predicted probabilities of class membership for each 
individual, which was used to assign an individual to a class or group associated with the  
highest predicted probability of class membership.   The indicator representing the class 
membership became the moderator variable.  Then, the degree of effect modification of the 
association of the intervention (home visitors) and the key outcome (asthma c ontrol) was 
estimated for each candidate modifier group by [CONTACT_162367], and time.  These preliminary analyses were based on 
Wald tests for [ADDRESS_188398] interactions of time (fit with marginal sp lines), intervention (home visitor 
36 
 
 versus patient portal only), and the candidate effect modifier.    Further investigations used 
separate regressions (of intervention*time interactions) for each level of the potential effect 
modifier, while controlling fo r the baseline covariates based on latent classes of factors (see 
description of latent classes).  We used a common p -value for testing interactions of p<0.1.  Our 
working hypothesis is that patients with comorbidities and with limited computer literacy co uld 
face additional challenges in the use of the patient portal.  They also might need a more 
intensive (in frequency and in home education) home visitor program than the 4 -visit program 
our intervention offered.  
References  
1.     Apter AJ, Cheng J, Small D, et al. Asthma Numeracy Skill and Health Literacy. J Asthma 
2006;43:[ADDRESS_188399] 
to measure functional health literacy. Patient education and counseling 1999;38:33 -42.  
3.     Sherbourne CD, Stewart AL. The MOS social support survey. Social science & medicine 
(1982) 1991;32:705 -14. 
4.     Radloff LS. The CES -D Scale: A self -report depression scale for research in the general 
population. Applied Psychological Measureme nt 1977;1:385 -401.  
5.     Norman CD, Skinner HA. eHEALS: The eHealth Literacy Scale. Journal of medical Internet 
research 2006;8:e27.  
6.     Knapp C, Madden V, Wang H, Sloyer P, Shenkman E. Internet use and eHealth literacy of 
low-income parents whose chil dren have special health care needs. Journal of medical Internet 
research 2011;13:e75.  
7.     Dempster AP, Laird NM, Rubin DB. Maximum likelihood from incomplete data via the EM 
algorithm with discussion. J R Stat Soc B. 1977;39:1 -38. 
8.     Lo, Y., Mendel l, N.R. & Rubin, D.B. (2001). Testing the number of components in a normal  
mixture. Biometrika, 88, 767 -778.  
9.     McCutcheon AL. Latent Class Analysis. Beverly Hill, CA: Sage University Press Series on 
Quantiative Applications in the Social Sciences; 1987.  
  
37 
 
 Appendix A7. Methods for handling Irregular data collection interviews - Unified modeling 
approach.  
 
Background  
This appendix details our approach and rationale for handling irregular data collection 
interviews.   Although not specifically detailed in our original PCORI proposal, the methods we 
outline below we pre -specified before considering analyses that incorpor ate any outcomes.     
Typi[INVESTIGATOR_162339] a categorical factor.   When all 
patients are measured at the same time, this analytic approach is entirely appropriate.  For such 
studies as ours, however, this approach was both not feasible and theoretically unsound.  For 
that reason we modeled actual data collection times using a flexible approach – marginal 
splines.  
As with many studies, and in particular as with studies that involve mostly disadvantaged 
patients who also have underlying comorbidities that limit their mobility, contact [CONTACT_162368], this difficulty 
presents challenges. The preplanned times were 0, 12, 24, 36, and 48 weeks from 
randomiza tion. But patients could not be contact[CONTACT_162369]. This reality led to measurements at times that differed from, 
but mostly followed, the preplanned times.   With irregular data collection t imes, we therefore 
used the following method of analysis.   
Methods for irregular data collection times  
(1) For analysis, we used all data whenever obtained.  No interviews were considered to be out 
of range.  We used all interviews even for those patients  who dropped out after baseline 
interviews but before the completion of the fifth and final interview.   
(2) Unlike many studies, we modeled time as a continuous measure rather than as a categorical 
factor.   We recorded and used for each patient the actua l time (months from randomization) of 
the interview.    
(3)  With continuous time, we needed then to allow for non -linear trajectories of outcomes over 
time.  We made no assumptions about linear trends in health improvement arising out of the  
  
38 
 
 Appendix A 7 (continued) . Methods for handling Irregular data collection interviews - Unified 
modeling approach.  
 
study intervention.  To that end, we modeled time using flexible splines.  This approach is well -
described in the statistical literature and implemented in standard statistical software packages.   
(4) With measures occurring over a continuous time line, and with final measures happening 
sometime before and some after the pre -planned 12 -month goal, we compared the two 
randomized groups of patients as of th e same, pre -planned 12 -month time compared to 
baseline (date of randomization).  We accomplished this task by [CONTACT_162370] [ADDRESS_188400] a lower (better) asthma 
control score if he or she is interviewed at month [ADDRESS_188401], approaches that use a patient’s  final measurement, even if it occurs before 12 months 
(pre-specified end date), as the final, [ADDRESS_188402] (LOCF) approaches, which have been thoroughly discredited in 
numerous analyses , reports, and editorials.  A final measurement at month 8 in theory will  
39 
 
 Appendix A7 (continued). Methods for handling Irregular data collection interviews - Unified 
modeling approach.  
 
differ from the same patient's measurement at month 12.  Fourth, alt hough multiple 
imputation is a well -accepted option for missing outcomes when visit times are categorical, the 
approach is not practical when, as in our case, visit times can and do occur throughout the 12 -
month follow -up.  Multiple imputation, as currentl y programmed, would necessitate that we 
impute all 12 months of data for each patient – a very large amount of missing observations to 
impute and thus a large fraction of monthly outcomes are missing by [CONTACT_8345].   Finally, examples 
in the statistical litera ture support this suggested approach (Howe 2016).   
Model form  
The primary outcome is improvement in asthma control in both the intervention (PT + 
HV) and the control PT (Portal only) groups.  The question of interest then is whether asthma 
control improv ed over time more in the PT + HV group compared to the control group, and did 
the control group improve over time.  More formally, as the primary comparison of this primary 
outcome, the corresponding statistical estimand is the difference in expected value s between 
the PT + HV group and the PT (control) group from baseline to [ADDRESS_188403] the within group and across group effects of the interventions on outcomes we  
implemented  mixed effects  mod els (using  restricted  maxi mum likelihood  and adaptive  
quadrature)  and marginal  models  (using  generalized  estimating equations  (GEE))  as a unified  
approach  for the anal ysis of the longitudinal  data  with  baseline  rando mization.  For within -
group  outcomes,  these  models  use all available  data  to estimate  changes  over  time. Both  the 
mixed effects  and marginal  models  can be used  for contin uous, bina ry, and count  outco mes 
using  linear,  logistic,  and log linear  models that can compare changes over  time  in the outco mes 
of asthma control,  quali ty of life, ED visits,  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_162340]. (Fitzmaurice, Laird, 
Ware 2011). By [CONTACT_162371] -by-time interaction terms, these  models can then  be adapted  
to compare improvement  over  time  between  the patient  portal  plus home visit group and the 
portal only group.   
Each type of model has its strengths and weaknesses.  While the GEE method benefits 
from simplicity and robustness, it requires stronger assumptions about dropout (dropout  
40 
 
 Appendix A7 (continued). Methods for handling Irregular data collection interviews - Unified 
modeling approach.  
 
completely at random).  Planned analyses considered the effects of both dropout and 
nonadherence (failure to complete the scheduled home visits), irregularity of the data collection 
and outcome ascertainm ent, as sensitivity analyses.   Details are below.  
We selected the model form based on the particular form of the outcome of interest.  
For the primary outcome of asthma control, we found that the responses were heavily skewed.   
For that reason we impleme nted log gamma models.  In each case, we include in the base model 
as a stratification factor, the clinical site at which the patient was treated.  We did so because 
randomization was stratified by [CONTACT_162372].  Using a log gamma model, these expected values 
and their differences can be estimated using mixed effects models that allow for correlations in 
longitudinal data.   For estimates of the differences between treatment groups of the change 
over time in asthma control, we will analyze the change in asthma control per our statistical 
analysis plan using mixed effects models with a random intercept and slope for patient, using an 
identity link models.  If the observed distribution is skewed to the right, as we suspect a priori, 
then a log gamma general ized linear mixed effects model will be indicated and used.  Time is 
modeled flexibly with splines.   
Sensitivity analysis to irregular data collection times  
Methods for sensitivity analysis for irregular outcome assessment times are under 
development (Lin ; Pullenayegum,  Van Ness, and Buzkova 2009, 2010).    In brief, recent 
research on sensitivity of estimate to informative dropout and related software assume regular 
outcome measurement times in longitudinal studies (Scharfstein 2018; 2017).   In our case , the 
issue is informative measurement times —an association of the timing of the measurement and 
the value of the measurement.   Current software does not yet meet the needs of a proper 
sensitivity analysis for possibly informative, irregular measurements.     It does cover regular 
follow up intervals.   Sensitivity analysis along the lines of the proposal and implementation of 
Scharfstein and colle agues remains for development.  
 
 
41 
 
 References  
1.     Buzkova P, Brown ER, John -Stewart GC. Longitudinal data analysis for generalized linear 
models under participant -driven informative follow -up: an application in maternal health 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. American journal of epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] 2010;171:189 -97. 
2.     Buzkova P, Lumley T. Semiparametric modeling of repeated measure ments under 
outcome -dependent follow -up. Statistics in medicine 2009;28:[ADDRESS_188404] NM, J.H. W. Applied Longitudinal Analysis, 2nd Edition. Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley & Sons; 2011.  
4.     Howe LD, Tilling K, Matijasevich A, et al. L inear spline multilevel models for summarising 
childhood growth trajectories: A guide to their application using examples from five birth 
cohorts. Statistical methods in medical research 2016;25:1854 -74. 
5.     Lin H, Scharfstein DO, Rosenheck RA. Analysis  of longitudinal data with irregular, outcome -
dependent follow -up. . Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical 
Methodology) 2004;66:[ADDRESS_188405] to irregular observation: A review of 
methods with a focus on visit processes, assumptions, and study design. Statistical methods in 
medical research 2016;25:2992 -3014.  
7.     Scharfstein, D. , McDermott, A. , Díaz, I. , Carone, M. , Lunardon, N. and Turkoz, I. (2018), 
Global sensitivity an alysis for repeated measures studies with informative drop ‐out: A semi ‐
parametric approach. Biometrics.   2018; 74: 207 -219. doi: 10.1111/biom.[ZIP_CODE]  
8.     Scharfstein D, McDermott A.  samon.  Sensitivity a nalysis for missing data.   2017.  
https://cran.r -project.org/package=samon  
9.     Van Ness PH, Allore HG, Fried TR, Lin H. Inverse intensity weighting in generalized linear 
models as an option for a nalyzing longitudinal data with triggered observations. American 
journal of epi[INVESTIGATOR_623] 2010;171:105 -12. 
  
42 
 
 Appendix  A8. Fitting mixed effects models to estimate individual improvement in asthma 
control and achievement of asthma control.  
 
Background   
The overall estimates of the average improvement in asthma control over time within 
the two intervention groups and the differences in the two improvements (see main text) do 
not reflect whether all patients improved, some improved and others did not, or s ome 
improvement markedly and others worsened.     To arrive at estimates of the number of 
patients who might have achieved asthma control over time and/or who might have improved 
individual levels of control over time, we had to implement model strategies that estimate 
individual levels of control.   We regard this exercise as a sensitivity analysis to our main results 
(see main report), or alternatively as a re -expression of those results in alternative terms that 
might have more clinical meaning.  
For two  reasons, we could not and should not use raw data to report individual asthma 
control.   First, as we report in the main text, patients were measured at times that departed 
from the pre -specified times.  Most of these departures reflected delays in obtain ing 
interviews.   Reasons for the delays we have already outlined: patients were difficult to locate 
and schedule, in part because of their many illnesses and their often poor living conditions and 
communication options.    For that reason, actual 12month measures of outcomes, e.g.,  asthma 
control, were routinely not observed.  Rather, observed (measured) asthma control occurred at 
various times around 12 months from the date of randomization for the individual.  Variation in 
times of the final measurement  were substantial. We therefore had to develop a method of 
estimating measures of asthma control as of a common date – 12 months from randomization 
– to account for this variation in the timing of data collection.   Second, as with many health 
measures based  on patient responses to an interview instrument, asthma control is measured 
with error.  The observed asthma control is but one estimate of the patient's asthma symptoms 
on a particular day out of several days that represent actual, steady -state symptoms.    For both 
of these reasons, an observed measure will not accurately reflect the actual level of control.  
Methods  
  
43 
 
 Appendix A8 (continued) . Fitting mixed effects models to estimate individual improvement in 
asthma control and achievement of asthma contro l. 
 
Mixed effects models that include random effects to represent individual patient 
departures from average levels of outcomes, such as asthma control, have long been used to 
address these issues of measurement error.   The resulting "predictions" of indi vidual levels of 
outcomes are in theory better, less biased, estimates of individual -level outcomes t hat are the 
raw observations. (Efron; Morris; Casella).  In this application, we implemented longitudinal 
models with two different types of random effects .   Random intercepts reflect the individual 
departure of outcomes (asthma control) at baseline, in our case at randomization (month 0).   
Random slopes reflect the departure of individual level trajectories from the average trajectory 
of change in outcome s over time.   With these two types of random effects, we could predict 
each patient's level of outcome at two common times: the date of randomization and 12 
months later.   We used these predictions, and their differences, of asthma control to estimate 
the number of patients who were in control (score <1.5) and who had achieved a clinically 
important reduction in score (decrease of 0.5), which reflects an improvement in asthma 
control.   
We used restricted maximum likelihood (REML) as implemented in the pr ogram "mixed" 
in Stata version 15.[ADDRESS_188406] alternative.  
In our application, defining and implementing random slopes became more complex 
because of our use of splines to estimate the changes over time in outcomes (See main text for 
descriptio n of the primary analysis).    The time line of observation as divided into segments, 
with each segment allowed to have a different slope (or trajectory) of the outcome over time.   
We began with a model that had the same set of 5 line segments for time as  did the primary 
model.   We then added all of the baseline covariates (as in the primary analysis) in order to 
explain as much as possible the individual patient -level variation in outcome.    To this model, 
we added a random intercept for each patient an d a single random slope to reflect overall  
44 
 
 Appendix A8 (continued) . Fitting mixed effects models to estimate individual improvement in 
asthma control and achievement of asthma control.  
 
departure of the individual over time from the average trajectory not  explained by [CONTACT_162373].    The model converged.  We then added a second random slope to 
represent an additional element of individual patient departure from average as the follow -up 
time progressed.   This model converged in [ADDRESS_188407] the additional time segments of the spline model would not converge.     
The final model, included as fixed effects: Linear (marginal) spline wi th knots at 3,6, 9, 
and 12 months; clinic, Spanish as the primary language, age categorized (18 -39, 40 -49, and 
50+), literacy levels (4 levels from latent class models),  social support(3 levels from latent class 
models), smoking exposure(4 –levels:  none,  first hand smoke only, second hand smoke only, 
both first and second hand smoke), comorbidities (3 -level latent class model:  healthy, 
depressed, other chronic comorbidities),  baseline asthma severity (low high),  concern about 
using health data on the in ternet (5 levels), home crowding (3 levels: <1 per room, 1 up to 2 per 
room, 2+ per room).    
Random effects included: a random intercept for subject and a random slope for the 
first two line segments constructed by [CONTACT_162374].     
This analysis can best be thought of as a sensitivity analysis to the main findings of the 
asthma control outcome.    Its limitations are that there were insufficient data to fit a log -link, 
gamma -family model with more than 2 random slopes.     
 
References  
1.     Efron B, Morris C. Data analysis using Stein’s estimator and its generalizations.  J. Amer. 
Statist. Assoc.  1975;70:311 –319.  
2.     Morris CN. Parametric empi[INVESTIGATOR_162341]: Theory and applications.  J. Amer. Statist. 
Assoc.  1983;78:47 –65. with discussion.  
3.     Casella G. An introduction to empi[INVESTIGATOR_162342].  Amer. Statist.  1985;39:83 –87. 
  
45 
 
 Appendix A9 :  Sensitivity analysis for dropout —Using baseline covariates.  
 Two missing data pr oblems might affect our results: (1) m issing outcomes over time 
arising from dropout, and (2) missin g baseline covariate values. This appendix does not co ver 
missing covariate values. Details on how we used latent class models to revolve the small 
amount of data on baseline factor appears in the appendix on effect modi fication.   This 
appendix uses the latent cla sses and baseline factors as a  sensitivity analysis of the effect of 
dropout on randomization.  In addition, in this appendix we do not discuss the potential for 
dropout (or more appropriately delayed acquisition of outcome data) that might be not at 
random.   That subject we cover in Appendix A10, and  a formal solution awaits methodological 
advances for irregular visit data.   
 We used marginal models adjusted for baseline covariates as combined using latent 
class models.   (See details in Appendix on effect modification).    
  
[ADDRESS_188408] of home visitors adjus ted for incomplete adherence – A 
sensitivity analysis.  
 
Methods  
 With less than full adherence to the scheduled number of home visits for all patients 
assigned to home visitors, the "as randomized" analysis do es not answer the following 
question: What is the effect of home visitors among patients who would be responsive to 
scheduling for and meeting with a home visitor? The estimand to answer this question is 
sometimes called the "complier average causal effect " or CACE.   Because actual adherence to 
the home visit protocol is not randomized, i.e., because patients receive or do not receive the 
full complement of home visits based on factors other than randomization, simplistic 
approaches can be subject to selec tion bias, from both observed and unobserved confounders.  
Those factors might influence both the patient's decision to meet the home visitor and the 
patient's observed outcome.   In other words, the observed change in asthma control, for 
example, among th ose patients who completed all scheduled home visits does not account for 
the fact that this subgroup of patients has not been randomly assigned to full home visits 
versus no home visits.  Nor does the simple approach consider that those who accept the hom e 
visits might also have been more likely to improve if they had been assigned to the patient 
portal arm alone.   Whether the patient received the home visit might be related to the 
patient’s outcome.  (Sagarin 2014)  To avoid the bias from less than comple te adherence, special 
statistical methods are needed. (Stuart 2008) . 
 One approach might be the use of models that weight data based on the probability of a 
patient’s being adherent to the treatment at the specified discrete time that is the same for all 
patients.   This approach could apply for example, in a study in which all patients are seen at the 
same time since randomization or when data collectio n is at set times (Toh 2010). These 
weighting approaches attempt to address the bias arising out of non -randomized adherence 
through modeling adherence based on baseline and post -baseline covariates.   While this 
approach might apply in the case of regular data collection times, it is not feasible for studies, 
such as ours, in which data c ollection times are i rregular. In our case, irregularity is the rule  
  
47 
 
 Appendix A10 (continued) . Estimating effect of home visitors adjus ted for incomplete 
adherence – A sensitivity analysis.  
 
rather than the exception. We elected an alternative approach to resolve this estimation 
problem.  
Instrumental variable approach to adherence  
 To deal with this estimation problem in randomized designs, we adopted an 
instrumental variable approach, in which randomization serves as the instrument, and the 
study design reflects what can be called a "randomized encouragement design".  By [CONTACT_162375], randomization to the home visitor group becomes an encouragement to the patient 
to respond to the staff's request to schedule a home vi sit, and then to meet with the visitor as 
scheduled.  (Ten Have 2004).  In our case, “adherence” is much more complex than just 
accepting a treatment.  Rather, adherence is a combination of being able to remain in contact 
[CONTACT_162376], having a sch edule that permits setting a home visit date, and allowing the 
home visitor to come to the patient’s home and offer information.   
 The instrumental variable approach can support estimation of the effect of the home 
visits among those who accept them and r eceive them, and will control for confounding of  
unmeasured factors, at the expense of increased variance in the resulting estimates of the 
intervention effects.  To be valid and unbiased, the instrumental variable analysis must satisfy  
several assumptio ns. ( Baiocchi 2014; Stuart 2008).  We realize that different authors sometimes 
describe these assumptions somewhat differently.  
(1)  The stable unit value treatment assumption requires two sub -assumptions.   (1a) The 
assumption of "no interference" -- that the outcome of one patient is not influenced by [CONTACT_162377].   This assumption was likely satisfied because home 
visits occurred patient by [CONTACT_162378].  (1b) There is only 
one version of the home visitor intervention.  The home visitors were trained, and their 
interviews were scripted with the help of an interview packet.    But as with any similar 
intervention, our study could not guarantee that the eight home visitors presented themse lves 
consistently and according to the protocol, but that variation in home -visitor personalities gave  
  
48 
 
 Appendix A10 (continued) . Estimating effect of home visitors adjus ted for incomplete 
adherence – A sensitivity analysis.  
 
rise to somewhat different f lavors of the intervention.   For that reason, part of the SUTVA 
assumption might not be satisfied.   
(2) "Exclusion restriction".  The effect of the assignment to the home visitor arm of the study 
must influence outcome only through the actual completion of the home visit.   A patient would 
have to react the same in terms of asthma outcome if he or she had been assigned to the home 
visitor treatment arm or the portal only arm, and had received no home visits.   In the context 
of this study, this key assump tion would be violated if the mere assignment to the home visitor 
led to higher expectations of improved asthma outcome just by [CONTACT_162379], and 
diminished expectations upon learning of assignment to the patient portal arm.   Owing to the 
unavoidable fact that the patients could not be blinded to the treatment assignment, a 
violation of this assumption might be possible.  But it might be that both the home -visitor 
patients and the portal -only patients could have similar expectations of some i mprovement 
merely by [CONTACT_162380].    A variation on this assumption 
requires that the patient who is randomized to the home visitor group but who does not 
schedule or see the home visitor (lack of compliance with the  protocol) will receive no benefit 
from just being assigned to the home visit group.   That assumption seems plausible in this 
setting.    
(3) The final assumption, "monotonicity", requires that patients assigned to the portal group 
did not obtain home vis its.   Our design satisfied this assumption because only patients assigned 
to the home visit arm of the study were able to receive home visits.  Although this assumption 
was very likely satisfied, meeting this assumption limits the inference of the effect of the home 
visitors to the patients with the characteristics of those who actually had the full set of home 
visits.   To be able to generalize the effect of home visits to all patients would require yet an 
additional assumption – that the effect of treatm ent is the same across all patient types.   We 
feel that this assumption could not be satisfied because home visits, almost by [CONTACT_108], are 
not going to produce the same reaction and outcome across a diverse group of patient who  
  
49 
 
 Appendix A10 (continued) . Estimating effect of home visitors adjusted for incomplete 
adherence – A sensitivity analysis.  
 
have sometimes markedly different comorbidities, ages, educations, poverty levels, and home 
environment.    
 Additional assumptions implied by [CONTACT_162381] (4) random assignment and (5) that 
at least some patients complied with the protocol and met with the home visitors having  been 
randomized to that arm.  Both implied assumptions were satisfied in our study.    
Based on the assumptions, we det ermined that the instrumental variable approach 
might help to estimate the effect of home visits among those who complied with the home visit 
protocol.  
Measuring adherence  
 To implement the instrumental variable approach, we measured adherence as follows.    
The data collection times at the protocol were 0 12 24 36 and 48 weeks.   The scheduled home 
visit tim es were baseline, 3, 5, 8 , and 25 week.   But many patients could not or did not follow 
either plan.   For reasons of difficulty in scheduling both the  home visit and the data collection, 
patients' actual schedules slipped, sometimes by [CONTACT_726] a few months, from the schedule 
specified by [CONTACT_760].   
 By [CONTACT_162382], we could determine for each data collection the number of home visits that the 
patient should have completed as of the data collection date and compare that number to the 
number of home visits actually received at that time.    For example, if the pat ient had a first 
post -baseline data collection as of day [ADDRESS_188409] received 
three home visits, the expected number of visits = 3.   If the patient had received only 2 home 
visits as of that time, then the ratio of actual t o expected number of visits = 2/3= 0.67.   We 
then concluded that falling behind in the home visit schedule could attenuate the effect of the 
home visitor, and for that reason, we categorized each patient at each visit as adherent if this 
ratio was greater  than or equal to 1.[ADDRESS_188410] of home visits under complete adherence  
  
50 
 
 Appendix A10 (continued) . Estimating effect of home visitors adjus ted for incomplete 
adherence – A sensitivity analysis.  
 
 To estimate the  effect of the home visitors among those who would adhere to the visit 
schedule, we implemented the two -stage residual inclusion (2SRI) approach to instrumental 
variable analysis in longitud inal settings.  (Small 2006). By [CONTACT_162383], in the first stage  we 
modeled the probability of a patient in the home visit group being adherent at a given time as a 
func tion of baseline covariates. At this stage we also computed the predicted probabilities of 
adherence based on this model for each patient, and then the  residuals (Wij= actual adherence 
– predicted adherence, for patient=i at time=j), where the residuals =0 for patients assigned to 
receive portal training only.     
 In the second stage, we then fit a random effects log linear model (to account for 
skewed distribution of asthma control as an outcome) of asthma control as a function of:  time 
(T), baseline covariates (X), the residuals (Wit), and the indicator for being ad herence at a given 
time (Ait). This model we fit for all 301 patients.  To this model w e then added random effects 
for patient, in the form of a random intercept for each patient and a random slope for time.    
Because of the added complexity of irregular data collection times, we fit the same spline 
model for time as with the primary outcom e model for asthma control (without an adjustment 
for less than complete adherence).  The coefficient for the term for Aij represents the estimate 
of the effect of the home visitor at time=j . 
  For implementing the analysis of the effect of home visits amo ng the compliers, we 
modified the two -stage residual inclusion (2SRI) approach as follows to arrive at a similar 
difference of expected values as we estimated in the "as randomized" analysis.     
Step #1:  Estimating the residuals  
The initial model is a l ongitudinal logit model with Ait as the outcome (adherence as of the data 
collection at time = t).   Then  
E(Aij) = alpha0+ Xi*ALPHA + BETA*Tij, where X is a vector of baseline covariates, and Tij is a 
vector of elements of a spline for patient=i at time=j .     
Wij=Aij - E(Aij) represents the residuals from this first stage equation.  
Step #2: Estimating the response model  
51 
 
 Appendix A10 (continued) . Estimating effect of home visitors adjus ted for incomplete 
adherence – A sensitivity analysis.  
 
Using a log lin k model (for asthma control), the response model was:  
Log(Yij)=Xi*DELTA1 + GAMMA*Wij + BETA*Tij + *PSI*Aij, + Z*b,  where this model is log gamma 
to account for skewed data, Xi is a vector of baseline covariates including an intercept, Wij is 
the vector of  residuals from step 1, Tij is a vector of times in spline format, and Aij is the vector 
of adherence over time.   Z*b represents random effects at the patient level to allow for 
variation of individual patients from the average.    For the patients in the  portal only group, 
Wij=0 and Aij=[ADDRESS_188411] access to the home visitor.   (The upper -case 
represents a vector of coefficients corresponding to the vector of factors.   For example, 
GAMMA is a vector of coefficients for the residual ( from Step #1) at each data collection time.   
PSI then represents the vector of coefficients over time).    
 Our interest was not in the estimates for coefficients PSI but in the expected value of 
outcome (asthma control, for example, as of two time points , month=0 and month=12).  For 
that reason, we estimated the solution to the question of the effect of the home visitor among 
those who complied by [CONTACT_162384] (n=301) with four additional datasets 
and then using the original dataset to estimate predictions for each patient and then applying 
the predictions to the augmented datasets.   The predicted outcome accounted for  each 
patient's baseline characteristic as well as the patient's random variation from the average.  The 
four augmented  datasets had the following characteristics.  
(1)   For the patients who complied/adhered, assume that they did not adhere at all (Aij=0) and 
that time = month 0, i.e., that the vector T of spline values for time are set to the equivalent of 
month =0.  
(2)  For the patients who adhered, assume that they did not adhere at all (Aij=0 and that time = 
12 months.  
(3) For the patients who adhered, assume that they did adhere throughout (Aij=1) and that 
time= 0 months.  
(4) For the patients who adhered, assume that they did adhere throughout (Aij=1) and that 
time = 12 months.    
52 
 
 Appendix A10 (continued) . Estimating effect of home visitors adjus ted for incomplete 
adherence – A sensitivity analysis.  
  
These augmented datasets were confined to the patients who adhered, because we 
could not justify the assumption that the effect of home visitors would be the same across all  
patients. By [CONTACT_162385], we were 
able to estimate individual patient outcomes assuming  two different adherence regimes and at 
two times.  Thus, each patient had four predicted values.    
 The last step was to calculate the mean over the patients in each of the four augmented 
datasets.  These four means then represented the expected values o f the outcome among the 
patients who adhered at two time points (month=0 and month=12), assuming that they did 
adhere and alternatively that they did not adhere at all.    The estimator of interest was then:   
[E(Y0,12) – E(Y0,0)]  - [E(Y1,12) – E(Y1,0)], where E(YA,B) is the expected value (mean), A=0 
represents the assumption of no adherence, A=1 represents the assumption of full adherence, 
and B represents times 0 and 12 months.  
Confidence intervals  
 We estimated 95% confidence bounds for the resulting estimate by [CONTACT_162386] 999 iterations and percentile bounds, with replacement stratified by 
[CONTACT_2939] (home visitor vs portal training only).    
Implementation of the two -stage residu al inclusion approach  
 Both for the initial stage of this method (estimating residuals) and for the response 
model, we used same set of covariates as with the primary asthma control model (with baseline 
covariate adjustment) for the effect modification ana lyses.   
 
Refere nces  
1. Baiocchi M, Cheng J, Small DS. Instrumental variable methods for causal inference. Stat 
Med. 2014; 33(13):2297 -340. [PMID: 24599889]  
  
53 
 
 2. Nagelkerke N, Fidler V, Bernsen R, Borgdorff M. Estimating treatment effects in 
randomized cl inical trials in the presence of non -compliance. Stat Med. 2000; 19(14):1849 -64. 
[PMID: 10867675]  
3. Sagarin BJ, West SG, Ratnikov A, Homan WK, Ritchie TD, Hansen EJ. Treatment 
noncompliance in randomized experiments: statistical approaches and design issu es. Psychol 
Methods. 2014; 19(3):317 -33. [PMID: 24773358]  
4. Small DS, Ten Have TR, Joffe MM, Cheng J. Random effects logistic models for analysing 
efficacy of a longitudinal randomized treatment with non -adherence. Stat Med. 2006; 
25(12):1981 -2007. [PMID : 16220487]  
5. Stuart EA, Perry DF, Le H, Ialongo NS. Estimating Intervention Effects of Prevention 
Programs: Accounting for Noncompliance. Prevention Science. 2008; 9(4):[ADDRESS_188412] T,R., Elliott MR, Joffe M, Zanutto E, Datto C. Causal Models fo r Randomized 
Physician Encouragement Trials in Treating Primary Care Depression. Journal of the American 
Statistical Association. 2004; 99(465):[ADDRESS_188413] TR, Normand SL, Marcus SM, Brown CH, Lavori P, Duan N. Intent -to-Treat vs. 
Non -Intent -to-Treat Analyses under Treatment Non -Adherence in Mental Health Randomized 
Trials. Psychiatr Ann. 2008; 38(12):772 -83. [PMID: 20717484]  
8. Toh S, Hernandez -Diaz S, Logan R, Robins JM, Hernan MA.  Estimating absolute risks in 
the presence of nonadherence: an application to a follow -up study with baseline 
randomization. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623]. 2010; 21(4):528 -39. [PMID: 20526200]   
 