 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile Integrated Care for Childhood Obesity  
 
Study Proposal  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Document last updated May 30, 2025  (only addition of  cover letter and enrollment  end date ) 
 
Last IRB approval October 30, [ADDRESS_952914]  rates of obesity .1-3 Obesity increases a child’s risk for health conditions, including diabetes, 
cardiovascular disease, pulmonary disease, and orthopedic problems .4-[ADDRESS_952915] a framework tha t emphasiz es the need to integrate  community systems with 
health care delivery  to improve obesity care and reduce disparities  (Figure 2) .[ADDRESS_952916] leader’s (RPL) A cademic Pediatric Association  
Research in Academic Pediatrics Initiative on Diversity  Award  study of children ages 4-[ADDRESS_952917] a meaningful decrease in weight. Families who rec eived psychological 
counseling were twice as likely to remain in obesity treatment.11 Analyzing  data on >7000 children  in the N ational 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey  database , we found that children with severe obesity were two times 
more likely to be of a  racial or ethnic minorit y backgrounds , from single -parent households , or from households 
experiencing  povert y.3 Finally, i n a survey of over  200 families of overweight  children under age 5 from a  
Nemours primary care clinic , 85% endors ed one or more  psycho social needs .[ADDRESS_952918]’s K23 show  that self -management tools keep families engaged in obesity 
treatment .  Driven by [CONTACT_701924]-efficacy managing their child’s behaviors,36-[ADDRESS_952919] : the value of hearing from  other families of 
children with obesity of diverse backgrounds, the importance of choice and convenience in how the intervention 
is delivered , and the need to be activated . The intervention  has been  tested in a pi[INVESTIGATOR_32876] 120 families  
attending the Nemours Healthy Weight and Wellness Clinic , with preliminary data showing  improved  short -term 
visit adherence among families who view ed the videos . 
Our team has spearheaded studies demonstrating the value of telehealth in improving  the reach of  
childhood obesity  care. A survey of  159 Nemours pediatric primary care providers  (PCP)  demonstrated their 
desire  to connect families with community resources and have obesity specialists  accessible by [CONTACT_223938] .26 We 
presented findings from 85 telehealth visits  with the Nemours Healthy Weight and Wellness  Clinic among families 
in rural Delaware . Not only did 100% of families surveyed report that telehealth visit s were more convenient , but 
no-show rates  were significantly lower  than in -person visits .[ADDRESS_952920] demonstrated the effectiveness of 
iAmHealthy, a family -based behavioral  group treatment  delivered via telehealth, in the IDeA States Pediatric 
Clinical Trials Network (ISPCTN) .38-[ADDRESS_952921] developed  Mobile 
Integrated Care for Childhood Obesity 
(MICCO , Figure 2). MICCO is an evidence -
based , multi -component intervention that 
combines integrated community care to ad -
dress  psycho social needs, multidisciplinary 
obesity care, and self -management tools to 
promote healthy lifestyle  behaviors . All 
components are delivered through  a single 
mobile platform to increase accessibility for 
underserved populations and are integrated into the patient -centered medical home through the mobile 
platform’s integration with the EHR. Aim 1: Community -engaged and qualitative research methods will be used 
to refine MICCO and ensure it is community -centered and family -friendly .  Aims 2 and 3 : MICCO will then be 
tested in a RCT with families of children with obesity from rural primary care practices to examine its impact on 
family engagement in treatment , child weight status and  disparities in these outcomes . 
B. INNOVATION  
Because attrition  is one of the most challenging problems in obesity treatment, developi[INVESTIGATOR_701919].   MICCO will change practice paradigms by [CONTACT_701925] -based interventions in an innovative way, leveraging technology, the patient -centered 
medical home, and the community to increase engagement and sustainability beyond the clinical trial .   
B.[ADDRESS_952922] demonstrated the importance of addressing psycho social determinants of health  in the treatment of 
childhood obesity , especially to decrease attrition from treatment .3,11 Each component of MICCO is aligned with 
this goal . MICCO provides targeted psycho social services to families in partnership with  community 
organizations ; visits  with obesity specialists including a psychologist  to assist  families  with behavior change, 
parenting, mood , and self -esteem ; and psychoeducational tools to educate, engage, and empower families .   
B.[ADDRESS_952923] ing of  a mobile application that is state -of-the-
art, user -friendly , and integrated with the healthcare system.41 Nearly all families of children with obesity  
(95%)  in our prior studies report ed access to  the internet through a mobile device , making it a n accessible and  
convenient platform to augment healthcare delivery . Other studies have utilized mobile apps  for childhood 
obesity ,[ADDRESS_952924] -practice methods used in private 
(marketing) and healthcare (e -health) settings  to improve the usability of new technologies42-[ADDRESS_952925] -practice community -engaged research strategies to ensure that MICCO is 
feasible, relevant, and poised to create sustainable change .44-45 While e ngag ement of  community 
stakeholders  is increasing in childhood obesity studie s, fully engaging stakeholders in a meaningful and rigorous 
manner is still uncommon .46 We will engage a diverse group of stakeholders in rural communit ies in Delaware , 
including families, community organizations, and primary care practices , as partners in all phases of research 
design and execution  to enhance alignment  of MICCO with community  resources  and stakeholder values , ensure 
MICCO is family -friendl y, and facilitate  effective recruitment, retention, and dissemination.  
C. APPRO ACH 
C1. OVERVIEW : The proposed study will refine and test a n evidence -based , multi -component  intervention, 
Mobile Integrated Care for Childhood Obesity (MICCO ), delivered  through a mobile application platform linked 
to the Nemours EHR. We will engage a  Council of Community Partners  and a Council of Parent Partners  and 
use Think Aloud testing  to refine  MICCO (Aim 1) , which  will then be tested in a RCT with families of young 
children with obesity from three primary care practices in  rural Delaware to examine impact on attrition  and child 
weight (Aim 2) and disparities in these outcomes (Aim 3) . Overall project goal:  Improve the relevance  and 
accessibility  of obesity interventions  for families in underserved rural communities  to reduce health disparities.  
C.2 RESEARCH TEAM : Our team is exceptionally well-qualified to conduct this study, with expertise spanning 
all methodological and conceptual aspects of the proposed work ( see Biosketches ). Thao -Ly Phan, MD, MPH 
(RPL) is the Medical Director of  the Nemours Healthy Weight and Wellness  Clinic who has been awarded  two 
career development grants to addres s psychosocial factors that impact weight outcomes , leveraging EHR -based 
technology.  Her senior mentorship team  has diverse and complimentary  areas of expertise and connections with  
professional networks that will strengthen  [CONTACT_701941] ’s research : (1) Anne Kazak, PhD, ABPP , Director of the 
Nemours CHDS  and Nemours PI [INVESTIGATOR_701920] , has  expertise in psychosocial intervention s and implementation 
science  and has served as [CONTACT_701941]’s primary mentor  on multiple projects ; (2) Ann Davis, PhD, MPH , Director 
of the Center for Children's Healthy Lifestyles & Nutrition at the University of Kansas Medical Center , has  
expertise in telehealth obesity interventions for rural populations  and has collaborated with [CONTACT_701941] through the 
ISPCTN ; (3) Ihouma  Eneli, MD, MS , Director of the Center for Healthy Weight and Nutrition at Nationwide 
Children's Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_701921] , has expertise in integrat ing 
obesity treatment into primary care  and has collaborated with [CONTACT_701941] on PEDSnet and AAP Institute for Healthy 
Childhood Weight  activities ; and (4) Allison Karpyn, PhD  is the Director of the Center for Research Education 
and Social Policy  at the University of Delaware and member of the ACCEL Community Engagement Core , with 
expertise in community -engaged research and improving access to healthy food for underserved communities . 
This project leverages robust resources offered by  [CONTACT_701926] , including mobile app development  
expertise , and extends our collaboration  with Nemours primary care practices  and caregivers of children with 
obesity  in rural Delaware  with the assistance of the PROMISE  Core  (see C. 4, Aim 1 ). 
C.3 MICCO INTERVENTION: Based on our preliminary work and the Clinical -Community Integration 
Framework,  we developed a multi -component intervention, Mobile Integrated Care for Childhood Obesity 
(MICCO, Figure 3), that will be accessible by [CONTACT_701927] a custom dashboard on the 
Nemours App. The Nemours App is a n existing state of the art mobile application platform  that provi des 
comprehensive patient  services ( tools for education, telehealth, appointment s, communication  with providers , 
and health management) ; is accessible by [CONTACT_650804], tablet, or desktop/laptop computer;  and is linked to the 
Nemours EHR (EPIC , see detailed description  of Nemours App  in IMPACT  Core) .  All MICCO components will 
be available in English and Spanish , and families will receive hands -on instruction  on using MICCO . 
Component 1: Integrated Community Care. Upon beginning the MICCO intervention, t he social needs 
screener  , refined and tested by [CONTACT_8362] (see A.3) , will be sent to caregivers through the 
Nemours App  (in English) or a REDCap  survey  (in Spanish) .  REDCap survey results will be entered into the 
EHR by [CONTACT_701928].  A positive screen will appear on an EHR dashboard for review by [CONTACT_701929]’s patient -centered medical 
home .  The decision to incorporate a community health worker as part of the team was based on Community 
Partner and Healthcare Partner feedback, given the broader scope of the community health worker’s role and 
their demonstrated effectiveness  on the RPL’s recent study to increase COVID -19 vaccine uptake among 
underserved populations.  EPIC’s care management  tool will be used by [CONTACT_701930] 
a care plan, refer the family to services (e.g. food banks, transportation services, mental health providers) in their 
zipcode recommended by [CONTACT_701931], and track communi ty programs  that have been 
accessed .  The commun ity health workers  will participate in the  Council of Community Partners to incorporate 
resources shared by [CONTACT_701932].   Based on feedback from the 
Council of Community Partners, community resources will also include a monthly healthy lifestyle event for 
participants  to encourage peer support  and family engagement.  Monthly healthy lifestyle events will include a 
physical activity , healthy dinner , and presentation on a healthy lifestyle topic (e.g., cooking class, mindfulness)  
provided at no cost to participants.   
Component 2: Integrated Obesity Care. Families will receive evidence -based weight management treatment 
consistent with Stage 3 AAP Expert Committee Recommendations and U nited States Preventive  Services  Task 
Force (USP STF) guidelines ,8,47 tailored to the needs of each family.  Treatment will include biweekly telehealth  
or in-person  (included based on parent and healthcare stakeholder feedback)  visits with members of an  existing 
and established transdisciplinary group of obesity specialists (medical provider, psychologist, exercise 
physiologist, dietitian , and community health worker ) from the Nemours Healthy Weight and Wellness  Clinic, 
with an interpreter available for families whose preferred language is Spanish. Telehealth v isits will be delivered 
via the Nemours App  and in -person visits will be provided at Nemours Children’s Health, Milford . Care provided 
will include motivational interviewing  to establish lifestyle behaviors goals  specific to each child’s needs  but 
following evidence -based lifestyle recommendations like MyPlate and the Traffic Light 
Diet, cognitive -behavioral strategies such as self -monitoring and stimulus control, positive 
parenting strategies, and management of child mood and self -esteem . Based on feedback 
from parent partners  and in recognition of the challenges with attending biweekly visits,  
providers will  reach out to parents by [CONTACT_701933] ( App, 
phone, or text) if a family misses a visit.  This outreach will focus on  evaluating progress 
with lifestyle behavior goals,  problem -solving strategies to assist with lifestyle behavior 
goals, setting new lifestyle behavior goals as appropriate , and ensuring families are 
connected to community programs as needed.  
Component 3: Self -Management Tools. Families will be provided with 
psychoeducational tools  in English or Spanish  through the Nemours App to promote 
lifestyle behavior change . These will include a self -monitoring tool (Figure 3) to track daily progress toward  
lifestyle behavior goals established during visits, a series of culturally -relevant videos developed by [CONTACT_701934] (see A.3, Figure 4), and media -based 
educational resources (e.g. , exercise / cooking videos) to promote healthy lifestyle behaviors curated by 
[CONTACT_701935] . Obesity specialists  and community health workers  will review  data on an  
EHR dashboard about lifestyle behavior goal metrics  and anthropometric measurements to inform  clinical 
decision s during  visits  with families .  Participants will also have  the option of access ing the YMCA of Delaware’s 
virtual platform  through the App  at no cost to participants . 
Figure 4. Positive Parenting Videos  
 
 
families will receive compensation for study visit s, as detailed on the form.  
 
 
 
 
“The parent is what gets your child 
to come outside . Your child listens 
to you and your child looks up to 
you.” 
 “Constant motivation and 
complimenting the child will 
encourage them to keep playing and 
having more fun when they play .” 
 “If you come outside with your kid, 
they’re going to feel loved, they’re 
going to feel important, like you have 
an interest in their life .” 
 Figure 3. Goal 
Tracking
 
C.4 STUDY DESIGN : See 
PHS Human Subjects & 
Clinical Trials form for de-
tailed  eligibility criteria, 
sample size justification, 
recruitment /retention plan, 
time-line, human subjects 
protection, and data/safety 
monitoring.  All participating  
AIM 1. REFINE MICCO WITH COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT  AND THINK ALOUD  TESTING  
 
COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT  
Three communities  in Southern Delaware  (Milford, Millsboro , and Seaford ), each 2+ 
hours from the NCH -D. will be engaged in the study  in collaboration with our PROMISE  
Core . The Nemours primary care clinics  in these three towns  have a diverse patient 
population  (Figure 5). Based on  EHR data , of the [ADDRESS_952926] 
year, less than 20%  were referred to and less than 10%  attended the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] -based 
obesity clinic , with c hildren of Hispanic ethnicity being even less likely to be referred , 
underscoring disparities in accessing care.   A Council of Community Partners  and 
Parent Partners  will serve as  active members of the research team . Partners will 
participate in monthly calls and frequent e -mail correspondence, receiving a stipend for 
their time . The Council s will provide insight into implementing the study  in and 
disseminating findings to  the c ommunity , with each partner inform ing aspects unique to 
their perspective . There will be three  members from each  of 3 groups : 
1) PCPs  will inform integration of  MICCO and standard of care into the patient -centered 
medical home ; 
2) Primary care coordinators  will determine  best approach  for care coordination of psycho social services ; 
3) Community organizations providing s ocial services  or community centers  will identify and facilitate  
access to  relevant community -based  psychosocial  services and lifestyle resources  to address family 
psychosocial needs , will help recrui t families  from their organizations through advertisement and inform best 
ways to recruit and engage families during the course of the study .  
Six families of children with obesity of diverse backgrounds  will serve on a Council of Parent Partners and 
inform  ways to increase the relevance of MICCO content and decrease the burden of participating for families . 
 
THINK ALOUD TESTING : Families  of children ages 4-[ADDRESS_952927] the session  in-
perso n, an in -person session can be arranged  with a preference for participants to still use their own device to 
experience the app .   After a brief introduction to MICCO, f amilies  will be instructed on how to access the  MICCO 
App prototype  on their mobile device , tablet, or computer . They will then be instructed to use MICCO and 
encouraged to say everything that they are thinking and doing as they navigate independently through  the 
components , sharing their screen so that the research team member can view their screen flow . There will also 
be a brief series of qualitative interview questions to assess for acceptability of the App (please see attached 
interview guide). The research team member will record the session (audio and screen share  if conducted online, 
audio if conducted in -person ) and take notes on observations , including feedback about content and technology . 
The recording will be transcribed by a professional transcription company.  Personal information will be deleted 
from the transcript and the recording will be deleted after the study is complete.  After each session  (30-60minutes 
in length) , family feedback will be summarized  utilizing a  modified cognitive interview analysis protocol .48 The 
process will be  iterative, with real -time changes made quickly after each session , expedited by [CONTACT_701936], and testing ending  when saturation is achieved (i.e., no novel suggestions 
for improvement identified) . It is anticipated that 5 -10 families will be needed to achieve saturation of responses.42 
 
 
Figure 5.  Primary care clinics in 
Southern DE  
AIMS 2 and 3 : EXAMINE  IMPACT OF MICCO ON FAMILY ENGAGEMENT AND CHILD ADIPOSITY  AND 
DISPARITIES IN THESE OUTCOMES  
PARTICIPANTS : 184 families  of children with 
obesity (BMI percentile ≥ 95th percentile for age) 
ages [ADDRESS_952928],  or Millsboro  
serving primarily  rural populations  will be 
identified from the  EHR  and with advertisement 
at community centers . Participants identified 
from the EHR will be contact[CONTACT_701937]/or e -
mail message.   Interested participants will be 
advised to contact a research team member , 
who will then contact [CONTACT_701938] .  If a family is eligible and 
interested after this contact, the research team 
member will arrange a time to conduct an 
informed consent process with the participant, 
who will sign an electronic consent .  
STUDY DESIGN : Enrolled families will be randomly allocated to receive MICCO ( see C.3) or an active control 
condition ( standard care ) using a 1:1 randomization scheme stratified by [CONTACT_545]/ethnic ity (three  groups impacted 
most by [CONTACT_701939] : Latin o, non -Hispanic Black, non -Hispanic White ; Figure 6 ). The intervention 
will be delivered over [ADDRESS_952929] CARE:  An active control condition was selected to demonstrate the impact of the intervention 
beyond the typi[INVESTIGATOR_701922] a child would receive in primary care. Standard care will include  bimonthly  in-person 
visits for  lifestyle counseling with the child’s  PCP per [ADDRESS_952930] on the Nemours App 
to prevent contamination . 
OUTCOME MEASURES  
Family Engagement in Treatment : Study visits will be documented in the EHR as part of routine clinical care 
for all patients, including the number of visits with primary care providers  (where obesity and lifestyle counseling 
was provided, per ICD-10 codes ) or obesity specialists  (including type of specialist)  and number of 
cancelled /missed visits . Attrition  (non-attendance  to 6 month  follow -up visit) will be assessed  via EHR review .  
In addition, number of days in study will be assessed as a secondary outcome.  
Child Adiposity : Weight will be measured with a wireless  smart scale  that has been used in prior research and 
demonstrated excellent  agreement with research -grade scales .49-[ADDRESS_952931] Phan and mentor Davis using  a measuring tape and ruler , which has demonstrated validity 
when compared to measurement of height with a medical -grade  stadiometer  measured by a research team  
(Forset , et al., 20 22).[ADDRESS_952932] Care group .  
Disparities : Child race /ethnicity  and insurance  (proxy measure of socioeconomic status)  will be collected from 
the EHR . Age, sex, caregiver preferred language, and social needs (from screener ) will also be collected . 
C5. DATA ANALY TIC PLAN .  Think Aloud Testing (Aim 1):  Themes from qualitative interviews will be 
identified using an inductive thematic approach  (see PHS Human Subjects Form for more detail) .[ADDRESS_952933] (Aim 
2): Based on prior research describing the impact of behavioral interventions on BMI z -scores, we expect a mean 
difference in adjusted BMI z -score of 0.[ADDRESS_952934] size that has also been associated with 
a change in cardiometabolic risk.8 A sample size of 92 participants (46 in each group) can detect an effect size 
of this magnitude with a power of 80% and a level of significance of 0.05 , assuming a 50% attrition rate  based 
Measures (N = 46)  
Weight and height for every visit  
Visit adherence a nd attrition  
Figure 6.   
RCT 
Design  
Measures (N = 46)  
Weight and height at every clinic visit  
Clinic visit  adherence and attrition  
MICCO (6 months)  
Care coordination through App  
Biweekly visits  
Self-management tools in App  
MICCO Group (N = 92)  
Equal distribution of Black, Latin o, White  
Families of children [ADDRESS_952935] Care Group (N = 92)  
Equal distribution of Black, Latin o, White  
 
Conservative  
Lost to Follow -Up 
(N = 46)  
Standard Care (6 months)  
Bimonthly in -person lifestyle counseling 
with PCP per Stage [ADDRESS_952936] 
to Follow -Up  
(N = 46)  
on prior studies ,11-12 we would need to enroll 1 84 participants ( 92 in each group). A mixed effects model with 
random coefficients will be used to assess the longitudinal effects of MICCO  on change s in adjusted BMI z -score  
to minimize the effect of missing data . Logistic regression analysis will be used to assess the effect of the 
intervention on attrition . Disparities (Aim  3): The same models will be used to preliminarily assess the  interaction 
between the intervention and race/ethnicity and insurance on a djusted BMI z -score and attrition  to inform a larger 
multi -site trial that will be fully powered to evaluate disparities.  Due to pi[INVESTIGATOR_701923], the decision was made by [CONTACT_701940] 1 year.  
C.6 POTENTIAL PROBLEMS, ALTERNATIVES . Analysis of EHR data suggests that it will be feasible to recruit 
the sample size intended and advertisement  of the study through our community partners will also facilitate  
recruitment . However , if recruitment is slow we may expand eligibility to include children w ith BMI ≥ 85% or from 
other  Nemours  clinics  in rural areas . Every effort will be taken to refine MICCO based on input from stakeholders ; 
if MICCO  is found to be  ineffective  in the RCT , we will obtain  qualitative feedback from our Council s, analyze 
app analytics , and assess whether behavior change  improved . We understand that technology evolves quickly 
and modifications may be needed to ensure that the intervention remains current . We will leverage Nemours’ 
investment in innovati ve technologies  and the expertise of our IMPACT  Core to continuously improve  our 
intervention to be state  of the art.[ADDRESS_952937], unbiased results . MICCO 
incorporates evidence -based strategies for the treatment of childhood obesity that align with USPSTF and AAP 
guidelines and are informed by [CONTACT_50783]’s preliminary work.  Best practice c ommunity -engage d research 
methods and usability testing  will be used to  tailor and  refine the intervention  for families of children with obesity 
in rural communities of Delaware . A RCT will be used to evaluate efficacy of the intervention, with planned 
sample size calculated to  detect a reduction  in adjusted BMI z -score that would yield positive cardiometabolic 
outcomes  based on prior research  and accounting for attrition rates based on prior studies . Stratified  
randomization  will be used to ensure a diverse and representative sample from which disparities can be 
preliminarily evaluated . Our study will focus on o bjective o utcome measures  to assess intervention efficacy , 
using innovative and automated technology . We will collect additional information about use of MICCO  and 
components of standard care  visits to account for potential variability in participant experience of either 
intervention . Finally,  rigorous data analytic approaches and transparent reporting guidelines will be followed . 
C.[ADDRESS_952938]. Phan  will be highly competitive to apply for  funding  from the NIH  (NICHD /NIDDK  R01) or 
funding from PCORI  in year 2 of the COBRE , with a  larger goal of transforming health care delivery and policy  
for children with obesity  to include integrated preventive care  and innovative technologies to expand the reach 
of this  care. Importantly, this study will increase capacity for community -engaged research in rural Delaware to 
ensure that research with these populations continue s to be  conducted in a meaningful and impactful manner.  