Effect of Weight Loss on Prostate Cancer Pathology  
PI: [INVESTIGATOR_236502] J. Aronson, M .D. 
Co-PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_364192], M.D.  
Original Version : 08-28-07 
Modifi cation #1:  01-20-09 
Modification #2:  04 -24-09 
Modification #3:  11 -30-10 
Modification #4:  02 -22-11 
Modification #5:  04 -26-12 
Modification #6:  05 -25-12 
Modification #7:  02 -19-14 
1.RATIO
NALE
Statement of Problem :  Obesity is an epi[INVESTIGATOR_901], a major public health concern, and is a 
significant risk factor for progression and mortality from prostate cancer.  Research fr om our 
group and others suggest that weight loss interventions consisting of exercise and reduction in 
dietary fat may play an important role in the prevention of prostate cancer progression (secondary prevention).  
Objectives:  In this project we seek to establish the potential efficacy of weight loss for 
preventing the progression of prostate cancer by [CONTACT_364201] a 4-9-week weight loss 
intervention on the proliferation and apoptosis of prostate cancer tissue from radical prostatectomy specimens. We also seek to validate intermediate serum biomarkers that reflect 
or influence the weight loss -induced changes in prostate cancer tissue and which can be 
applied in future large -scale intervention studies aimed at secondary prostate cancer prevention 
in prostate cancer survivors.   
Based on 
the background and preliminary data presented in this proposal we hypothesize that: 
(1)Overw
eight and obese men that lose weight over a 4-9-week period prior to radical
prostatectomy will have decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis of prostate cancer
tissue relative to men that do not achieve weight loss, and that prostate cancer tissueobtained from men with weight loss will show evidence of a decreased tone of the local IGF
axis including reduced phosphorylation of the IGF1 receptor, as well as lower levels of IGF -1
protein levels relative to men that do not lose weight.
(2)Serum
 from men that lose weight will decrease the proliferation and increase the apoptosis
of LNCaP cells in ex -vivo bioassays to a greater degree than serum obtained from men that
do not lose weight, and that serum IGF- I levels will also fall with weight loss while IGFBP -1
levels will rise.
(3)The wei
ght loss -induced changes in serum ex -vivo bioassay results and serum IGF -1 &
IGFBP- [ADDRESS_453879] that: (a) Increased weight loss will
correlate with a fall in serum IGF- I and a rise in serum IGFBP- 1 as well as with a reduction
in the ex -vivo proliferation bioassay and increase in ex -vivo apoptosis bioassay.  (b)
Increased weight loss will correlate with increased apoptosis staining and decreased Ki67
staining in the prostate cancer tissue. (c) The post -intervention change in the serum ex -vivo
proliferation and apoptosis bioassays and serum IGF- I and IGFBP -[ADDRESS_453880] elected to undergo radical 
prostatectomy will be randomized to a control group (no weight loss) vs. a 4-9-week weight loss 
program followed by [CONTACT_9067]. Proliferation (Ki67) and apoptosis (TUNEL) of the 
prostate cancer tissue will be compared between the groups.  We will also compare the 
proliferation and apoptosis indices between the baseline prostate needle biopsy specimens and 
corresponding radical prostatectomy specimens. In addition, prostate cancer tissue IGF- axis 
RNA and protein levels (IGF -1, total and phospho -IGF-1 receptor, and down- stream molecules), 
will be compared between the weight loss and control groups.  
 Objective 2.  To evaluate if weight loss prior to radical prostatectomy in overweight and 
obese men impacts on the circulating levels of IGF- related analytes and on the Ex- vivo 
mitogenic and apoptotic activity of patient sera on LNCaP cell lines.   The ex -vivo mitogenic 
and apoptosis bioassay in LNCaP cells will be performed on pre and post sera from the Control 
Group – No Weight Loss and Weight Loss Group at baseline and prior to radical prostatectomy. 
In addition we will compare baseline and post -intervention serum IGF- I and IGFBP -1 levels by 
[CONTACT_6428].  
 
Objective 3.  To determine if the weight loss -induced changes in the serum 
biomarkers/bioassays from Objective [ADDRESS_453881] 
predictive circulating indicator of prostate tumor apoptosis.  
 
Long- Term Objectives:   Our long term objective is to establish weight loss as an effective 
treatment to slow prostate cancer progression (secondary prevention) in overweight and obese 
prostate cancer survivors. If our presently proposed trial is found to be positive, indicating that 
weight loss results in improvements in the proliferative and apoptotic indices in malignant epi[INVESTIGATOR_2130], our next trial ( intermediate goal ) will be a large scale, multi- site study evaluating if 
weight loss impacts on PSA doubling time in men with a rising PSA after primary therapy for prostate cancer. Given that PSA doubling time is becoming established as a surrogate for 
prostate cancer survival, results from this larger scale trial will determine the need for weight 
loss strategies in overweight and obese prostate cancer survivors.  
 2. BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
 
Introduction :  Obesity is an epi[INVESTIGATOR_901], a major public health concern, and is a significant risk 
factor for progression and mortality from prostate cancer.  Research from our group and others 
suggest that weight loss interventions consisting of exercise and reduction in dietary fat may 
play an important role in the prevention of prostate cancer progression (secondary prevention).  For example, our group demonstrated that a diet and exercise weight loss intervention in obese 
men reduced the serum IGF -[ADDRESS_453882] also developed unique ex-vivo bio -
assays that indicated that sera from obese men that underwent a weight loss intervention had 
anti-mitogenic and pro- apoptotic effects on prostate cancer cells in vitro , and this was a result of 
the above mentioned changes in IGF axis parameters.  In addition, our group demonstrated that feeding mice a low -fat diet resulted in decreased prostate tumor growth, increased tumor 
apoptosis, decreased tumor proliferation (ki67 staining), and decreased serum and tumor IGF- [ADDRESS_453883] on prostate cancer progression is outlined in the  
background section of the research protocol.   
Obesity and Prostate Cancer Progression:  Prior studies examining the relationship between 
adult body mass index (BMI) and risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_364193]  a positive association
1-[ADDRESS_453884] higher grade disease, and obesity was an independent predictor of prostate 
cancer recurrence following radical prostatectomy.  Interestingly, both studies found that black 
men were more likely to be obese, which may explain, in part, the higher mortality from prostate cancer among black men.
12  In regards to obesity and prostate cancer mortality, two large 
prospective studies deserve particular attention.  In 1959 and again in 1982, the American Cancer Society enrolled a cohort of patients for longitudinal studies on cancer, known as the 
Cancer Prevention Study (CPS) I and II, respectively.  Men were then followed for 13 years in 
CPS-I and 14 years in CPS -II.  Together these studies followed a total of 816,268 men during 
which time there were 5,212 prostate cancer deaths.  Both CPS -I and CPS -II reported that 
obese men (BMI >30 kg/m2) were significantly more likely to die from prostate cancer with a 
27% increased risk of prostate cancer death from CPS -I and a 21% increased risk of death from 
CPS-II.8  More details regarding CPS- II were recently published which showed that severely 
obese men (BMI >35 kg/m2) were at even greater risk of dying from prostate cancer with a 34% 
higher risk of prostate cancer death relative to normal weight men.9 The data linking obesity with 
prostate cancer progression and mortality supports the urgent need for further studies 
evaluating weight loss interventions and prostate cancer progression.  
 
Hormones, Obesity and Prostate Cancer Progression  
 
Sex Hormones and Leptin:  Studies on obesity and prostate cancer are complicated by [CONTACT_364202], but also altered serum levels of 
numerous hormones including testosterone, estrogen, insulin, insulin- like growth factor -I (IGF -I), 
and leptin, all of which have to some degree been linked to prostate cancer. Whereas androgens,
13, 14 estrogens,15 leptin,16, 17 and adipokines18 such as adiponectin may play an 
important role in prostate cancer progression in obese men, these hormones and growth factors will not be discussed here as the focus of our proposal and our preliminary data points towards 
the IGF axis proteins.  
 
Insulin: Obesity is  associated with insulin resistance and non -insulin dependent diabetes 
mellitus.19 It has been hypothesized that insulin resistance may be related to prostate cancer 
development.20 For example, Hsing et al. found that insulin resistance, diabetes, and elevated 
insulin/glucose levels increased prostate cancer risk.21, [ADDRESS_453885] of insulin resistance and or diabetes on prostate cancer development or progression.  
 
IGF-I and IGF Binding Proteins : IGF-I is a peptide growth factor and  a potent mitogen for the 
growth of androgen responsive and androgen independent human prostate cancer cell lines.[ADDRESS_453886] demonstrated that caloric restriction decreases growth of prostate tumors and decreases 
serum IGF- 1 levels.31, 32  The activity of IGF -1 is modulated by [CONTACT_5019] -affinity IGF -binding proteins 
(IGFBP's 1 –6).33  Circulating lev els of IGFBPs -1 and –[ADDRESS_453887] many forms of tumors including prostate cancer, circulating levels of IGFBP -1 
are increased, and to a lesser degree IGFBP –[ADDRESS_453888] also been shown to increase following low -fat diet and exercise interventions, 
probably due, in part, to changes in serum insulin.38 
 
Dietary Fat and Prostate Cancer Progression :  The mechanisms through which dietary fat 
may impact on prostate cancer progression (and conversely decreasing dietary fat may prevent 
prostate cancer progression) are multiple and include increased energy intake, inflammatory 
pathways, alteration of sex steroid hormones, and effects on serum and tissue growth factors.31, 
41-[ADDRESS_453889] shown an increased 
risk of pros tate cancer with a low -fat diet.48, 49 
 
Exercise and Prostate Cancer :  In a recent review of the literature on physical activity and the 
risk for prostat e cancer, Thune and Furberg found that [ADDRESS_453890] 10 years and compared prostate cancer relevant biomarkers with an age matched group of overweight men with a sedentary lifestyle.
51 
Results of prostate cancer biomarkers were more favorable in the exercise group including decreased serum IGF- I levels, increased serum IGFBP -1 levels, and decreased serum -
stimulated growth of a human prostate cancer cell line (LNCaP) in vitro when cultured in media 
containing patient sera.
51  There is a great need for further studies examining the effects of 
exercise on serum and tissue biomarkers in prostate cancer patients. 
 
Preclinical Studies in Energy Restriction and Prostate Cancer :  Several recent preclinical 
studies support the role of caloric restriction for preventing the development and progression of prostate cancer. Mukherjee et al. utilized two transplantable prostate tumor models: (1) 
androgen- dependent Dunning R3327- H adenocarcinoma in rats and (2) androgen -sensitive 
LNCaP human carcinoma in severe combined immunodeficient mice. They found that caloric restriction reduced tumor growth in both models relative to animals fed ad libitum, and increased apoptosis was found in tumors from the energy restricted groups relative to the ad libitum 
groups.
31 Boileau et al. induced prostate tumors in rats by [CONTACT_364203] N -methyl -N-
nitrosourea and testosterone (a well established model for prostate cancer), and found a 
reduced proportion of mice developed prostate tumors in the caloric restriction group relative to 
an ad libitum fed group.52 Likewise, Suttie et al. found decreased development of prostate 
cancer in TRAMP mice that were restricted in calories (relative to an ad libitum group), and 
tumors from the restricted group had reduced tumor grade.[ADDRESS_453891] of a prospective randomized trial in men evaluating weight loss and biologically relevant tumor markers. 
 
Significance:   If we find that the proposed weight loss intervention increases apoptosis and/or 
decreases proliferation in malignant epi[INVESTIGATOR_2130], this will form the basis for immediate initiation of 
larger scale trials evaluating weight loss for prostate cancer survivors. In our experience, the most likely design for this type of larger trial in the future would be to enroll men with a 
progressively rising PSA following primary therapy for prostate cancer with the aim of evaluating 
if weight loss can decrease the PSA doubling time over 1- year.  Emerging data from our group 
and others suggests that PSA doubling time directly relates to mortality in men with prostate 
cancer and therefore represents an important surrogate for future large scale trials.
54,[ADDRESS_453892] to make feasi ble 
a larger scale definitive trial in the future evaluating weight loss in men with rising PSA levels as 
described above.  
 
Relevance to Veteran’s Health :  The proposed research is directly relevant to Veteran’s 
health. Given that the majority of the VA population is aging males, prostate cancer remains a significant health concern for our patients. Prostate cancer is second to skin malignancies in incidence of prostate cancer in the [LOCATION_002] and is the second leading cause of male 
cancer deaths.
56 Obesity is also a major health concern among Veterans.  Research from our 
group found approximately 70% of veterans with prostate cancer that underwent radical  
Prostatectomy were overweight or obese.  Given the sometimes long and protracted course of 
prostate cancer, if weight loss is ultimately found to decrease prostate cancer progression, this 
will be an important non -toxic intervention for patients to consider that have elected watchful 
waiting, or as an adjuvant to other primary therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014].  
 
3. WORK PROPOSED  
 
Overview : The study design for the present proposal is illustrated below.  To obtain adequate 
power to detect a difference in prostate tumor apoptosis between the groups, the trial will 
require 30 patients per group.  Based on our prior experience with the weight loss intervention 
we will be using in this trial, we are assuming a 15% dropout rate in the Weight Loss Group. Therefore, we are adding an additional 5 subjects to the Weight Loss Group to bring the total in 
this group to 35 and the total in the overall trial to 65. 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Screening and Recruitment of Subjects - Minority Participation :  Subjects will be recruited 
for the present trial from the VA Medical Center, Greater Los Angeles Health Care System . [CONTACT_364217] conducts the urologic oncology clinic at the VA in which [ADDRESS_453893]. Aronson’s research coordinator.  Given the high prevalence of overweight 
and obese subjects ( up to 70 % at our VA10), and given the high number of radical 
prostatectomy pr ocedures performed at our VA (40/year), we anticipate no problem meeting our 65 overweight and  
obese prostate cancer  
patients  Screening  
randomization  30 pts 
35 pts Control Group, No Weight Loss Intervention  
Radical Prostatectomy  
Weight Loss Intervention  
(4-9 
wks) 
Anthropometry  
Serum biomarker studies  
(Weight Loss Gro up) Anthropometry  
Serum biomarkers studies      
(Both Groups)  Incentive  
Wt Loss Program  
(5-8 wks) 
4-9 
wks (estimated 4 -9 
wks) 
Radical Prostatectomy  
Anthropometry  
Serum biomarker studies  
(Control Group)  
recruitment goal of 65 subjects over 5- years.  As well, given that 40 -50% of men that undergo 
radical prostatectomy at the VA are AAM, we anticipate 40-50% of men in our clinical t rials will 
be AAM.62  This is extremely important given the increased risk of obesity in AAM and the 
undue burden of increased morbidity and mortality of prostate cancer in AAM.  For men 
randomized to the weight loss intervention group, the 4-9 week delay in radical prostatectomy 
has been shown not to increase the risk of biochemical recurrence.63  However, we will not 
enter patients in this trial with a high risk of having advanced disease (Gleason Grade  > 4+4) to 
avoid the potential risk (albeit extremely low) for progression during the weight loss intervention.  
 
Inclusion Criteria : 
 
1. Subject is overweight or obese (BMI > 25 kg/m2) 
2. Patient with pathologically confirmed adenocarcinoma of the prostate and has elected to undergo radical prostatectomy  
3. Able to adhere to physical activity intervention (able to walk for [ADDRESS_453894])  
4. Able to come to the VA CRC for study  visits over 4-9 weeks (necessary if the subject is 
randomized to the weight loss intervention group) 
5. Patient agrees to stop taking dietary or vitamin supplements (Lycopene***,  Vitamin E, 
selenium, genistein, fish oil) or herbal supplements (e.g. , saw palmetto, PC -SPES) prior to 
starting the dietary intervention.  
 
Exclusion Criteria: 
 1. Gleason grade of prostate cancer  > 4+5.  
2. History of ever receiving androgen deprivation therapy or antiandrogen therapy  
3. History of receiving finasteride*  in the past 9 months   
4. Patient receiving insulin** for diabetes mellitus  
5. Current  use of weight loss medications  
6. Significant co- morbidities (i.e. cardiac, pulmonary, liver disease, ongoing alcohol/drug 
abuse)  
7. Cardiac pacemaker  
 * Androgen deprivation therapy: Leuprolide, Goserelin. Antiandrogen therapy: Flutamide, 
Bicalutamide 
** Changes in insulin levels may impact on the proposed biomarkers (IGF- 1, IGFBP -1) 
*** Lycopene has previously been shown to impact on apoptosis in prostate cancer tissue
64 
 
 
Cli ni c al Tri al Fl o w C h art:  
                                                                        
 
F o ot n otes:  
1.  Fasti n g ser u m bi o mar kers/ bi oassa ys t o be st u die d are I G F -[ADDRESS_453895] u di es will be i ns uli n, P S A, a n d li pi [INVESTIGATOR_805].  
2.  T he N o W ei g ht L oss Gr o u p has t he sa me B aseli ne Visit pr oce d ures a n d Fi nal Visit pr oce d ures ( wit hi n 3 -da ys pri or t o s ur ger y) as t he W ei g ht L oss G r o u p : De xa 
Sca n, f asti n g ser u m bi o mar kers , a nt hr o p o metrics , a n d a 3- D a y Fo o d Diar y .  
3.  At wee k [ADDRESS_453896]/ Hi p Meas ure me nt will be at t he Fi nal Visit Pri or t o S ur ger y.  
 
  Scree n             
             Acti vit y                          w k -1 t o 0    b as eli ne  w k 1  w k 2  w k 3  w k 4  w k 5  w k 6  w k 7 w k 8  w k 9  s ur g er y  
 V 1  V 2  V 3  V 4  V 5  V 6  V 7  V 8  V 9  V 1 0  V 1 1   
O btai n I nf or me d C o nse nt              
Re vie w I ncl usi o n/ E x cl usi o n              
Me dical H x & P h ys  Ex a m              
C o nc o mita nt Me dicati o ns  �            
Waist -t o -Hi p meas ure me nt 3             
Wei g ht              
Gi ve s u bject 3-Da y Fo o d Diar y  
t o c o m plete              
Ra n d o mizati o n              
D E X A Sca n              
C ollect 3 -Da y F o o d Diar y              
Ser u m Bi o mar kers/ Bi oassa ys 1             
Wei g ht l oss I nter ve nti o n Visits 2             
Assess a d vers e e ve nts              
Tiss ue c ollecti o n f or bi o mar kers            �  
 
Study Procedures: Subjects will have their first study visit at the VA Greater Los Angeles 
Healthcare System Clinical Research Center (CRC) which will include subject consent and 
review of the entry criteria. Once consent is obtained, a medical history and physical exam will 
be performed including height, weight, and measurement of waist to hip ratio (anthropometrics) . 
The urologist’s DRE and clinical stage will be recorded from the subject’s urology  note, and 
prostate needle biopsy pathology including Gleason grade and percent of cores with cancer will 
be recorded . A fasting serum specimen will be collected for biomarker studies.  A DEXA scan  
will be performed (to determine lean body mass to calculate caloric intake for the weight loss 
program) and to determine percent body fat.  The Subject  will then return home and during the 
next week will keep a 3-D ay Food Diary  (Appendix 2).  Subject’s  will be randomized within 3 -
days of  their initial visit  and contact[CONTACT_364204]. 
 
Randomization:  If a subject meets all eligibility  criteria, the following steps will occur:  
 
1. The study coordinator will FAX the subject’s  initials, study ID, and date of visit to the junior 
statistician (to be named).  
2. Within [ADDRESS_453897] ician will inform the research coordinator of the randomization 
result (weight loss vs. No Weight Loss G roup) and date of randomization.  The research 
coordinator will inform the study subject of the results and schedule subsequent study visits.  
3. The randomization will use a permuted block design with 5 blocks of size 13 (7 weight -loss 
and 6 no weight -loss. 
 
Control – No Weight Loss Intervention Group:  After randomization to the control group, 
these men will proceed with radical prostatectomy as scheduled.  They will have one additional 
visit to the VA CRC within [ADDRESS_453898] recovered 
from their surgery. This optional weight loss program is given as an incentive for their participation in the trial.   
 
Weight Loss Intervention Group :  Subjects randomized to the Weight Loss Group will receive 
an appointment to the VA CRC to meet with the research study coordinator  and the study 
dietician  to initiate the weight loss intervention.  Subjects will receive one of two standard 
structured energy -restricted meal plans (1200, 1500, 1800  Kcal/day) using meal replacements 
and portion- controlled foods.  Prescribed plans will be based upon resting energy expenditure 
and lean body mass as determined by [CONTACT_364205]. The goal of the meal plan is to provide a total calorie intake incorporating 500- [ADDRESS_453899] s will lose 4 -6% of their body weight over  5-8- weeks as a result of the weight loss 
intervention.    
 
Subjects will  have weekly visits with the study  dietician until the time of the radical 
prostatectomy.  [CONTACT_55209] or her associates will oversee each of these visits with the study dietician.  
The s ubject  will receive instruction on recipes, ideas and places for food shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007],  education on 
healthy food preparation, and preparation of meal replacements.  Recommended diets will 
 
contain 20- 25% energy from fat, 15- 20% from protein and 50 -65% from carbohydr ates largely 
from fruits and vegetables with some whole grains. Fiber recommendations will be a total of 25 
grams/day from fruits, vegetables, legumes, and high fiber cereals.  
 Subjects  will be counseled by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Li or her associates on performing 1 hr of exercise/day 
including aerobic, resistance, and flexibility activities. As an exercise incentive, subjects will be 
given  a pedometer and exercise an log (Appendix  3) to complete and results will be reviewed 
with the dietitian at each visit.  Subjects will be weighed at each visit and waist to hip ratio will be 
measured at the Screening or Baseline, Weeks 2, [ADDRESS_453900] s for fatigue as well as the ability to perform their usual daily tasks (functional ability).   If 
subjects  have significant loss of strength or daily function, we will take them off  protocol and 
have them re- evaluated in the preoperative clearance clinic at the West Los Angeles VA to 
make sure they can safely undergo radical prostatectomy.    
 
Post -Prostatectomy Follow -up:  Subjects in the Weight Loss Group will have scheduled visits 
at [ADDRESS_453901] over the phone.  This will be the same for the Control subjects.  
 
Radical Prostatectomy –Tissue Collection : At the time of prostatectomy, frozen tissue blocks 
of benign prostate tissue and prostate carcinoma will be obtained immediately following surgery. 
Frozen sections will be evaluated by a pathologist to ensure the quality of the specimens and 
verify if the specimen represents benign or ma lignant tissue.  Fresh tissue will be embedded in 
OCT ( polyvinyl alcohol and polyethylene glycol), 'snap frozen', and stored at -80o. The 
remainder of the tissue will be fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin for routine histology and immunohistochemistry studies. The amount of fresh tissue obtained will 
vary depending on the size of the carcinoma, but our experience has shown that at least one 
1.[ADDRESS_453902] prostatectomy specimens. At the time of 
radical prostatectomy a sample of fat from the anterior surface of the prostate, a sample of 
subcutaneous fat and fat from the inner abdominal wall will be collected.  Half of the tissue will 
be flash frozen and used for genomic and proteomic analysis. The other half will be cultured at 
37 degrees centigrade  in M199 media and the conditioned media will be harvested and used to 
quantify secreted inflammatory cytokines such as IL8  and IL6.  
  
Serum  and Plasma  Studies- Overview :  Serum insuli n, Free and Total Testosterone, Estradiol, 
Leptin, IGF-1, IGFBP -1, PSA, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], ex-vivo mitogenic bioassay, and the ex -vivo apoptosis 
assay  will be performed at baseline and prior to radical prostatectomy in all subject  in the 
Weight Loss Group and control group. We are measuring PSA levels given that PSA represents 
an established tumor marker of disease progression in prostate cancer and weight loss may 
potentially decrease the PSA. PSA levels will also be measured in subjects in the control and 
Weight Loss Groups post -operatively every 6 -months (for the 10- year study duration) as is 
routine in our GU Oncology clinic at the VA. White blood cells will be collected from the bu ffy 
 
coat, RNA extracted, and PCR arrays will be performed to quantitate inflammatory cytokines 
and chemokines.  Subject weights will also be recorded at these visits.   
 
Ex-Vivo Bioassays:  The ex -vivo mitogenic and apoptosis bioassay will be performed in the 
laboratory of [CONTACT_364218]. These  bioassays are designed to test the presence of serum factors 
affecting the proliferation and apoptosis of androgen dependent (LNCaP) prostate cancer cells by [CONTACT_364206].  
  
Rationale for prostate cancer tissue analysis :  Weight -loss may affect prostate cancer through 
numerous mechanisms involving both primary and  secondary effects (through changes in 
serum IGF molecules or other factors).  These  changes may influence the expression of mRNA 
of key molecules, the levels of proteins expressed in cancer cells, or the 
phosphorylation/activation state of key growth and survival signaling cascades.  Our primary 
goal in this project is to identify proliferative and apoptotic changes in prostate cancer tissue in 
response to weight loss.  We will also focus our studies based on our prior observations in 
preclinical xenograft models that showed diet -induced changes in IGF1 gene expression and 
protein levels,  and reduction in the phosphorylation of the IGF- 1 receptor in prostate cancer 
tissue. We  will follow  these with additional related studies of down- stream survival molecules 
such as Akt/phospho- Akt, activated caspase- 3, BCL2, and BAX.  Initial findings will guide us 
regarding the performance of these secondary outcome measures.  
Immunostaining and Interpretation: Immunostaining of paraffin embedded pretreatment 
prostate needle biopsy specimens and malignant tissue from radical prostatectomy specimens 
will b e performed using ki67 monoclonal antibodies (DAKO) and a TUNEL assay (BioVision).  
The cancer tissue with the highest Gleason grade will be analyzed in a blinded fashion by 
[CONTACT_126205] 300 cancer cells per slide.  Our main objective (Objective 1 of this proposal) will  be to 
compare the percent of cells staining positive for ki67 and TUNEL between the Control Group-
No Weight Loss and Weight Loss Group (controlling for Gleason grade). We will also compare 
the percent of cells staining for ki67 and TUNEL in the prostate needle biopsy specimen relative 
to the prostatectomy tissue (also matching for Gleason grade).   In addition, we will perform 
correlation analysis to determine if weight loss correlates with proliferation and apoptosis. We hypothesize that with increasing weight loss there will be decreased ki67 staining and an 
increasing percentage of cells with TUNEL staining.  To further evaluate the effect of weight-
loss on prostate tumor staining of the IGF signaling cascade we will analyze immunostaining of 
phospho- IGF-1R (using a Cell Signaling antibody) and phospho- Akt (Cell Signaling). We will 
also evaluate for earlier stages of apoptosis as measured by [CONTACT_323704]- 3 (Oncogene).  
If we detect changes in apoptosis, we will also stain for BAX and BCL2 us ing antibodies from 
R&D.  If we detect changes in proliferation as measured by [CONTACT_364207]67 staining, we will also stain for 
Mcm -2 (which has been shown to be a prognostically important prostate cancer proliferation 
marker) using antibodies from R&D.
66 
 
Prostate Cancer t issue RNA and Protein Analysis:   For Western analysis, equal amounts of 
protein from the tumor tissue lysates will be evaluated by 8% SDS -PAGE analysis. Beta Actin 
antibodies (Cayman Chemicals, MI) will be used for loading control.  Membranes will be 
devel oped using the ECL system (Amersham).  Primary antibodies to total and phosphorylated 
IGF1 receptor (Cell Signaling) will be used. As a secondary aim, if we find that weight loss 
significantly impacts on the IGF -1 axis proteins as hypothesized above, we will perform analysis 
of total and phosphorylated Akt (Cell Signaling) which is known to be activated downstream from the IGF -1 receptor. In the event that increased apoptosis is observed in the experimental 
Weight Loss Group, we will also immunoblot for BAX  and BCL2 using R&D antibodies.  
 
 
Quantitative real time PCR analysis (QRT -PCR) : Total RNA from the frozen tissue will be 
extracted using the RNeasy kit (Qiagen) and checked for its purity and total RNA content. QRT-
PCR will be performed on all samples to determine the expression of IGF -1, the apoptosis -
related genes (BCL2, BAX) and the housekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_364194] -actin.  cDNA will be synthesized 
using the First Strand cDNA Synthesis kit for RT -PCR ([COMPANY_002]).  Gene- specific primers and 
probes were designed and synthesized by [CONTACT_364208]. 
PCR will be performed (in triplicates) in a LightCycler thermal cycler ([COMPANY_002]) using previously 
published conditions and amplification programs.  A negative control without a cDNA template 
will be run simultaneously with every assay. Standard curves will be obtained using serial 
dilutions of the beta- globulin gene (DNA Control Kit; [COMPANY_002]). The concentration of each gene 
product will be determined on the basis of a kinetic approach using the lightcycler software 
([COMPANY_002]) and normalized for ACTB . When comparing gene expression and protein levels 
between the groups, we will match the Gleason grade of the tissue. All of the above methods are fully operational in our laboratory. 
 
Proteinomics/Genomics:  We plan to further study the molecular nature of the weight loss -
induced changes in the tumor proteome through gene array and proteomic approaches coupled with confirmatory protein and RNA analys es. 
 
Statistical Analysis  
 
Statistical Design : The statisti cal design of this study is a randomized repeated measures 
utilizing random mixed block sizes known only to the statistician constructing the randomization 
list to assign subjects to two study arms in a ratio of 7:6, weight loss to no weight loss.  
 
Sample Size Determination: An evaluable sample of at least 60 subjects (no weight loss=30, 
weight loss=30)  is expected to provide 80% power to detect an effect size of 0.[ADDRESS_453903] with a 0.050 two- sided significance when comparing the apoptotic index (primary 
outcome variable) in the radical prostatectomy malignant epi[INVESTIGATOR_364195].  The apoptotic index will be measured in the malignant epi[INVESTIGATOR_364196]. To account for a post -randomization attrition rate of up to 15% 
in the Weight Loss Group, a total of [ADDRESS_453904] size of 1.74 on 
apoptotic index using a nutritional intervention in a similar study.64  
 
Data Analysis:   Data analyses will be performed on randomized subjects who complete the 
study. All parameters measured will be summarized descriptively. The number of subjects, mean, standard error of the mean, median and min- max values will be presented for continuous  
parameters and the number and percentage of subjects in each category will be presented for 
categorical parameters. No imputation of missing data is planned.  Demographic and baseline 
characteristics will be summarized using descriptive statistics overall  and by [CONTACT_364209]. Treatment groups will be compared using the appropriate nonparametric tests for categorical parameters and analysis of variance models for continuous 
parameters.  
 
Primary Outcome Variable:  The primary outcome variable is apoptotic index of the highest 
Gleason grade malignant epi[INVESTIGATOR_364197].  The primary 
objective is to compare the mean apoptotic index between the Weight Loss Group  and the 
Control Group- No Weight Loss .  The two independent  sample t -test will be used to compare the 
index between the groups. If the index is non- normally distributed we will use the Wilcoxon rank 
sum test. Next, linear regression models will be constructed to test whether the treatment eff ect 
 
is significant after controlling for Gleason grade, stage and any demographic factors that are 
significantly different between the groups. 
 
Secondary Outcome Variables :  The secondary outcome variables are: the proliferative index 
in prostate cancer epi[INVESTIGATOR_364198], the change in 
apoptotic and proliferative indices of malignant epi[INVESTIGATOR_364199], the change (baseline vs post -
intervention) in serum IGF- related analytes: IGF- 1 and IGFBP -1, the ex -vivo mitogenic and 
apoptotic activity of patient sera on LNCaP cells, and the change in body weight and percent 
body fat by [CONTACT_364210] 4-9-weeks.  
 
Secondary Statistical Analyses:   The statistic al methods for these analyses will be analysis of 
variance (ANOVA), linear regression, and correlation analysis. ANOVA will be used to 
determine if the serum biomarkers (IGF- I, IGFBP -1, proliferation and apoptosis bioassays) 
change over the course of time.  These models will include a term for time, treatment (weight -
loss versus no weight loss) and the time by [CONTACT_364211].  We will also construct 
ANOVA models for weight and body fat over time to determine if the treatment by [CONTACT_364212] 
(intervention effect) is significant. Next, linear regression models will be constructed for each 
biomarker to assess the factors that predict change in that marker. Predictors will include actual 
weight loss (percent change), group, grade, PSA, percent body f at, and demographic factors. 
These models will allow us to assess the direct effect of weight loss on each of the serum biomarkers and allow for the assessment of whether weight change or intervention is the 
primary factor predicting change in the biomarke rs. This assessment is required due to the fact 
that the intervention will have varying effects on weight based on the amount of subject 
compliance with the weight loss regime. Regression models will also be constructed to compare 
the groups with respect t o the pre- prostatectomy biomarkers and the tissue markers and the 
between group tissue markers (apoptosis, Ki67 staining). A separate model will be constructed for each marker including the predictors of group, grade, PSA, percent body fat and 
demographic factors. Next, we will construct regression models to determine if the biomarkers, 
or change in biomarkers, affect the post -op pathology. Ordinal regression will be used for post -
op pathology. These models will include terms for the demographic factors and for each of the 
biomarkers. Since there are a large number of biomarkers we will first construct single biomarker models which will include the covariates for each outcome and then combine together all significant markers into multiple regression models. Finally, we will use the 
Spearman correlation to test for correlations between pre- prostatectomy biomarkers and the 
tissue markers. This analysis will specifically address Objective 3 of the proposal, that being to 
determine if a correlation exists between serum biomarkers and tissue biomarkers. The 
Spearman correlation is a non- parametric rank based correlation measure that does not depend 
on the assumption that the markers are normally distributed. 
  
Subgroup Analyses:   Subgroup analyses of parameters will be performed according to 
stratification by [CONTACT_40609], previous prostate cancer treatment, tumor stage, and by [CONTACT_364213]. Clinically relevant demographic factors, baseline characteristics, and medical history will 
be examined for differences in the primary efficacy parameter.  
   
  
 
 
  
 
Literature Cited: 
 
1. Andersson, S. O., Wolk, A., Bergstrom, R. et al.: Body size and prostate cancer: a [ADDRESS_453905], 89: 385,  
1997 
2. Veierod, M. B., Laake, P., Thelle, D. S.: Dietary fat intake and risk of prostate cancer: a 
prospective study of 25,708 Norwegian men. Int J Cancer, 73: 634, 1997  
3. Putnam, S. D., Cerhan, J. R., Parker, A. S. et al.: Lifestyle and anthropometric risk factors 
for prostate cancer in a cohort of Iowa men. Ann Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541], 10: 361, 2000  
4. Whittemore, A. S., Kolonel, L. N., Wu, A. H. et al.: Prostate cancer in relation to diet, physical activity, and body size in blacks, whites, and Asians in the United  States and 
Canada. J Natl Cancer Inst, 87: 652, 1995  
5. Giovannucci, E., Rimm, E. B., Liu, Y. et al.: Body mass index and risk of prostate cancer in U.S. health professionals. J Natl Cancer Inst, 95: 1240, 2003  
6. Hsing, A. W., Deng, J., Sesterhenn, I. A. et al.: Body size and prostate cancer: a population -
based case -control study in China. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_1948], 9: 1335, 2000  
7. Snowdon, D. A., Phillips, R. L., Choi, W.: Diet, obesity, and risk of fatal prostate cancer. Am J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541], 120: 244, 1984 
8. Rodriguez, C., Patel, A. V., Calle, E. E. et al.: Body mass index, height, and prostate cancer 
mortality in two large cohorts of adult men in the [LOCATION_002]. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_88657], 10: 345, 2001  
9. Calle, E. E., Rodriguez, C., Walke r-Thurmond, K. et al.: Overweight, obesity, and mortality 
from cancer in a prospectively studied cohort of U.S. adults. N Engl J Med, 348: 1625, 2003  
10. Freedland, S. J., Aronson, W. J., Kane, C. J. et al.: Impact of obesity on biochemical control 
after r adical prostatectomy for clinically localized prostate cancer: a report by [CONTACT_364214][INVESTIGATOR_364200]. J Clin Oncol, 22: 446, 2004  
11. Amling, C. L., Riffenburgh, R. H., Sun, L. et al.: Pathologic variables and recurrence rates as 
related to obesity and race in men with prostate cancer undergoing radical prostatectomy. J Clin Oncol, 22: 439, [ADDRESS_453906], J. L., Stephenson, R. A., Coyle, L. M. et al.: Prostate Cancer Trends 1973- 1995. 
In: SEER Program, Nationa l Cancer Institute. NIH Pub. No. 99 -4543. Bethesda, MD., 1999  
13. Ho, E., Boileau, T. W., Bray, T. M.: Dietary influences on endocrine- inflammatory 
interactions in prostate cancer development. Arch Biochem Biophys, 428: 109, 2004  
14. McCormick, D. L., Rao,  K. V., Dooley, L. et al.: Influence of N -methyl -N-nitrosourea, 
testosterone, and N- (4-hydroxyphenyl) -all-trans -retinamide on prostate cancer induction in 
Wistar -Unilever rats. Cancer Res, 58: 3282, 1998 
15. Freedland, S. J., Aronson, W. J.: Obesity and Prostate Cancer. Urology (In Press), 2004  
16. Chang, S., Hursting, S. D., Contois, J. H. et al.: Leptin and prostate cancer. Prostate, 46: 62, 2001 
17. Saglam, K., Aydur, E., Yilmaz, M. et al.: Leptin influences cellular differentiation and progression in prostate cancer. J Urol, 169: 1308, 2003  
18. Trayhurn, P., Wood, I. S.: Adipokines: inflammation and the pleiotropic role of white adipose tissue. Br J Nutr, 92: 347, [ADDRESS_453907], E. S., Bowman, B. A. et al.: Prevalence of obesity, diabetes,  and 
obesity -related health risk factors, 2001. JAMA, 289: 76, [ADDRESS_453908], R. J., Aronson, W. J., Tymchuk, C. N. et al.: Prostate cancer: another aspect of the 
insulin -resistance syndrome? Obes Rev, 3: 303, 2002 
21. Hsing, A. W., Gao, Y. T., Chua, S., Jr. et al.: Insulin resistance and prostate cancer risk. J Natl Cancer Inst, 95: 67, 2003 
 
22. Steenland, K., Nowlin, S., Palu, S.: Cancer incidence in the National Health and Nutrition 
Survey I. Follow -up data: diabetes, cholesterol, pulse and physical activity. Cancer 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_1948], 4: 807, 1995  
23. Giovannucci, E., Rimm, E. B., Stampfer, M. J. et al.: Diabetes mellitus and risk of prostate 
cancer ([LOCATION_002]). Cancer Causes Control, 9: 3, 1998  
24. Rosenberg, D. J., Neugut, A. I., Ahsan, H. et al.: Diabetes mellitus and the risk of prostate 
cancer. Cancer Invest, 20: 157, 2002  
25. Iwamura, M., Sluss, P. M., Casamento, J. B. et al.: Insulin- like growth factor I: action and 
receptor characterization in human prostate cancer cell lines. Prostate, 22: 243, 1993  
26. Yu, H., Rohan, T.: Role of the insulin- like growth factor family in cancer development and 
progression. J Natl Cancer Inst, 92: 1472, 2000  
27. Chan, J. M., Stampfer, M. J., Giovannucci, E. et al.: Plasma insulin- like growth factor -I and 
prostate cancer risk: a prospective study. Science, 279: 563, 1998  
28. Wolk, A., Mantzoros, C. S., Andersson, S. O. et al.: Insulin -like growth factor 1 and prostate 
cancer risk: a population- based, case -control study. J Natl Cancer Inst, 90: 911, 1998  
29. Stattin, P., By[CONTACT_364215], A., Rinaldi, S. et al.: Plasma insulin- like growth factor -I, insulin -like 
growth factor -binding proteins, and prostate cancer risk: a prospective study. J Natl Cancer 
Inst, 92: 1910, 2000  
30. Kaplan, P. J., Mohan, S., Cohen, P. et al.: The insulin- like growth factor axis and prostate 
cancer: lessons from the transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate (TRAMP) model. Cancer Res, 59: 2203, 1999 
31. Mukherjee, P., Sotnikov, A. V., Mangian, H. J. et al.: Energy intake and prostate tumor  
growth, angiogenesis, and vascular endothelial growth factor expression. J Natl Cancer Inst, 91: 512, 1999  
32. Dunn, S. E., Kari, F. W., French, J. et al.: Dietary restriction reduces insulin- like growth 
factor I levels, which modulates apoptosis, cell proliferation, and tumor progression in p53 - 
deficient mice. Cancer Res, 57: 4667, 1997  
33. Ferry, R. J., Jr., Katz, L. E., Grimberg, A. et al.: Cellular actions of insulin- like growth factor 
binding proteins. Horm Metab Res, 31: 192, 1999 
34. Katz, L. E., S atin-Smith, M. S., Collett -Solberg, P. et al.: Dual regulation of insulin- like 
growth factor binding protein- 1 levels by [CONTACT_364216]. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab, 83: 4426, 1998  
35. Thissen, J. P., Ketelslegers, J. M., Underwood, L. E.:  Nutritional regulation of the insulin- like 
growth factors. Endocr Rev, 15: 80, 1994  
36. Donaghy, A. J., Baxter, R. C.: Insulin- like growth factor bioactivity and its modification in 
growth hormone resistant states. Baillieres Clin Endocrinol Metab, 10: 421, 1996  
37. Nam, S. Y., Lee, E. J., Kim, K. R. et al.: Effect of obesity on total and free insulin- like growth 
factor (IGF) -1, and their relationship to IGF- binding protein (BP) -1, IGFBP -2, IGFBP -3, 
insulin, and growth hormone. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord, 21: 355, 1997 
38. Hellenius, M. L., Brismar, K. E., Berglund, B. H. et al.: Effects on glucose tolerance, insulin secretion, insulin- like growth factor 1 and its binding protein, IGFBP- 1, in a randomized 
controlled diet and exercise study in healthy, mi ddle-aged men. J Intern Med, 238: 121, 
[ADDRESS_453909], R. J., Tymchuk, C. N. et al.: Effect of Diet and Exercise on Serum Insulin, IGF -1, and IGFBP -1 Levels and Growth of LNCaP Cells In Vitro. Cancer Causes 
and Control, 13: 929, [ADDRESS_453910], R. J., Leung, P. S. et al.: Insulin -like growth factor I (IGF -I) and IGF 
binding protein- 1 modulate prostate cancer cell growth and apoptosis: possible mediators 
for the effects of diet and exercise on cancer cell survival. Endocrinology, 144: 2319, 2003  
 
41. Wallace, J. M.: Nutritional and botanical modulation of the inflammatory cascade--
eicosanoids, cyclooxygenases, and lipoxygenases --as an adjunct in cancer therapy. Integr 
Cancer Ther, 1: 7, 2002  
42. Aronson, W. J., Glaspy, J. A., Reddy,  S. T. et al.: Modulation of omega- 3/omega -6 
polyunsaturated ratios with dietary fish oils in men with prostate cancer. Urology, 58: 283, 2001 
43. Ross, R. K., Henderson, B. E.: Do diet and androgens alter prostate cancer risk via a 
common etiologic pathway? J Natl Cancer Inst, 86: 252, [ADDRESS_453911], R. J., Cohen, P. et al.: Effect of isocaloric low -fat diet on human LAPC -
4 prostate cancer xenografts in severe combined immunodeficiency mice and the insulin- like 
growth factor axis. Clin Cancer Res, 9: 2734, 2003 
45. Giovannucci, E., Rimm, E. B., Colditz, G. A. et al.: A prospective study of dietary fat and risk of prostate cancer. J Natl Cancer Inst, 85: 1571, [ADDRESS_453912], D. W., Slattery, M. L., Robison, L. M. et al.: Adult dietary intake and prostate cancer risk in Utah: a case -control study with special emphasis on aggressive tumors. Cancer 
Causes Control, 2: 85, 1991 
47. Fradet, Y., Meyer, F., Bairati, I. et al.: Dietary fat and prostate cancer progression and 
survival. Eur Urol, 35: 388,  1999  
48. Severson, R. K., Grove, J. S., Nomura, A. M. et al.: Body mass and prostate cancer: A 
prospective study. BMJ, 297: 713, 1989  
49. Hsing, A. W., McLaughlin, J. K., Schuman, L. M. et al.: Diet, tobacco use, and fatal prostate cancer: results from the Lutheran Brotherhood Cohort Study. Cancer Res, 50: 6836, 1990  
50. Thune, I., Furberg, A. S.: Physical activity and cancer risk: dose- response and cancer, all 
sites and site- specific. Med Sci Sports Exerc, 33: S530, [ADDRESS_453913], R. J., Ngo, T. H., Leung, P. S. et al.: A low -fat diet and/or strenuous exercise alters 
the IGF axis in vivo and reduces prostate tumor cell growth in vitro. Prostate, 56: 201, 2003  
52. Boileau, T. W., Liao, Z., Kim, S. et al.: Prostate carcinogenesis in N -methyl -N-nitrosourea 
(NMU) -testosterone -treated rats fed tomato powder, lycopene, or energy -restricted diets. J 
Natl Cancer Inst, 95: 1578, 2003  
53. Suttie, A. W., Dinse, G. E., Nyska, A. et al.: An investigation of the effects of late -onset 
dietary restriction on prostate cancer development in the TRAMP mouse. Toxicol Pathol, 33: 386, 2005  
54. Okotie, O. T., Aronson, W. J., Wieder, J. A. et al.: Predictors of metastatic disease in men 
with biochemical failure following radical prostatectomy. J Urol, 171: 2260, 2004  
55. Freedl and, S. J., Humphreys, E. B., Mangold, L. A. et al.: Risk of prostate cancer -specific 
mortality following biochemical recurrence after radical prostatectomy. Jama, 294: 433, [ADDRESS_453914], E. et al.: Cancer statistics, 2005. CA Cancer J Clin, 55: 10, 2005 
57. Elmer, P. J., Grimm, R., Jr., Laing, B. et al.: Lifestyle intervention: results of the Treatment of 
Mild Hypertension Study (TOMHS). Prev Med, 24: 378, 1995  
58. Jeffery, R. W., Bjornson- Benson, W. M., Rosenthal, B. S. et al.: Correlates of weight loss 
and its maintenance over two years of follow -up among middle- aged men. Prev Med, 13: 
155, 1984  
59. Lanza, E., Schatzkin, A., Daston, C. et al.: Implementation of a 4- y, high -fiber, high- fruit-and-
vegetable, low -fat dietary intervention: results of dietary changes in the Polyp Prevention 
Trial. Am J Clin Nutr, 74: 387, 2001  
60. Li, Z., Hong, K., Saltsman, P. et al.: Long- term efficacy of soy -based meal replacements vs 
an individualized diet plan in obese type II DM patients: relative effects on weight loss, metabolic parameters, and C -reactive protein. Eur J Clin Nutr, 59: 411, [ADDRESS_453915], R. J., Heber, D. et al.: Evidence of an inhibitory effect of diet and 
exercise on prostate cancer cell growth. J Urol, 166: 1185, 2001  
 
62. Freedland, S. J., Jalkut, M., Dorey, F. et al.: Race is not an independent predictor of 
biochemical recurrence after radical prostatectomy in an equal access medical center. 
Urology, 56: 87, 2000  
63. Khan, M. A., Mangold, L. A., Epstein, J. I. et al.: Impact of surgical delay on long- term 
cancer control for clinically localized prostate cancer. J Urol, 172: 1835, 2004 
64. Kim, H. S., Bowen, P., Chen, L. et al.: Effects of tomato sauce consumption on apoptotic cell 
death in prostate benign hyperplasia and carcinoma. Nutr Cancer, 47: 40, [ADDRESS_453916], R. J., Tymchuk, C. N. et al.: Effect of diet and exercise on serum insulin, IGF -I, and IGFBP -1 levels and growth of LNCaP cells in vitro ([LOCATION_002]). 
Cancer Causes Control, 13: 929, 2002  
66. Meng, M. V., Grossfeld, G. D., Williams, G. H. et al.: Minichromosome maintenance protein 2 expression in prostate: characterization and association with outcome after therapy for 
cancer. Clin Cancer Res, 7: 2712, 2001  