1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol  
  
Disseminating Public Health Evidence to 
Support Prevention and Control of Diabetes  
Among Local Health Departments  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
  
Updated October 11, [ADDRESS_890989] a stepped wedge cluster randomized controlled trial of 12 local health 
departments (LHDs) in Missouri to evaluate the effectiveness of active D&I approaches  on 
perceived individual and organizational capacity for evidence- based decision making in 
prevention of diabetes and other chronic diseases .  
 
LHDs will be  randomly assigned to three groups that crossover to receive the intervention with 
measurements at 8 -month intervals. No LHDs receive the intervention at baseline. All 
participating 12 LHDs will receive  the intervention, however, for varying durations; group [ADDRESS_890990] and receives the intervention activities for 8 months. The 
intervention activities include a flexible “menu” of D&I approaches that account for local 
contextual and organizational factors. Dissemination strategies are designed to build workforce 
and organizational capacity, and may include training in evidence- based public health, technical 
assistance through a knowledge broker, providing targeted messages/emails with a short 
summary of the research and actions that might be tak en based on the evidence, and 
organizational changes to assist agency leadership in prioritizing, incentivizing and incorporating 
the use of EBPPs. LHD practitioners can choose intervention activities from this "menu". This 
"menu" approach avoids the pi[INVESTIGATOR_204733] a “one- size-fits-all” process that is unlikely to be effective 
across the 12 participating LHDs. Therefore, this study will not attempt to evaluate a single D&I intervention activity but will pursue active, multi -modal approaches, since these are supported in 
the literature.  
 Local Health Department Enrollment  
 Of the twelve LHDs selected, at least 3 will come from LHDs in counties with high diabetes disparity (highest tertile). Once all LHDs are recruited, each will be randomly assigned to one of 
three groups with four LHDs to a group. At least one LHD from high diabetes disparity will be 
randomly assigned to each group. Each group of LHDs will cross over to the intervention a t 8-
month intervals. To account for varying sample sizes for small versus large LHDs, we will limit our sample to LHDs with at least 5 employees working in or supporting chronic disease control 
and on the upper end no more than 22 individuals in larger LHD s. We will also include an 
additional 5- 10 individuals (an average of 8) from partner agencies in each local community that 
include non- governmental organizations (e.g., local hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], American Diabetes Association) 
and governmental organizations outside of the health sector (e.g., universities, parks/recreation, 
schools).  
 
LHD selection will be based in part on the total number of full -time equivalent (FTE) employees 
(number of FTEs increases with size of population served by [CONTACT_660669]), number of employees 
working in or supporting diabetes or chronic disease control, and diabetes burden, specifically 
mortality rate for diabetes as underlying cause (a measure of health disparity). Of the [ADDRESS_890991] ≥[ADDRESS_890992] a designee to work with the study team on aspects of the intervention. LHDs will 
be as signed to one of three groups (four LHDs to each group) using simple random concealed 
allocation performed by [CONTACT_30165].  
3 
  
LHDs with a total number of FTEs ≥35 or serving a population of ≥200,[ADDRESS_890993] manager (RP) contact[CONTACT_660670] 25- 34 FTEs and serve a population of 
<200,000 (8 LHDs) to determine if their LHD has ≥5 employees working in diabetes prevention and management, obesity prevention, physical activity, nutrition, cardiovascular health, or 
cancer screenings; 5 of the 8 LHDs met this criterion. Of eligible LHDs (17 of 115 LHDs), those 
with the greatest diabetes burden (i.e., in the highest tertile for mortality rate for  diabetes as 
underlying cause) followed by [CONTACT_660671]. Random assignment of the first [ADDRESS_890994] their employees working in diabetes and chronic disease control participate in the study. If 
any LHD declines, the next LHD according to total number of FTE employees will be selected. 
All employees working in or supporting diabetes and chronic disease control in participating 
LHDs will be invited into the study (complete listing), and a purposive sample of individuals from 
partner agencies (other governmental and non- governmental) in each LHD local community will 
also be invited. LHDs’ key partners will be recruited into the study with the help of the chronic 
disease managers and other practitioners. We anticipate a range of [ADDRESS_890995] a designee (most likely the lead chronic disease staff person) who will 
provide the project coordinator a contact [CONTACT_660672], agency leadership, and staff at key partner agencies. The project/study 
coordinator will send an email to the list of contacts at the measurement time poi nts (baseline, 
and three 8 -month intervals) inviting them to participate in the dissemination survey. For the 
network analysis instrument, the invitation will occur at baseline and the last measurement time 
point.  
 
Table. Stepped wedge group randomized study design.  
Shaded cells represent intervention periods (24 months, 16 months, or 8 months).  
 Months  
1-2 3-10 11-18 19-26 
Group 1  
(4 LHDs)   24 months    
Group 2  
(4 LHDs)      
Group 3  
(4 LHDs)     8 months  
 
 
Individual Participant Consent Process  16 months  
 
4 
  
For the web- based/online surveys (dissemination survey and network analysis instrument), the 
first page will be a cover letter containing all elements of consent. The cover letter will include a 
portion where individuals will be able to choose the statement that best describes how the 
individual would like to proceed ("Yes, I would like to take the survey," or "No, I prefer not to take the survey.”). If a person clicks "Yes, I would like to take the survey," this will indicate 
her/his consent and s /he will be directed to the start of the survey. If a person clicks "No, I prefer 
not to take the survey," this will indicate s/he does not consent and s/he will be directed to the 
end of the survey and no follow up invite/reminders will occur. Project sta ff will conduct follow up 
through email and telephone contact. In all contact [CONTACT_112320], project staff will emphasize that participation is voluntary. Specifically, health department personnel will be 
informed that if they choose to take part, they can change their mind and leave the survey. 
Further, they will be informed that any refusal to participate or withdrawal will not involve a 
penalty or loss of benefits to which they are otherwise entitled.  
 Intervention: Individual and Organizat ional Capacity Building Activities  
 
The capacity building (intervention) activities seek to build workforce and organizational 
capacity, and to effectively package and provide information so that it is timely, relevant, and 
useful for various local -level p ractitioners. There will be a menu of capacity building 
(intervention) activities in which each LHD can choose depending on what the LHDs deems important, relevant and feasible. The intervention period for groups begins with workshops as 
described below. A  full set of examples of capacity building activities is shown in an attached 
table (Intervention Activities). A narrative summary of potential activities are listed below.  
 
1. Targeted dissemination workshops –  promoting the use of EBPPs will be modeled a fter 
successful workshops that have been conducted to promote evidence- based decision making 
(Brownson et al., 2009, Gibbert et al., 2013). The workshops will seek to enhance participants’ 
abilities to: understand the role of EBPPs in addressing the diabet es burden; identify diabetes 
control strategies recommended by [CONTACT_12243]- based reviews (e.g., the Community Guide); adapt 
EBPPs to address health disparities; address organizational barriers to EBPPs; and take action 
steps to move toward implementation and evaluation of EBPPs. All workshops incorporate 
principles of science- based training, including: an informal setting, team training, experiential 
learning, and small group activities applicable to real world experiences. A sample workshop 
agenda with a brie f description of the modules is attached to this IRB form (EBPH Workshop 
Agenda).  
 
2. Knowledge brokers –  provide a link between research and practitioners by [CONTACT_12780][INVESTIGATOR_007] a 
mutual understanding of goals and cultures, collaborating with end users to identify  problems for 
which solutions are required, and enhancing access and use of research evidence in practice and policy. This dissemination strategy has been used more in Canada than in the US. Although 
the public health literature is sparse with evaluations of knowledge broker impact, there is 
considerable evidence of effectiveness in other fields, particularly from business and agricultural 
sectors (Hargadon 2005, Verona et al., 2006, Zook 2004). The knowledge broker activities 
include: assistance with needs  assessments and strategic planning that incorporate EBPPs; 
consultation on overcoming barriers to EBPPs; help with grant writing that incorporates 
information from evidence- based sources; and participation in the dissemination workshops 
described below. I nteraction with the brokers will be one- on-one (broker to individuals and 
teams within the LHD) and it includes face -to-face contact, and remote telephone, email, and 
video communication.  
 
5 
 3. Organizational changes – during the intervention period for each  LHD, the research team will 
work with the LHDs to identify and implement a range of strategies to foster organizational 
change consistent with Institutional Theory that is part of the project's conceptual framework. 
Examples of strategies that will be employed will seek to: identify ways agency leadership can 
prioritize use of EBPPs, develop incentives for use of EBPPs, and incorporate EBPPs as a core 
component of agency practices (e.g., performance reviews, contracts with local partners).  
 
Data Collection  
 To evaluate the impact of these intervention activities, we will:  
 
1) ask staff/practitioners working in/supporting chronic disease control at each LHD, and their 
partner organizations to complete the online dissemination survey at four time points (baseline 
and three 8 -month intervals);  
 2) ask for LHD records - program  plans and progress reports that LHDs submits to funders, 
such as the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services at two time points (baseline and 
the last data time point);  
 
3) ask for information on the external partnerships of each LHD (baseline and the last data time 
point), and then ask LHD leadership - manager level and above to complete the online network 
analysis survey at two time points (baseline and the last data time point). The surveys will be 
designed for minimal time burden (about 20 m inutes).  
 
Power Analysis  
 This study uses a stepped wedge cluster randomized design. Based on our preliminary studies 
and values of ICC in the literature, we estimated a range of effect sizes and ICCs. ICC 
estimates are the most difficult to obtain. We cal culated a median ICC from similar studies and 
developed a range based on a 50% decrease and increase around the median (range 0.009 to 
0.027). The sample size requirement is based on testing hypotheses with a power of >90% and 
the overall Type I error of 5 % given 12 clusters (LHDs). The null hypotheses suggest there 
would be no change in the scores from baseline of three outcomes —awareness, adoption, and 
maintenance—in all three groups of LHDs (no change). Drawing from our previous work, we hypothesize that  the scores will be 17%, 20%, 14% higher for awareness, adoption, and 
maintenance from baseline to end of study, respectively. Following Baio et. al., and using the 
most conservative estimates of effect sizes and ICCs, we estimate a need for 12 LHDs, 3 steps 
or groups (of LHDs), and 10 subjects in each LHD (total = 120) to ensure [ADDRESS_890996] 
measure/end of study (total = 60).  
 
 
Analysis Plan  
 Descriptive statistics for participant and LHD characteristics and main outcomes will be 
conducted by [CONTACT_660673]. We will calculate gap in each skill for EBDM by [CONTACT_660674] (possible range of -10 to +10). An overall skill gap will be  created 
by [CONTACT_660675] 10 skill items. We summed all 8 possible EBIs to calculate an “EBI score” which had a possible range of 0 -8. For organizational culture items, we grouped and 
averaged Likert items within six main focus areas based on previous work: awareness of culture supportive of EBDM, capacity and expectations for EBDM , resource availability, evaluation 
capacity, EBDM climate cultivation, and partnerships to support EBDM (20). A confirmatory 
[ADDRESS_890997] regression models for 
each outcome with LHD and Participant entered as random intercepts, trial mode (control or intervention) as fi xed effect, and time as a categorical fixed effect. Public health degree, years 
worked in the public health field, job position category and accreditation status were entered as 
fixed effects. Kenward- Rogers approximations will be used to determine signifi cance of fixed 
effects, a common approach in fitting restricted maximum likelihood models in order to produce 
acceptable Type [ADDRESS_890998] 
models will be  approximated. Survey data will be  cleaned initially in SPSS and then managed 
and analyzed in R.  
 Table. Summary of individual and organizational capacity building (intervention) activities  
Domain  Activity  Description  
Accreditation  Accreditation 
preparations  Local health assessment and plan,  formalized decision 
making, documentation of evidence, documentation 
reviews, site visit, approval  
Access to 
scientific 
information  Targeted 
messages  Participants will receive an email indicating that a 
systematic review related to diabetes or chronic disease 
control is available  
Workforce 
development  Evidence -based 
decision making 
(EBDM) training 
(dissemination 
workshops)  In-state, in -person multi -day training in EBDM skills, 9 
modules, as initial study intervention (this is the kick -off 
activity for the entire study)  
Supplemental 
brief EBDM skill 
trainings  Provided by [CONTACT_660676], in -
person or webinar, as part of  this study, with 3 states 
emphasizing evaluation skills  
Non-study 
national trainings  Hosted in -person EBDM -related skill trainings by 
[CONTACT_660677]/or encouraged out -of-state 
training beyond those required by [CONTACT_660678], guidance  
New employee 
EBDM o rientation  Via archived webinars or course materials, facilitated 
discussions, meetings  
Leadership, 
management 
supports  Chronic disease 
leadership teams expect EBDM  Leaders and supervisors continually ask ‘what is the 
evidence’, communicate EBDM expectations to staff, champi[INVESTIGATOR_660667], encourage use of data for decision 
making, encourage skill building  
Use of data for 
decision making  Use data to prioritize programs, develop work plans, and 
monitor progress; share performance measures, data on 
intranet or centralized data systems  
Centralized data 
systems  Dashboard development to prioritize, measure, and track 
objectives and link to evidence base; share performance 
measures and data  
Meetings 
incorporate 
EBDM  Work unit and cross -section meetings addre ss EBDM, 
present evidence, plans;  (in leadership and in training)  
7 
 Performance 
reviews and 
EBDM  Work unit employee evaluations include objectives on 
EBDM learning and application 
Hiring practices 
address EBDM  Job descriptions, interview questions address EBDM; 
hire people with public health competencies; hire 
specialty staff including evaluators and epi[INVESTIGATOR_660668], sharing of information 
for decision making  
Common 
language for 
EBDM  Creating and using common EBDM language across 
program areas  
Administrative 
reorganization for 
coordination  Organizational restructuring at the unit or section levels 
to increase coordination across programs and conduct 
joint projects across programs  
Organizational 
changes  EBDM engrained  EBDM an embedded inseparable aspect of day -to-day 
work; strong expectation from leadership; high priority   
Learning 
orientation  Culture supports professional development and ongoing 
learning, providing links to webinars, bringing in guest 
speakers  
Relationships 
and 
partnerships  Partnerships with 
in-state 
universities  Ongoing partnering for evaluation, trainings, internship 
placem ent 
Partner technical 
assistance and 
training  Phone and in -person guidance for partners’ evidence -
based work plans, evaluation, logic models; Provide 
EBDM trainings to partners  
Relationship 
building  Active steps to build or maintain positive partner 
relationships with open communication, trust, mutual respect, ensuring partner engagement and coalition 
development   
Financial 
practices  Performance -
based contracting Funded partners required to implemen t evidence -based 
approaches as prescribed or selected from a menu, with 
performance objectives, work plans, and evaluation; 
holding contracted partners accountable for evidence-
based interventions  
Proposals 
approved 
internally for 
EBDM prior to 
submissio n to 
funder  Local health department pre -approval process for grant 
applications to funders with requirements to show 
objectives, evidence basis, performance measures, 
evaluation plan  
 