 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Improving COVID -[ADDRESS_1156946] of the pandemic; however, Black an d Latino  adults have experienced 
reduced rates of COVID -19 vaccin ation, perpetuating disparities.3  In Delaware, 15% of Blacks and 13 % of 
Latinos have been fully vaccinated for COVID -19 compared to 21% of Whites.[ADDRESS_1156947] in vaccination rates for other infectious diseases (e.g., HPV, influenza ) in both adult and pediatric 
populations.5,[ADDRESS_1156948] an individual’s intention to vaccinate.7,[ADDRESS_1156949] difficulty accessing  vaccines due to 
systemic factors (e.g., cost, insur ance, time, transportation, and technology challenges).12,[ADDRESS_1156950] examples of this is the CDC’s Vaccine for Children Program, which 
has been able to provide routine pediatrics immunizations at no charge to children who are uninsured, 
underinsured or have public insurance through a collaboration bet ween healthcare centers serving 
underserved populations and public agencies.[ADDRESS_1156951] of the COVID -19 pandemic 
on pediatric healthcare utilization and family well -being.   Based on 
450,000+ visits to the Nemours healthcare system we found that Black 
and Latino families were less likely to attend their sch eduled 
ambulatory care visits than White families before the pandemic and 
that these disparities persisted during the pandemic.  We also showed, 
in 2500+ caregivers of children receiving care in the Nemours 
healthcare system, that Black and Latino families  are exposed to more traumatic aspects of the pandemic and 
experienced more distress from the pandemic than White families.  Caregivers of Black children also 
expressed more hesitancy in vaccinating their  children against COVID -19 (Table 1)  and were  less l ikely 
to believe  that the vaccine  was efficacious.  C aregivers  of both Black and  Latino children  were less likely to say 
that healthcare experts influenced their plan to vaccinate their child than caregivers of White children.  Data 
from Nemours’ initial C OVID -19 vaccination clinics for our patients over age 16 provides further evidence of 
disparities in uptake.  Only 31% of all caregivers (20% of Black and 27% of Latino caregivers) responded to an 
e-mail or text to schedule their adolescent for the vaccine .  This preliminary work provides insights into the 
systemic and psychosocial barriers experienced by [CONTACT_833165] -[ADDRESS_1156952] COVID -
19 when eligible [N (%)]  
Race/Ethnicity  Yes No Not sure  
Latino  94 (56.3)  17 (10.2)  56 (33.5)  
Blacka 98 (36.3)  47 (17.4)  125 (46.3)  
White  515 (59.3)  96 (11.0)  258 (29.7)  
Other  101 (52.3)  20 (10.4)  72 (37.3)  
a Significantly more “not sure” vs. “yes” and “no” vs. “yes” 
than all other groups  
children under age 16, it is important to proactively mitigate barriers to vaccination and p re-register children 
now for the COVID -[ADDRESS_1156953] 
effective interventions are multicomponent and tailored to specific  populations.  We will leverage Nemours’ 
existing marketing strategies and digital technologies to develop messaging that is specific to the concerns of 
the community, delivered by [CONTACT_833166], and in a format that will have the greate st 
reach and impact. We will also leverage Nemours’ community healthcare workers and large primary care 
network to increase access to the intervention to communities across the state of Delaware.   
B3.  We will leverage existing health system technologies and partnerships  with public agencies to 
develop an infrastructure to ensure accountability in the equitable allocation of COVID -19 vaccines  to 
children .  By [CONTACT_833167] -registration for the COVID -19 vaccine to information about the child’s demographics 
and health in the Nemours EHR, we will be providing easy registration for families from a trusted source, 
removing many of the barriers experienced with cu rrent registration systems.  The EHR -linked registry that will 
be created will be available to the Nemours primary care network and partners at the Delaware Division of 
Public Health to ensure that COVID -[ADDRESS_1156954] -practice community -based 
participatory research methods (Aim 1) . The intervention will 
be refined in an iterative process using innovative 
crowdsourcing methods with Black and Latino youth and 
caregivers  (Aim 2) .  The intervention will be pi[INVESTIGATOR_169990] a 
cluster randomized controlled trial with four primary care 
practices in Delaware and the communities they serve (Aim 
3). Overall project goal:  We will develop a culturally -tailored, 
community -informed approach to increase pediatric COVID -19 
vaccine uptake among Black and Latino communities.  
C2. RESEARCH TEAM .  Our team  (Table 2)  is exceptionally 
well-qualified to conduct this study, with expertise spanning all 
methodological and conceptual aspects of the propos ed work  
(see Biosketches).  Thao -Ly Phan, MD, MPH ( Research 
Project Lead, RPL ) is an Associate Professor of Pediatrics and Research Scientist with CHDS with expertise 
in the conduct of behavioral clinical trials and the use of health information technology . Paul Enlow, PhD 
(RPL) is a Pediatric Psychologist and Assistant Research Scientist with CHDS with expertise in behavioral 
sciences and the evaluation of healthcare disparities.  The complimentary expertise of the two MPIs, each with 
current NIH funding, has resulted in success ful collaboration on a DE -CTR grant evaluating the impact of the 
pandemic on family functioning and engagement with the pediatric healthcare system.  Anne Kazak, PhD, 
ABPP,  Enterprise Director of the CHDS, is a senior investigator with expertise in family psychosocial 
interventions  and implementation science . She will continue to serve as mentor to the RPLs on this project.   
An Advisory Committee  will provide guidance on the proposed project, leveraging their community 
engagement expertise, strong connecti ons to community and healthcare stakeholders, and prior experiences 
with the Delaware Department of Health and Social Services.  The Advisory Committee includes four 
members: 1) Kara Odom Walker, MD, MPH, MSHS , Senior Vice President and Chief Population He alth Table 2.  Research Partners  
Community Partners  
• Parents/caregivers of Nemours patients  
• Youth community group (e.g. The Warehouse)  
• Black community group (e.g. Racial Justice Collaborative)  
• Latin community group (e.g. Latin Community Center)  
Healthcare Partners  
• Community healthcare workers  
• Primary care providers  
• Delaware Division of Public Health  
• Sussex County Health Coalition  
Advisory Committee  
• Harrington Value Institute Community Partnership Fund (Lee)  
• UD Partnership for Healthy Communities (Landgraf)  
• Nemours National Office of Policy and Prevention (Walker)  
• Nemours Division of Infectious Disease (Rellosa)  
Nemours Investigators  
• Center for Health Delivery Science (Phan, Enlow, Kazak)  
• Primary care network (Miller)  
• Office of Health Equity and Inclusion ( Palaez)  
Officer for Nemours Children’s Health System ; 2) Marshala Lee, MD, MPH , Director of the  Christiana Care 
Harrington Value Institute Community Partnership Fund  and H arrington Trust Physician Scholar ; 3) Rita 
Landgraf , Director of the University of Delaware  (UD)  Partnership for Healthy Communities and Professor of 
Practice and Distinguished Health and Social Services Administrator ; and 4) Neil Rellosa, MD,  Attending 
Physician in the Nemours Division of Infectious Disease to provide expe rtise on the public health response to 
the pandemic.  Finally, t his project leverages robust resources offered by [CONTACT_833168] 
(Director Jonathan Miller, MD , co-investigator), and the Nemours Office of Health Equity and Inclusion 
(Research Associate Lavisha Pelaez, BSPH, MPH , co-investigator). Nemours Marketing and Center for 
Health Delivery Innovation (CHDI) will help create intervention prototypes and final  intervention components.  
C3. PARTNER ENGAGEMENT PLAN . To create a culturally -tailored and community -informed intervention, 
community and healthcare stakeholders (Table 2) will be engaged as research partners.  Identification and 
engagement of partners wil l be facilitated by [CONTACT_833169] (Landgraf) and 
Harrington Value Institute Community Partnership Fund (Lee).  This Council of Community and Healthcare 
Partners will meet regularly throughout the course of the study with our te am of investigators. Best practices 
from the Promising Practices Guide developed by [CONTACT_378607]’s Engage for Equity team will 
be followed to ensure that community partner engagement is successful.17-20 In addition, three FYREworks 
training  modules21 (30 minutes each) will be completed by [CONTACT_833170].18,20  The quality of the research 
partnership will be evaluated using Engag e for Equity’s Community Engagement Survey20 following every 
meeting to ensure partner synergy and alignment of values, modifying our community engagement practices 
as needed based on responses.  
C4.  STUDY DESIGN . Please  see PHS Human Subjects & Clinical Trials form for detailed eligibility criteria , 
sample size justification, recruitment/retention plan, timeline, human subjects protection,  participant  
compensation, and data/safety monitoring.  
AIM 1 . Develop a multi -component intervention to increase COVID -19 vaccine uptake among Black and 
Latino communities in Delaware in partnership with community and healthcare stakeholders.  
CO-CREATI ON OF  INTERVENTION : A 6-step 
process based on models by [CONTACT_833171]22 and 
Wallerstein18,19   will be used to co -create the 
intervention with community and healthcare 
partners (Figure 2).  
Step 1: In our first 1 -hour meeting, we will orient 
the 8 community partners (2 from each group in 
Table 2 ) and 4 healthcare partners (1 from each 
group in Table 2) to the study aims and review 
preliminary data from our survey of caregiver 
intention to vaccinate their child against COVID -
19. We will also share Nemours’ influenza 
vaccination campaign that prior itized diversity and 
inclusion (Figure 3) and the Delaware Division of 
Public Health’s COVID -[ADDRESS_1156955] with the stakeholders and outline 
strategies to reach these goals.   
Step 2:  In our second 1 -hour meeting with 
community and healthcare partners, intervention 
ideas will be brainstormed.  Ea ch partner will be 
asked to write down their ideas to address each of the three A’s (awareness, access, and accountability), 
providing input on content, delivery, and implementation, with a focus on feasibility given available resources 
and acceptability t o target communities. Individual ideas will then be synthesized into broader themes, 
ensuring equal input and promoting consensus building.22 23,24 1. Frame study 
objectives2. Brainstorm 
interventions3. Develop 
intervention 
prototypes
4. Receive 
feedback from 
partners5. Iterative 
development6. Develop final 
intervention
Figure 2. Intervention Development  Process  
Figure 3.  Nemours Influenza Vaccine Campaign Materials  
Step 3:  Based on the intervention components decided on 
during the brainstorming session, intervention component 
prototypes  will be developed (Table 3).  This will be 
accompl ished leveraging resources from the CDC, state, 
Nemours Primary Care Network, Nemours Marketing, 
Nemours CHDI, and Nemours Office of Health Equity and 
Inclusion to ensure that the prototypes are family -friendly, 
literacy -sensitive, culturally -relevant, and  state -of-the-art.  
Step 4:  Before our third meeting with community and 
healthcare partners, intervention component prototypes 
will be shared and each partner will be asked to rate the 
acceptability and f easibility of each prototype using the 4 -
item Accept ability of Intervention Measure (AIM) and 4 -
item Feasibility of Intervention Measure (FIM) .25 In advance of the meeting, the AIMs and FIMs will  be scored 
(from 1 to 5) and  average scores for each prototype wil l be calculated.  During the [ADDRESS_1156956] discussion around how any intervention component prototype that does not achieve an average score 
above 4 (indicating that participants “agree” that it is acceptable) can be modified.  
Community and healthcare partners will attend addit ional meetings as the study progresses through Aims 2 
and 3. In total, p artners will attend eight meetings  during the study.  Community and healthcare partners will be 
compensated $400 ($50 per meeting x 8 meetings) for their time  via Greenphire .  
AIM 2.  Refine the intervention through a rapid iterative process with families and youth from Black and 
Latino communities in Delaware.  
Aim 2 will comprise steps five and six of intervention development process (Figure 2). Intervention components 
developed in Ai m 1 will be refined in an iterative process with youth and caregivers from Black and Latino 
communities using a mixed -methods approach to evaluate the acceptability of the intervention components.  
PARTICIPANTS : We will extract an EHR report containing the following variables for identifying potentially 
eligible youth and caregivers: child and caregiver name, child race and ethnicity, child gender, child age, 
caregiver preferred language, caregiver contact [CONTACT_35827], child’s COVID -19 vaccination status, insurance 
type, and primary care site. Youth (n = 20-30) between 12 and 1 7 years old  who receive their medical care at a 
Nemours primary care practice, identify as Non-Hispanic Black or Latin a/o, and are proficient in English or 
Spanish will be recruited. Similarly, caregivers (n = 20-30) will be recruited if they are proficient in English or 
Spanish and are the legal guardian of a child between 5 and 1 7 years  old who receives medical care at a 
Nemours primary care p ractice and identifies as Non-Hispanic Black or Latin a/o. Potentially eligible 
participants will be  recruited  by [CONTACT_47195]-person  at 
clinic visits  from an EHR -generated list or by [CONTACT_833172] . For participants recruited 
by [CONTACT_833173], a ll follow -up efforts will be made by 
[CONTACT_648], text , and/or email , advising participants to c ontact  
the research team to learn more about or opt out from the 
project (see attached materials for each recruitment 
method). During the  initial screening  phone call  or in-
person visit  with interested potential participants , a 
research coordinator  will provide a brief description of the 
study, confirm eligibility , and conf irm interest in study 
participation.  For eligible participants who are interested 
in participating, demographic information will be 
confirmed and entered into REDCap and a secured REDCap survey link hosting an electronic consent and/or 
assent form will be sent to the participant or pulled up on a secure tablet used only for research purposes . The 
research coordinator will complete the consent process over the phone  or in-person  with the participant . Youth 
will be able to participate if their caregivers do n ot and vice -a-versa. To ensure that the intervention 
components are sufficiently evaluated for both English and Spanish -speaking families, recruitment will be 
stratified by [CONTACT_833174]/ethnicity . Based on the research team’s experience in previous studies,26-[ADDRESS_1156957]  
Table 4. Qualitative Analysis  
Step  Example Prototype  
1) Review 
Transcripts  • Upload transcripts to Dedoose  
• Examine transcripts line by [CONTACT_4548]  
• Identify key words and phrases  
2) Create and 
Revise 
Codebook  • Create a -priori codes based on literature  
• Revise codebook based on key words and 
phrases from interviews  
3) Coding  • Independent coding of transcript subset  
• Review, discuss, and resolve inconsistencies  
• Calculate inter -rater reliability calculated via 
Cohen’s K and percentage of agreement  
• Continue double coding until 80% agreement  
4) Final Coding  • Recode all transcripts using final criteria  
 
achieve saturation (i.e., no new themes or insights are added from subsequent data), supporting  the 
comprehensiveness of this type of qualitative data .29 Furthermore, we will use purposive sampling to ensure we 
gather diverse perspectives based on caregivers’ intention  to vaccinate  their child  (yes, no, or unsure). We will 
be monitoring recruitment to ensure that we are recrui ting youth and caregivers that are representative of the 
population based on demographics.  
DATA COLLECTION : Crowdsourcing  is a form of online problem -solving in which a problem or question is 
presented to a group of individuals with relevant experiences and perspectives to solicit pertinent and timely 
input.[ADDRESS_1156958] participants, will be used for 
crowd sourcing. Intervention components (e.g., videos, registration websites) will be posted to Yammer. 
Participants w ill be able to view or engage with the intervention components through the platform and will rate 
the acceptability of each intervention component on the AIM. In addition, participants will be asked to provide 
feedback via Yammer on why they felt that inte rvention components were or were not acceptable.  Participants 
will be able to  post free-text responses to queries and see others’ responses.  This simulate s participant 
interactions found in focus groups  while reduc ing logistical barriers to participation  (e.g., travel, coordinating 
schedules), which will facilitate inclusion of health care providers and  socioeconomically disadvantaged 
families .  Participants will be given the option of completing a n electronic survey or qualitative interview with 
the same questions posed to the online crowds  if they feel uncomfortable posting on Yammer .   Participants  
will be compensated , via Greenphire , for each AIM rating and each free -text response . Participants can earn 
up to $120 once this portion of the study ends, based on number of responses and ratings completed . 
ANALYSIS:  Quantitative  data (AIM ratings) will be analyzed via descriptive statistics. Qualitative data  (free-text 
responses) will be analyzed using an inductive thematic approach (Table 4).  Data w ill be analyzed until code 
and meaning saturation has occurred and the findings are reliable and thorough.34-37  Quantitative and 
qualitative data will be mixed through the process of building38,39 in which qualitative data are used to provide a 
more thorough understanding of participants’ ratings of acceptability (e.g., codes can be stratified to explore 
whether different themes emerge for participants based on acceptability ratings).  
INTERVENTION REFINEMENT:  Ratings on the AIM range from 1 to 5, with higher scores indicating greater 
acceptability. A score of 4 indicates that participants “agree” that interventions are acceptable. Intervention 
components with a mean score < 4 will be modified based on qualitative responses , with the research team 
determining what modification can be  made based on importance and feasibility.   The process of revision and 
participant feedback will continue until the mean acceptability score is ≥ 4.   
AIM 3.  Test the preliminary efficacy of the intervention through a pi[INVESTIGATOR_833161] 4 Nemours primary care sites.  
PARTICIPANTS: Four primary care practices  will be enrolled in the 
study (Figure 4), leveraging RPL Phan’s prior work with primary care 
practices in Delaware and co -I’s Miller role as Director of the Nemours 
Primary Care Network.   The four  primary care practices  selected for the 
study  have large an d diverse patient populations, with two practices in 
Northern Delaware (Becks Woods, Foulk  Road) and two in Southern 
Delaware (Milford, Seaford) having comparable patient demographics.  
All practices are within the Nemours Children’s Health System, which 
provides care to the majority of children in the state, and share an EHR.  
STUDY DESIGN:  A pi[INVESTIGATOR_833162], with clustering at the practice level .  Enrolled practices will 
be randomly allocated to receive the intervention (Intervention Practice) 
or not (Control Practice) using a 1:1 randomization scheme stratified by 
[CONTACT_833175] (Northern or Southern Delaware).   
OUTCOME MEASURES  
Vaccination Rat es: We will extract EHR data about  rate of  COVID -19 
vaccination for all eligible children at each practice.  
Accountability for Vaccination:  Vaccination rates for each site will be 
made available and reviewed monthly by [CONTACT_833176] 
N = 4220  
Rural: 0.2%  
Medicaid: 44% 
Black: 34% 
Latino: 10%  
N = 4041  
Rural: 
0.9%  
Medicaid: 
63% 
Black: 
35% 
Latino: 
21%  
N = 4183  
Rural: 63% 
Medicaid: 78% 
Black: 27% 
Latino: 25%  
N = 7234  
Rural: 35% 
Medicaid: 75% 
Black: 29% 
Latino: 16%  Figure 4 
Network, who will share an overview of de -identified data with the Delaware Division of Public Health and 
partner with them to ensure that enough COVID -19 vaccines will be allocated and distributed to communities to 
meet demand and that continual efforts to  encourage vaccination.   
Disparities: Child race/ethnicity (Black, White, Latino, Other) will be the primary measure of disparity and will 
be collected from the EHR.  Zipcode from the EHR will be used to categorize patients into rural vs. not (RUCA 
≥4)40 and to generate a Child Opportunity Index score41 for each child as secondary measures of disparity.  
Insurance, sex, medical diagnoses, and caregiver preferred language will also be collected from the EHR.  
ANALYSE S: Analyses demonstrated the efficiency of  the stratified cluster randomized trial  in detect ing a 
difference in  vaccination rate of 30% among Blacks in the Control Practices compared to an increase in 
vaccination rate to 60% among Blacks in Intervention Practices , with a sample size of 500,  < 0.05 and power 
of 90%.  Proportions of caregivers who vaccinate their child  will be compared by [CONTACT_833177]-
square test s.  To test the efficacy of the intervention, while accommodating the cluster -randomized design of 
the study, a multi -level mixed -effects model (MME)  logistic regression will be used fit to the data for the primary 
outcome of child vaccination rate  to assess the effect of intervention.  MME models will be adjusted for 
race/ethnicity  to evaluate the effect of intervention on reducing this disparity.  
C5. POTENTIAL CHALLENGES AND ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES . The state of the COVID -[ADDRESS_1156959] begins, more vaccines may become available and to younger age 
groups; however, we are certain that there will still be families who are unsure of whether to vaccinate their 
children against COVID -19 or who face barriers to access.   As vaccines become more available to children, 
Nemours Marketing may begin to develop COVID -19 vaccination campaign or registration materials.  In this 
case, we will work closely with them to ensure that the preliminary data we’ve collected from families  and the 
input of our community partners is considered.  Any early development of COVID -[ADDRESS_1156960] the process of refinin g and testing any intervention to ensure it is tailored to the needs and values of 
communities and families.  Our ongoing engagement with community partners will also ensure that we are 
nimble in adapting our approach to be responsive to any other changes in how families are experiencing the 
pandemic.  Finally, it is possible that the reach of the intervention may not extend to as many families in the 
community as intended with our pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251]. Therefore, it will be important for us to gather data on the nu mber of 
families who access different intervention components (e.g. data analytics for digital components, number of 
families who attend an event). This data can be used to determine intervention reach and provide insight into 
which components are most imp actful.   
C6. SCIENTIFIC RIGOR . This study was designed to 
ensure that it will yield robust results.  We are 
involving community partners throughout the project 
and using empi[INVESTIGATOR_833163] -create the intervention for this study.[ADDRESS_1156961] will result in a community -informed 
intervention to increase COVID -19 vaccine uptake among Bla ck and Latino children and provide preliminary 
evidence of the efficacy of the intervention.  Because the intervention is integrated into existing Nemours 
infrastructure and leverages Nemours resources, it will be readily available for use more broadly acr oss the 
entire Nemours Children’s Healthcare System once the study is complete, contributing to the sustainability of 
the project and its intended impact.  The results from this project will also position the research team to apply Table 5. Study Timeline   
 
Jul-Sep Oct-Dec Jan-Mar Apr-Jun 
Research Partner Meetings      
Co-Develop Intervention (Aim 1)      
Conduct Crowdsourcing (Aim 2)      
Finalize Intervention (Aim 2)      
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_833164] (Aim 3)      
Data Analysis & Dissemination      
for rapid funding from t he NIH or other agencies like PCORI to conduct a larger cluster randomized controlled 
trial of this approach across multiple sites in the state of Delaware, with equitable allocation of the COVID -[ADDRESS_1156962] of the pandemic on families will inform future research proposals by [CONTACT_833178] h ealth burden of 
the pandemic on children from underrepresented communities.  