COMBO- MS: Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, Modafinil, or Both for MS Fatigue  
Clinical Trials.gov NCT #: 03621761  
IRB Approval Date:  5/7/2020  (with contingencies)  
IRB Approval Notification Date:  5/18/2020  
Protocol 
Title:
 A randomized controlled trial of telephone -delivered cognitive behavioral -therapy, modafinil, and 
combination therapy of both interventions for fatigue in multiple sclerosis  
Version 6.0, 05/07/20 
HUM00143320
 
Phase
: 4 
Insti
tution: University of Michigan  
Study Si
tes: University of Michigan (1) and University of Washington (2)  
Prin
cipal Investigator s: Tiffany J. Braley, MD, MS  and Anna L. Kratz, Ph D 
Co-Inve
stigators: Dawn Ehde, PhD  (UW site PI)  
Kevin Alschuler, PhD  
Deirdre Conroy, PhD  
Gloria Von  Geldern, MD  
Ronald D. Chervin MD, MS  
Roderick Little, Ph D 
Sponsor s: P
atient -Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI)  
  National Multiple Sclerosis Society  
Clinical Trials.gov NCT #: 03621761  
Page 2 of 37 
 TABLE OF CONTENTS   
PROTOCOL SUMMARY………………………..…………………………………………..  4 
1.  INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………........  6 
1.1 Indication …………………………………………………………………… ….…… ..… 6 
1.2 Background and Rationale …………………………………………………… ……….…  6 
1.3 Safety………………………………………………………………………………… .… 7 
2.  STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS………………………………………… .... 9 
2.1 Objectives ………………………………………………………………………………  9 
2.2 Endpoints………………………………………………………………………………..  10 
2.2.1 Primary Outcomes……………………………………………………………………..  10 
2.2.2 Secondary Outcomes………………………………………………………………….  10 
2.2.3. Exploratory Endpoints………………………………………………………………..  10 
3.  STUDY DESIGN…………………………………………………………………… ..….. [ADDRESS_260689] SELECTION…………………………………………………………… .….. [ADDRESS_260690] Recruitment…………………………………………………………………….  11 
4.1 Inclusion Criteria…………………………………………………………………………  11 
4.2 Exclusion Criteria……………………………………………………………… .……….  12 
5.  STUDY TREATMENTS………………………………………………………… ..……..  12 
5.1 Allocation to Treatment…………………………………………………………………  12 
5.2 Blinding………………………………………………………………………… ..………  12 
5.3 Interventions……………………………………………………………………………...  13 
 6.  STUDY PROCEDURES………………………………………………………… .……..  15 
6.1 Screening/Baseline visit………………………………………………………………...  15 
6.2 7-day PRO -Diary  application (EMA) – BASELINE AND WEEK 12 ONLY ………….    16 
6.3 Randomization…………………………………………………………………………..  16 
6.4 Interventions…………………………………………………………………………….  16 
6.5 Week 8, Week 12, and Week 24 Visits …………………………………………..…....  16 
6.6 Assessment Windows…………………………………………………………………..  17 
6.7 Treatment Windows…………………………………………………………………….  18 
6.8 Participant Compensation………………………………………………………………  18 
SCHEDULE OF ACTIVITIES TABLE…………………………………………………..….  20 
7.  ASSESSMENTS……………………………………………………………………..…...  23 
7.1.1 Primary Endpoint Assessments………………………………………………………..…  23 
7.1.2 Exploratory Assessments…………………………………………………..... ...............  23 
7.2 Data Collection Technologies……………………………………………………………  26 
7.2.1 The PRO -Diary…………………………………………………………………………...  26 
7.2.2 REDCap…………………………………………………………………………………  26 
7.2.3 M+Box……………………………………………………………………………………  26 
7.3 General Medical History………………………………………………………………...  27 
7.4 Concomitant Medication Use………………………………………………………..…  27 
7.5 Adverse Event Assessments………………… ……………………………………………..  27 
8.  ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING…………………………………………….............  27 
8.1 AE/SAE relat edness……………………………………………………………………….  28 
Page 3 of 37 
 8.2 Serious Adverse Events (SAE) Definition………………………………………………...  28 
8.3 AE/SAE Expectedness…………………………………………………………………….  28 
8.4 AE/SAW severity………………………………………………………………………….  29 
9.  DATA ANALYSIS/STATISTICAL METHODS………………………………………..  29 
9.1 Sample Size Determination……………………………………………………………....  29 
9.2 Analysis of Study Aims  ………………………………………………………..…..  30 
9.3 Analysis of Exploratory Endpoints……………………………………………  31 
10. MONITORING ……………………………………………………………………… .. 31 
10.1 Data Safety Monitoring Plan………………………………………………………… ... 31 
10.2 Independent Medical Monitor………………………………………………………….  32 
10.3 Monitoring Plan and Information………………………………………………………  [ADDRESS_260691] KEEPI[INVESTIGATOR_1645]…………………………………….  32 
11.1 CRFs / Electronic Data Record………………………………………………………....  [ADDRESS_260692] Retention……………………………………………………………………..…  32 
12.  ETHICS………………………………………………………………………………...  32 
12.1 IRB…………………………………………………………………………………..….  [ADDRESS_260693] Information and Consent ………………………………………………….…..  32 
13. STUDY DISCONTINUATION CRITERIA…………………………………………  33 
14. ENAGEMENT…………………………………………………………………………  34 
15. REFERENCES………………………………………………………………………….  [ADDRESS_260694] aims to compare the benefits and harms of a commonly accepted behavioral strategy 
(cognitive behavioral therapy, or CBT), a commonly used pharmacological therapy (modafinil) and 
combination therapy with both treatments for the treatment of fatigue in patients with multiple sclerosis (MS).  
 Fatigue is one of the most common symptoms of MS, affecting up to 90% of MS patients at some point in their 
disease course.  The majority of persons with MS also describe fatigue as their most disabling symptom, surpassing pain and even physical impairment.  Fatigue impacts activities of daily living, social interactions, 
and quality of life, and has profound socioeconomic consequences, including loss of occupation.   
 Fatigue also remains one of the most difficult MS symptoms to manage, due to an incomplete understanding of 
the daily patient experience of fatigue in MS,  poor understanding of f actors that influence its severity, and lack 
of evidence regarding how to effectively leverage existing treatments for optimal outcomes . A critical need 
exists to optimize the use of available therapi[INVESTIGATOR_217041] , and to identify tailored, patient- centered 
strategies fueled by [CONTACT_217076].  
 
Both pharmacological and behavioral strategies exist for the treatment of MS fatigue.  Among behavioral 
treatments, cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) promotes  effective self -management skills, including adaptive 
thought processes and behaviors (i.e. “copi[INVESTIGATOR_25110]”). CBT also commonly teaches goal -setting and behavioral 
activation strategies for engaging in physical, social, and other valued activities in the context of fatigue.  CBT 
has been shown to ameliorate MS fatigue in both placebo- controlled trials, and in trials that have used active 
behavioral comparators.  CBT for MS symptom self -management has also been adapted for telephone -delivery, 
effectively expanding access to this treatment.  Yet, despi[INVESTIGATOR_217042], it remains unknown whether combining  CBT with other therapi[INVESTIGATOR_217043], particularly for those who do not respond to CBT alone, which patients respond most favorably to CBT, or how CBT compares to pharmacological treatments in ameliorating MS -related fatigue.  
 Pharmacological approaches are also frequently employed to treat fatigue in M S, yet the effects of these 
treatments have never been directly compared to CBT, or studied in combination with CBT, or studied in 
pragmatic trials.  Among such therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014], modafinil is a safe, we ll-tolerated and effective wake- promoting agent 
that is FDA -approved for the treatment of fatigue related to sleep disorders.  Modafinil is also one of the most 
commonly used medications for MS -related fatigue in clinical practice. Although several studies  have 
demonstrated the effectiveness of modafinil for MS -related fatigue (testing doses up to 400 mg per day) , 
limitations of previous non- pragmatic trials have precluded formal prescribing recommendations or FDA 
approval of this medication. Consequently, off -label use of this drug is weakly supported in an unofficial 
capacity, commonly followed by [CONTACT_217077] “larger randomized controlled studies are necessary,” 
leading to decisional uncertainly regarding when it should be used and in which patients .  
 To address these gaps in our knowledge, this pragmatic RCT will capi[INVESTIGATOR_135814] a representative, heterogeneous  
sample of MS patients , novel patient -centered fatigue measures, and expertise from key stakeholders to 
compare the effectiveness of CBT monotherapy, modafinil monotherapy, and CBT+modafinil combination 
therapy  on fatigue impact, fatigue severity, and fatigability in patients with MS (Aim 1) , determine 
heterogeneity of treatment effects of co mmon potential modifiers including depression, sleep disturbances, and 
MS disability level (Aim 2) , and compare adverse events, treatment adherence, and patient dropout rates  among 
the three treatments (Aim 3).  
 
 
Objectives , Aims,  Endpoints , and Assessments:  
Page 5 of 37 
 The Aims  of this randomized, rat er-blinded clinical trial are to : 1) Compare the effectiveness of 3 therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]: 
CBT monotherapy, modafinil monotherapy, and CBT+modafinil combination therapy on patient -reported 
fatigue impact , fatigue intensity,  and fatigability among fatigued individuals with MS; 2) Test whether 
depression, sleep disturbances, or MS disability level modify comparative treatment responsiveness across 
treatment arms in terms of fatigue impact (i.e., heterogeneity of treatment effe cts); and 3) Compare adverse 
events, side effects, treatment adherence, and patient dropout rates among the three treatment arms and patient subgroups of interest.  
 Self-report measures of fatigue impact  (Modified Fatigue Impact Scale - primary endpoint) , fatigue intensity  
(Brief Fatigue Inventory ) and potential effect modifiers ( depression, sleep, and MS subtype/disability level ) will 
be assessed at baseline, at [ADDRESS_260695] -worn accelerometer pre -treatment (baseline) and 
[ADDRESS_260696] additional data on physical activity level, fatigue intensity (numerical self -report scale), and 
fatigability (ratio of EMA fatigue intensity/physical activity level).   See Figure [ADDRESS_260697] Scale (MFIS) 
score between 12 weeks and baseline (delta- MFIS), compared between the [ADDRESS_260698] 
subgroups, including those with clinically significant depression, progressive MS subtype and higher EDSS 
scores, and confirmed/suspected sleep disorders  (not related to poor sleep hygiene) , will be evaluated with 
interaction terms  in mixed effects models .  Interactions will be treated as random rather than fixed effects . 
 
For Aim 3, descriptive statistics will be used to analyze patte rns of treatme nt side effects (incidence, type, 
severity, and relatedness) and treatment adherence between treatment groups (modafinil vs. CBT vs. combination therapy).  Adverse event frequency between treatment groups and among subgroups of interest 
will be evaluated u sing ANOVA. Multiple linear regression models will be used to determine association 
between treatment group and treatment adherence (percent usage of prescribed therapy).  We also will assess whether degree of treatment effects measured in Aim 1 are related to treatment adherence (e.g. “dose 
response”).      
Page 6 of 37 
 1. INTRODUCTION  
 
1.1 Indication  
A critical need exists to optimize the use of available therapi[INVESTIGATOR_217041] , and to identify tailored, 
patient -centered treatment strategies that accounts for the diversity of MS patients.  
 
1.2 Background and Rationale  
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic, autoimmune disease that causes inflammation and destruction of the brain and spi[INVESTIGATOR_1831].  This condition is the leading cause of non- traumatic disability among young adults, and affects 
nearly half a million Americans and 2.[ADDRESS_260699] common symptoms of MS, affecting up to 90% of MS patients at some point in their 
disease course.  The majority of persons with MS also describe fatigue as their most disabling symptom, 
surpassing pain and even physical impairment .  Fatigue impacts activities of daily living, social interactions, 
and quality of life, and has profound socioeconomic consequences, including loss of occupation.  Fatigue also remains one of the most difficult MS symptoms to manage, due to an incomplete understanding of the daily 
patient experience of fatigue in MS,  poor understanding of factors that influence its severity, and lack of 
evidence regarding how to effectively leverage existing treatments for optimal outcomes.  
 
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_217044], there is insufficient information to guide tailored 
treatment decision -making for fatigue management in MS .  For example, although data from other chronic 
health conditions such as major depressive disorder and fibromyalgia suggest that combination therapi[INVESTIGATOR_217045]- term 
success for symptom management, only single -treatment modalities have been studied for MS fatigue.  
Furthermore, prior trials of treatments for MS -fatigue have not taken into account specific MS subpopulations 
who may, by [CONTACT_217078], respond better to one particular treatment or combination of treatments.  Finally, existing trials of some of the most commonly used treatments for MS fatigue have relied on 
measures that do not fully reflect the patient experience with this symptom.  Consequently, clinicians have little 
evidence to determine whether a specific monotherapy or combination ther apy is indicated for a particular 
patient.  Specifically, three major research gaps have contributed to the current decisional uncertainly regarding 
the approach to fatigue treatment in MS: (1) lack of pragmatic, comparative effectiveness trials, including  trials 
of combination therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014], for two of the most commonly used non- pharmacologic and pharmacologic 
treatments in clinical practice; (2) lack of assessment of common treatment effect modifiers associated with MS 
that contribute to fatigue (depression, sleep, and progressive MS/disability severity); and (3) lack of novel, 
reliable patient -centered fatigue outcome measures.   
 Among behavioral treatments  for MS fatigue , cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) promotes effective self -
management skills, includin g adaptive thought processes and behaviors (i.e. “copi[INVESTIGATOR_25110]”). CBT also 
commonly teaches goal -setting and behavioral activation strategies for engaging in physical, social, and other 
valued activities in the context of fatigue.  CBT has been shown to a meliorate MS fatigue in both placebo -
controlled trials, and in trials that have used active behavioral comparators such as energy conservation and 
exercise.  CBT for MS symptom self -management has also been adapted for telephone -delivery, effectively 
expan ding access to this treatment.  Yet, despi[INVESTIGATOR_217046], it remains unknown whether combining CBT with other therapi[INVESTIGATOR_217047], particularly for those who do not respond to CBT alone, which patients respond most favorably to 
CBT, or how CBT compares to pharmacological treatments in ameliorating MS -related fatigue.  
 
Page [ADDRESS_260700] 
demonstrated the effectiveness of modafinil for MS -related fatigue, the variability and limitations of previous 
non-pragmatic trials  (such as low sample size, lack of evaluation of important effect modifiers, and patient 
selection issues)  have precluded formal prescribing recommendations or FDA approval of this medication. 
Consequentl y, off -label use of this drug is weakly supported in an unofficial capacity, commonly followed by 
[CONTACT_217077] “larger randomized controlled studies are necessary,” leading to decisional uncertainly 
regarding when it should be used.  
 To inform best pract ice guide lines and address research these current research gaps, t his pragmatic comparative 
effect iveness RCT aims to compare the effectiveness of cognitive behavioral therapy, modafinil, and 
combination therapy on MS -related fatigue, in the context of common effect modifiers (depression, sleep 
disturbance, and disability level), using novel methodology that will capture the day- to-day experiences of 
patients with MS.  
 
Clinical Rationale  
Providers and patients need data regarding the real -world effecti veness of CBT and modafinil that accounts for 
the diversity of the MS population, effects  of treatment on daily function, and heterogeneous experience of 
fatigue. E xperts in the field have called for use of combined therapi[INVESTIGATOR_217048] -
management (CBT) interventions, but further evidence is needed to determine 1) which patient characteristics 
determine  whether to pursue CBT or modafinil for fatigue; and 2) whether  combination therapy with CBT plus 
modafinil lead s to a synergistic response  in fatigue management , and if so, which patients are most likely to 
benefit.   
 
1.3 Safety  
 
Risks  
Activities involved with this study will  involve no more than  a minor increase over minimal risk.  There are 
no alternatives to these data collection procedures.  Participants may choose to not participate in any part of this 
voluntary study. Medical treatment (e.g. medication management) as received as part of routine clinical care 
will bear no more risk than usual care given the treatment will take place in the same clinical context.  
 Cognitive Behavioral Therapy phone se
 ssions :  The risks of CBT are minimal . It is possible that some of the 
participants may become fatigued during the treatment sessions or find it uncomfortable to talk about their situation with the therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541].  Further, given the frequency with which fatigue is associated with psychological 
distress, as well as the inclusion of people with depression, we anticipate that some of the study participants will 
exhibit signs of psychological distress during treatment.   
The use of telephone sessions will help to reduce the risks related to fatigue. Clinicians will be trained to 
be at 
tentive to signs of fatigue or distress among all participants, who will be told they can stop any study 
procedures at any time if they feel uncomfortable. A participant will be referred to a medical professional if a study team member  concludes they need attention regarding an acute medical issue as identified in the medical 
evaluation. All participants will be informed they can stop participa tion at any time without penalty or any 
effect on the medical care or benefits they receive at their MS Center (either  UM Medical Center  or UW 
Medicine MS Center) , or any other medical institution. All participants will be offered the opportunity to 
discus s any situations or experiences associated with the study procedures they deem uncomfortable or adverse 
with one of the Principal Investigator s or, for UW participants, the UW Site PI  [INVESTIGATOR_12749] -Investigator. 
Page 8 of 37 
  
Modafinil: Use  of modafinil involves a minor increase over minimal risk.   Modafinil is generally considered 
to be safe and well tolerated.  The m ost common adverse reactions (5%) associated with modafinil which 
occurred more frequently than placebo- treated patients in  previous clinical trials were headache, nausea, 
nervousness, rhinitis, diarrhea, back pain, anxiety, insomnia, dizziness, and dyspepsia. It is recommended that caution be used in patients with a history of psychosis, depression, or mania, to avoid exacerbation of these 
conditions.  Serious rash requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_217049].  
Life-threatening skin conditions such as Steven- Johnson Syndrome or Toxic Epi[INVESTIGATOR_217050], 
angioedema, anaphylaxis, hypersensitivity reactions involving multiple organs, new or increased psychiatric symptoms (including worsening depression, mania, depression, suicidality) , or increased blood pressure  are 
possible. Dose reduction is recommended in patients with severe hepatic impairment.  Modafinil use may 
decrease the effectiveness of hormonal contraception, use of alternative or concomitant methods of 
contraception while taking modafinil and for one month after discontinuation of modafinil treatment is 
recommended.  Elimination of drugs th at are substrates for CYP2C19 (e.g., phenytoin, diazepam, propranolol, 
omeprazole, and clomipramine) may be prolonged by [CONTACT_217079], with resultant higher systemic exposure .   
All potential risks of modafinil will be outlined in the informed consent document and discussed with 
the p
atient prior to enrollment.  Patients will also be advised that there may be unforeseen risks not outlined in 
the ICF.  Based on the package insert, eligibility criteria will exclude pregnant women, and a urine pregnancy test will be required prior to study enrollment.  Women of childbearing age will be advised of the risk of 
decreased effectiveness of hormonal contraception with modafinil use and be advised to use a form of birth 
control that does not involve hormonal contraception ( spermicide or condoms) during the study and for one 
month after discontinuation of modafinil treatment .  Participants  with a history of hepatic impairment , 
participants over age 65, and participants who use warfarin, phenytoin, MAOIs and cyclosporine  will be given 
dose limitations that will not exceed half of the maximal daily dose for healthy patients  (50- 100 mg once -twice 
daily  as tolerated) .  Patients will be advised to monitor for common  side effects  of modafinil i ncluding 
headache, nausea, nervousness, rhinitis, diarrhea, back pain, anxiety, insomnia, dizziness, and dyspepsia while 
on modafinil, and if these symptoms occur or worsen, to alert the study team , during which time dose reduction 
or discontinuation will be discussed .  Participants who experience worsening depressive symptoms, psychosis, 
increased suicidality,  or suspected allergic react ions ( rash, hives, mouth s ores, blisters, swelling of the  face, 
eyes, lips, tongue, or throat, trouble swallowing or breathing, fever, shortness of breath, swelling of the legs, yellowing of the skin or whites of the eyes, or dark urine ) will be instructed to stop treatment immediately and 
contact [CONTACT_3476] . Participants  are also advised not to consume alcohol per the drug label.  Participants  
should be instructed to call study team when new drugs are added or removed from their drug regimens so that 
drug interactions can be assessed.  Participants  may choose to discontinue their treatment at any time if they 
experience any untoward effects that  they believe are related to modafinil, but will be encouraged to remain in 
the study until completion  for monitoring.  Adverse events and severe adverse events will be assessed /reported  
regularly and on an as -needed basis in accordance with the protocol, GCP, and IRB standards  (see sections 7.5 
and 8).  Action involving possible PI [INVESTIGATOR_217051], GCP and IRB guidelines , as well as the medical monitor  (see section 10 and 13) .   
 Confidentiality  (min
 imal risk) :  Loss of confidentiality regarding the subject’s study data (especially data 
regarding MS diagnosis and symptoms) could cause embarrassment or have social/occupational consequences. This risk is minimal, because a number of pre cautions have been taken  in order to protect confidentiality. Only 
authorized members of the research team will have access to study records . All collected data will be entered 
into a secure password protected electronic database (REDCap)  system, which is a secure, password protected, 
and HIPAA compliant web- based data platform hosted by [CONTACT_217080] (MICHR) at the UM. This protected database will be accessed and maintained by [CONTACT_217081]. This system features both a local and remote web- based interface, secure data transfer, and an Oracle 
database. Data security, patient privacy, and HIPAA requirements are a premium consideration for clinical trials 
Page 9 of 37 
 research using REDCap. A complete time- stamped audit of all REDCap activity (including which and when 
study personnel access data) is maintained, adding to the security and fidelity of the data. Study personnel can 
enter data into the database through administrative access to add to the self -report data provided by [CONTACT_4317]. 
Data coding will be done by s ubject ID number.  Coded paper records (including ICFs) will be locked in file 
cabinets, and cross- referenced by a name- subject  ID key for verification that will be stored in another location. 
Identifying information will not be attached to the collected data. Trained study personnel will enter pertinent information into the database. Trained study personnel will enter pertinent information into the database. 
Computers will be locked when not in use.  
 Study Questionnaires  (minima
 l risk) : Risks of study questionnaire completion include discomfort, frustration, or 
boredom.  These risks will be minimized by [CONTACT_217082]. The process of administering surveys via REDCap is 
very straightforward; URL links are emailed to study participants, who simply click on the link to complete 
their survey. They can complete the survey in a single sitting or save and return later t o complete it. REDCap 
provides study personnel with real -time information on what data a participant has provided; in cases where 
participants do not complete the online surveys in a timely manner reminder calls can be placed.  
 Ecological momentary assessment ( PRO -Di
 ary®, minimal risk ): Risks of completing ecological momentary 
assessments (EMAs) on the PRO -Diary  (wrist -worn monitor) include discomfort, frustration, and the potential 
hassle of interruption of daily routine.  These risks will be minimized by [CONTACT_217083]- and bed- time assessments when it is convenient for them and by [CONTACT_217084] -out of or 
postpone EMAs that are not convenient for them (they will be shown how to silence the monitor/delay reporting) .  These risks will also be minimized by [CONTACT_9377][INVESTIGATOR_217052]. Participants may 
also experience discomfort from wearing the PRO -Diary ®, especially if they are not used to wearing a watch on 
a daily basis. This risk is extremely rare  in our experience collecting data. We will minimize this risk by 
[CONTACT_217085] a few days to get used to wearing the PRO -Diary ®.  
 Suic
idal Ideation:  
In the event that a participant  mentions suicidal ideation or other severe mental distress that could result in harm 
to self or others, an initial assessment, using the Suicidal Ideation Documentation form will be conducted, by 
[CONTACT_217086]. Guidelines in this form indicate what the 
study team member should do in case of a true emergency (i.e. contact [CONTACT_9150]), and how to collect information to adequately assess the participants suicidal risk. One of the study investigators  who is a licensed 
psychologist (Drs. Kratz, Conroy, Ehde, or Alschuler, depending on location) will then be contact[CONTACT_217087]. If indicated by [CONTACT_217088], one of these 
psychologists may contact t he participant by [CONTACT_217089] a more in -depth self-harm/suicide assessment, 
taking appropriate action (e.g. referral for mental health services, contact[CONTACT_217090]) as needed.   All safety related incidents will be reported to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_217053].  
 As with any research study, there may be additional risks that are unforeseeable.  
   
2.  STUDY OBJECTIVES AND ENDPOINTS  
 
2.[ADDRESS_260701] modifiers (depression, sleep disturbance, and disability level), using novel methodology that will capture the day- to-day experiences of patients with MS.  
Page [ADDRESS_260702], as assessed by:  
[CONTACT_217091] (MFIS) score between 12 weeks and baseline 
(delta -MFIS), compared  between the [ADDRESS_260703] , and fatigability (measured 
using PRO -Diary ecological momentary assessment  and accelerometry, measured 4 x/day for 7 days, at 
baseline and 12 weeks ), compared  between the 3 treatment groups 
 
      2.2.3 Exploratory Endpoints  
a) The mean difference in the Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (MFIS) score between 0 and 8 weeks, and 
0 and 24 weeks (delta -MFIS), compared between the 3 treatment groups  
 
b) clinical treatment patterns post-intervention 
 
3.  STUDY DESIGN  
 
This is a randomized, rater blinded, comparative effectiveness  trial.  Consenting participants with MS and 
chronic problematic fatigue who meet all inclusion/exclusion criteria will be enrolled and randomized in a 1:1:1 
ratio to  receive telephone- based CBT (Group 1: 12 weeks of  one-on- one telephone -delivered sessions  of CBT 
that emphasize fatigue self -management skills; 8 weekly programmatic sessions + 2 maintenance/booster 
sessions), modafinil (Group 2: 100- 200 mg once -twice daily as tolerated, for 12 weeks); or combination 
treatment with CBT (8 weekly sessions + 2 b ooster sessions) and 12 weeks of modafinil (Group 3).   
 
Self-report measures of fatigue impact (Modified Fatigue Impact Scale - primary endpoint) and potential effect 
modifiers (depression, sleep, and MS subtype/disability level)  will be assessed at baseline and  at 8-weeks, [ADDRESS_260704]- worn accelerometer pre- treatment (baseline) and 12 weeks (i.e., concluding at the end of 
therapy) to collect additional data on physical activity level, fatigue intensity (numerical self -report scale), and 
fatigability (ratio of EMA fatigue intensity/physical activity level).  For specific measures and timeline see 
Figure 1, study schematic, below .  
Page [ADDRESS_260705] Recruitment  
Participants will be recruited from the UM and UW MS Clinics tertiary clinics. Additional participants will be 
recruited through  UM and UW medical records;  other neurology practices throughout Mid- and Southeaster n 
Michigan (by [CONTACT_217092]) and the Pacific Northwest, UM and UW electronic clinical trials registries; advertisement through community outlets (e.g., posting flyers in community centers, distributing flyers and 
fund raising walks), clinicaltrials.gov; Face book and other social media campaigns, iConquerMS, and from 
advertisements posted by [CONTACT_217093] (study stakeholder).  
The table below shows the current enrollment plan for data collection.  
 
Total number of study participants expected to be screened:  360 
Of those screened, total number of study participants expected to be 
eligible:  340 
Of those eligible, total number of study participants enrolled:  330 
Target sample size (i.e., of those eligible, total number of study 
participants expected to be enrolled) : 300 
completers  
 
We anticipate enrolling 50 subjects per site in year 1, 65 subjects per site in year 2, and 50 per site subjects in 
year 3, or an average of 4 -5 subjects per month per site throughout the course of the study . 
 
4.1 Inclusion Criteria  
1. Patients with clinically definite MS (all MS subtypes included, regardless of disease duration, disability level, or disease modifying therapy status);  

Page 12 of 37 
 2. Age 18 years or older ;  
3. Presence of chronic, problematic fatigue that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_217054], has interfered with their daily 
activities for ≥ 3 months;  
4. Average Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS) score greater or equal to 4 at screening.  
5. Access to the i nternet with video- capable smart phone or computer if performing study remotely (virtual 
visit).  
 4.[ADDRESS_260706] (diagnoses in which modafinil is already widely accepted as symptomatic care)  
2. History of MS relapse within the last 30 days prior to screening (participants will be considered eligible after the 30- day window);  
3. Current stimulant or wake -promoting agent use such as amantadine  (Symmetrel) , modafinil  (Provigil) , short 
or long ac ting methylphenidate (Ritalin/Concerta) , dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine), dextroamphetamine -
amphetamine (Adderall, Adderall XR), lisodexamfetamine (Vyvanse), armodafinil (Nuvigil), or amphetamine  
(Adzenys XR -ODT, Dyanavel XR, and Evekeo) within 30 days of screening (if present, patients could still be 
eligible after a 30 -day washout);  
4. For female participants  only: Pregnancy or breastfeeding (modafinil is contraindicated in these conditions);  
5. For female participants  only: Reliance on hormonal contracep tion ( such as such as birth control pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353], shots, 
implants, patches, vaginal rings) AND concomitant unwillingness to use alternative non-hormonal means of 
birth control (spermicide or condoms) during the course of the study (modafinil can decrease the effe ctiveness 
of oral contraception);  
6. Current suicidal ideation (SI) with intent or plan  (per a response of ≥ 1 on the suicide item from the P atient 
Health Questionnaire-9) ; these individuals will be assessed by a study psychologist and referred for urgent 
mental health treatment† (people with SI but no intent or plan will be included).  
7. Known hypersensitivity to modafinil or armodafinil or its inactive ingr edients . 
8. History of t he following cardiovascular  conditions: recent myocardial infarction  (last 6 months prior to 
screening), unstable angina, left ventric ular hypertrophy, mitral valve prolapse , NYHA class III or IV 
congestive heart failure  
9. Diagnosis of hypertension within the past year  not managed by a health care provider  
10. Recent hist ory (within 1 year) of  prescription or illicit stimulant abuse (such as cocaine, amphetamine, 
methamphetamine)  
11. Any other m edical , neurological,  or psychiatric condition that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_7372], could 
affect participant safety or eligi bility.  
  
†Participant behavior or comments that suggest imminent threat will prompt immediate [ADDRESS_260707]  SI with plan but no immediate threat will prompt psychiatric ER referral  
 
5.  STUDY TREATMENTS  
 5.1 Allocation to Treatment  (see also 6.4)  
Randomization Process  (see also section 6.3) : Participants who meet all I nclusion/E xclusion criteria  will be 
randomized (1:1:1  randomization) to CBT  (Group 1, n~ 100), modafinil  (Group 2, n~ 100), or combination 
CBT+modafinil after the participant has signed consent and completed the baseline activities.  
 
5.[ADDRESS_260708], PI, co -investigators, interventionists, and coordinators will not be blinded.  
 
Page 13 of 37 
  
5.3 Interventions:  
 Telephone -based CBT : Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for fatigue (CBT – see table 1), also commonly 
referred to as “fatigue self -management”, was chosen as a comparator given its endorsement in MS fatigue  
treatment guidelines based on previous efficacy studies demonstrating its bene fits in MS . For this study, we will 
use telephone -delivered CBT for fatigue self -management, which also has a strong evidence -base f or its use in 
MS patients .  Developed and tested by [CONTACT_217094] ([CONTACT_75934]), this treatment is routinely 
utilized in her clinical practice to manage several chronic symptoms in MS including pain, depression, and fatigue in MS.  In her primary trial of this intervention using the telephone -delivered treatment, which targeted 
MS-related pain and depression as well as fatigue, 50% of fatigued participants with MS had a clinically 
meaningful reduction in pain impact that was maintained at [ADDRESS_260709] treatment .  This treatment 
will be delivered one -on-one via telephone by [CONTACT_34450] y interventionists with  special training in CBT for symptom 
management and in telehealth delivery. The team of psychologists includes Drs. Kratz, Ehde, Alschuler, and 
Conroy, who are all licensed clinical psychologists, who will supervise the two study int erventionists (one per 
study site). Study interventionists will be either licensed clinical psychologists, clinical psychology pre-doctoral students or postdoctoral fellows , or Master’s level social workers. Currently, the primary intervention ists are  
Kristen Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9107], MS W at UM (Drs. Conroy and Kratz secondary/back- up interventionists) and Jamie Tingey, 
MSW, Tiara Dillwo rth, PhD, and Elena Mendoza, MS  at UW (Drs. Alshculer and Ehde secondary/back -up 
interventionists).  
 
The study interventionists  will be tra ined and supervised in the intervention by [CONTACT_217095], 
including [CONTACT_75934] (author of the telehealth treatment manual, on which this study is based) and [CONTACT_75930] 
at UW, and Drs.  Kratz and Conroy at UM. Training will include readings, didactics, and ongoing review and 
supervision of recorded sessions. A fidelity protocol will include therapi[INVESTIGATOR_217055], protocol checklists, weekly supervision meetings, and an ongoing independent review of randomly selected digital recordings from at least 
10% of all sessions. These procedures will ensure therapi[INVESTIGATOR_217056] (i.e., make certain that 
patients assigned to CBT get CBT as prescribed in the treatment manual).  If poor treatment fidelity is observed, that therapi[INVESTIGATOR_217057], additional training, and have all sessions reviewed to ensure 
100% adherence to the protocols.   
 
Table 1.  Major components of the manualized CBT fatigue self -management intervention  
Overall treatment goals:  Inform participants about fatigue in MS and engage patients to learn and apply 
fatigue self -management skills tailored to their strengths and priorities. Key self -management skills include: 
energy conservation/self -pacing, self -monitoring, sleep behaviors, identifying strengths and priorities, goal -
setting (based on individual values), behavioral activation, relaxation techniques, and managing thoughts and 
emotions.  
Session Content (8 weekly sessions and 2 booster sessions; each session 45 -60 minutes)  
Introduction to MS -related fatigue and fatigue self -management  
- Factors that contribute to MS fatigue, self -management philosophy, self -monitoring, identifying strengths  
Energy management  
- Self-monitoring check- in, energy management strategies/priorities, energy conservation/pacing training, 
staying active  
Sleep  
- Sleep behavior assessment, sleep education about sleep regulation, establish a plan for healthy sleep hygiene, 
problem -solving barriers to sleep disturbance (including morningness/eveningness tendencies); energy 
management check -in 
Goal setting and identifying stressors  
-Exploring priorities, setting goals, stress response, diaphragmatic breathing (intro to relaxation); energy 
Page 14 of 37 
 management check -in 
Working with thoughts (par t 1) 
- Identifying/label thoughts, thought stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007], distraction; relaxation practice; energy management check -in 
Working with thoughts (part 2)  
- Challenging unhelpful thoughts, evidence gathering, alternative thoughts; relaxation practice; energy 
manage ment check -in 
Managing emotions  
- Emotions and fatigue, living in the present, nurturing positive emotions, gratitude, guided imagery; energy 
management check -in 
Building resilience and moving forward  
-    Designing a personal fatigue self-management plan, skills relapse prevention, building resilience  
Two 15 -20 minute calls between weeks 8 -12, to review and troubleshoot implementation of fatigue self -
management skills, including their personal self -management plan.  
 
 
Modafinil:  Modainil will be  prescribed by [CONTACT_217096].   Modafinil (2-
[(diphenylmethyl) sulfinyl]acetamide) is a centrally -acting oral agent that is FDA -approved to improve 
wakefulness in patients with excessive sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_217058], obstructive sleep apnea, or shift 
work disorder.  The mechanism(s) through which modafinil promotes wakefulness is unknown.  Modafinil’s 
benefits for fatigue in MS have been demonstrated in 5 previous studies. Three successful open label studi es 
that used various subjective fatigue measures, demonstrated a benefit of modafinil on fatigue intensity.  A single- blind placebo- controlled study also demonstrated a significant improvement in fatigue intensity with 
modafinil in a recent study.  One 8-w eek double -blind placebo- controlled trial which examined the effects of 
modafinil on fatigue intensity showed a significant improvement in fatigue with modafinil.   
Modafinil will be dispensed for Group 2 and 3 patients following 1 week of baseline actigra phy 
monitoring and at 8 weeks .  At baseline, p articipants  will be prescribed the 100 mg pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353]  (enough to take up to 4 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_63711]) .  They will be advised to take  100 mg once a day (upon awakening)  as a starting point for the first 
week.  Depending on res ults, p articipants will be allowed to adjust their dose based on the following scenarios:  
 
- If the  100 mg/day  dose effectively treats their fatigue throughout the day, partic ipants will remain on 
this dose.   
- If the 100 mg/day  dose is adequate, bu t of in sufficient duration, participants  will be allowed to take 
another half pi[INVESTIGATOR_217059] (early afternoon: at least 8 hours before bedtime ) for a total 
dose of 150 mg or 200 mg a day.  
- If the 100 mg/day dose provides insu fficient relief of fatigue, participants  may increase the dose to 200 
mg/day (upon awakening).  
- If the 200 mg/day  dose is adequate, but of insufficient duration, participants will be allowed to take 
another 1 or 2 pi[INVESTIGATOR_217060] (early afternoon: at least 8 hours before bedtime) for a total dose of 
300 mg or 400 mg a day (max dose = 400 mg per day).  
- If the 100 mg dose is perceived by [CONTACT_217097], but associated with 
excessive side effects (see 1.3), participants will be allowed to decrease their dose to [ADDRESS_260710].  A pi[INVESTIGATOR_217061].  
 
*Participants who report a history of liver problems, participants age 65 or older, participants who us e warfarin, 
phenytoin, MAOIs or  cyclosporine†, and participants in whom the investigators think could be at increased risk 
for side effects, will only be permitted to take ½ of the maximum daily  dose, prescribed enough pi[INVESTIGATOR_217062] a 
maximum of 1 pi[INVESTIGATOR_217063] a day (200 mg/per day) unless they have previously tolerated and required a higher 
dose prior to enrolling (in which case they will be allowed to return to their previously tolerated dose, up  to 400 
Page 15 of 37 
 mg per day) . At baseline, these participants will be prescribed the 100 mg pi[INVESTIGATOR_3353].  They will be advised to take 
50 mg once a day (upon awakening) as a starting point for the first week (A pi[INVESTIGATOR_217064] .).  Depending on results, participants will be allowed to adjust their dose based on the 
following scenarios:  
 
- If the 50 mg/day dose effectively treats fatigue throughout the day, participants will remain on this dose.   
- If the 50 mg/day dose is adequate,  but of insufficient duration , participants will be allowed to take 
another ½ pi[INVESTIGATOR_217065] (early afternoon: at least 8 hours before bedtime ) for a total dose of 50 
mg twice a day.  
- If the 50 mg/day dose provides insufficient relief of fatigue, participants may increase the dose to 100 mg/day (upon awakening).  
- If the 100 mg/day dose is adequate, but wears off more quickly than desired, participants will be allowed to take another half pi[INVESTIGATOR_217066] (early afternoon: at least 8 hours before bedtime ) 
for a total dose of 150 mg or 200mg  a day (max dose = 200 mg per day).  
 
A medication dispensing log that shows how much drug that was dispensed for each participant at each time point (baseline and week 8) will be used for drug medication review.   
 
†if randomized to a modafinil treatment arm, participants on these medications will be told to inform their 
prescribing providers of the addition of modafinil to their regimen, to allow the opportunity for additional blood 
monito ring if the prescriber thinks this is necessary 
  Combination CBT+modafinil:  The CBT+modafinil  combination therapy will entail simultaneous 
engagement in both therapi[INVESTIGATOR_217067].  
 
6.  STUDY PROCEDURES  
 Pre-screening: We will be completing record review & pre -screening (over the phone) questions prior to 
informed consent procedures in orde r to evaluate initial study eligibility  prior to being scheduled for the 
screening/baseline visit .  
 
6.1 Screening /Baseline  Visit  
Depending on state or institutional COVID -19 restrictions at time of screening, baseline visits may be 
conducted virtually (via video meeting) or in-person. Even when in- person visits are permitted, participants will 
still be given the option for virtual visits.   
 
For in- person visits, s ubjects will be seen at one of several UM or UW sites for baseline visit activities, 
including but not limited to the University of Michigan Taubman Neurology  Clinic, Michigan Clinical Research 
Unit (MCRU), and the UW Medicine Multiple Sclerosis Center.  
 Informed consent will be obtained by [CONTACT_114007].  Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria will be reviewed. 
For virtual visits, the informed consent will be obtained  digitally. See section 7.2. 4. 
 
The screening portion of this visit will  include confirmation of eligibility via:   
1) Participant self -report (e.g. FSS, PHQ -3, etc.)  
2) Demographic information  
3) Focused medical and surgical history as it relates to multiple sclerosis (subtype, prior disease 
modifying therapy use, disease duration), fatigue, mood disorders and hepatic issues (for modafinil)  
4) Medication review  
Page 16 of 37 
 5) Neurologist assessment of eligibility  
6) Pregnancy test ( For individuals  of childbearing age who identify their pregnancy status as unsure)  
 
 
Eligible subjects will be randomized into one of the 3 study arms & will complete baseline assessment s of self -
reported fatigue, disability, sleep, exercise, self -efficacy, and other quality of life factors via online Redcap 
surveys.   
6.2  Home monitoring 7-day PRO -Diary  application ( EMA)  – BASELINE AND WEEK 12 ONLY : After  
completing the above screening/ baseline activities, participants will receive instruction on use of the PRO -
Diary® accelerometer watch, which the participant will wear during two separate 7 -day “home monitoring” 
periods, at baseline (sent home with watch following baseline visit) and 12 weeks  to assess physical activity 
(objectively measured via accelerometry), AND ecological momentary assessment (EMA) of fatigue intensity, 
fatigue impact, fatigability (ration of fatigue intensity/accelerometer activity counts), and sleep. See 
“Assessments” se ction . 
 
The [ADDRESS_260711] at the end of the study treatment interval; so 
that the home monitoring takes place before participants have discontinued their Modafinil, the 
assessment will begin approximately one week before the end of treatment for all treatment arms (i.e., home monitoring will conclude  around [ADDRESS_260712] -treatment initiation).  
 
6.3 Randomization 
Following collection of baseline assessments, participants will be randomized during the baseline screening 
visit and assigned treatment.   
 Randomization Process/Blinding:  Subjects who meet criteria I/E criteria will be randomized using computer -
based randomization via http://cscar -randomization.appspot.com/  (1:1: 1 randomization) to determine whether 
they will receive telephone based CBT monotherapy (Group 1, n~ 100), Modafinil monotherapy (Group 2, 
n~100) , or combination therapy with both treatments (Group 3) .  Statisticians and study staff who process data 
(subjects will enter data directly into the database, so no stu dy personnel are directly collecting data)  will 
remain blinded to group allocation for the duration of the study. The subject, PI, co-investigators, study interventionists, and coordinators will not be blinded.   
 6.4
 Interventions:  see also section 5.[ADDRESS_260713] 
7-days of PRO -Diary home monitoring.  
6.5 Week 8, Week 12 , and Week 24 Visit s  
Group 1 (CBT monotherapy) : Pa
 rticipants will have the option of completing all post- baseline REDCap 
assessments (week 8, 12, and 24) remotely (computer based assessments via weblink which will be provided, or 
paper forms by [CONTACT_2319])  or in-person.  An internet -connected device will be provided by [CONTACT_217098].  
Page 17 of 37 
 For Week 12 home monitoring period, the watch and instructions for completing the monitoring and for 
returning the monitor following the 7- day monitoring period (accompanied by a pre -paid return envelope) will 
be mailed to participants, so that the materials are delivered to the participant ahead of the start of the 11th week.  The study staff member will place a reminder call to the participant on or around the first day of the 
Week 12 home monitoring period and will answer any questions that participant has about completing the Week 
12 home monitoring.  
Group 2 (Modafinil monot her
 apy)*: Participants will have the option of completing all REDCap assessments 
remotely (computer based assessments via weblink which will be provided, or paper forms by [CONTACT_2319]), or or in-
person. An internet -connected device will be provided by [CONTACT_1758] s taff member for the participant to complete 
the REDCap assessments if they choose to complete them during the study visit.  Participants will be able to 
receive drug refill at 8 -week either in -person at UMHS (for in- person visit) or in the mail (for virtua l visit). 
Participants will be encouraged to complete the Week 12 REDCap assessment during the final (12th) week of 
treatment, as close to the end of treatment as possible. For Week 12 home monitoring period, the PROdiary  and 
instructions for completing the monitoring and for returning the PROdiary  following the 7- day monitoring 
period (accompanied by a pre -paid return envelope) will be mailed to participants, so that the materials are 
delivered to the participant ahead of the start of the 11th week. The st udy staff member will place a reminder 
call to the participant on or around the first day of the Week 12 home monitoring period and will answer any 
questions that participant has about completing the Week 12 home monitoring.  Participants will be asked to  
report number of remaining modafinil pi[INVESTIGATOR_217068] , or receive the drug destroyer via mail at the 
end of the 12- week treatment interval to  properly dispose of any unused m odafinil. 
Group 3 (Combination therapy) *:  
Participants will have the option of completing all REDCap assessments remotely (computer based assessments via weblink which will be provided, or paper forms by [CONTACT_2319]), or in -person. An internet -connected device will be 
provided by [CONTACT_217099].  Participants will be able to receive drug refill at 8-week either in -person 
at UMHS (for in -person visit) or in the mail (for virtual visit).   
Participants will be encouraged to complete the Week 12 REDCap assessment during the final (12th) week of treatment, as close to the end of treatment as possibl e. For Week 12 home monitoring period, the PROdiary and 
instructions for completing the monitoring and for returning the PROdiary  following the 7- day monitoring 
period (accompanied by a pre -paid return envelope) will be mailed to participants, so that the materials are 
delivered to the participant ahead of the start of the 11th week. The study staff member will place a reminder call to the participant on or around the first day of the Week 12 home monitoring period and will answer any 
questions that participant has about completing the Week 12 home monitoring. Participants will be asked to 
report number of remaining modafinil pi[INVESTIGATOR_217069], or receive the drug destroyer via mail at the 
end of the 12- week treatment interval to properly dispose of any unused modafinil.  
 
Participants who might be at risk for a sleep disorder (obstructive sleep apnea, restless leg syndrome, excessive 
daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008], and clinical insomnia) which might require further evaluation or treatment based on 
assessments administered during the study will be notified by [CONTACT_217100] 12- week visit. The letter will 
recommend that they share the informatio n with their primary care doctor . 
 
6.6 Assessment Windows 
Day 1 (start of Week 1) is designated as the point at which treatment starts; this will be somewhere between 7 
and 14 days after the baseline visit where randomization occurred. The treatment window is the 12 weeks 
between Day 1 and the end of Week 12.  
 
Page 18 of 37 
 Efforts will be made to ensure that assessments are gathered as close to the target assessment time points (Week 
8, Week 12, and Week 24) as possible; however, unexpected circumstances often arise that make data collection 
at very specific time points difficult.  Therefore, we have established the following assessment windows .  If a 
participant is not able to complete the assessment during the designated assessment window, they will be 
allowed to stay in the study (at the site investigator discretion) , compl eting any later assessments as they are 
able and willing.  
 
Protocol deviations will be completed for participants completing the assessments out of window, with the 
exception of the prescreening to screening assessment window.  Protocol deviations will not  be reported for self -
report survey data. Self -reported survey data at the baseline, 8 week, 12 week and 24 week surveys is not being 
collected to assess safety -related information (e.g., side effects, AEs). As is standard, participants are not 
required to  answer any self -reported survey questions they do not wish do answer, and some participants opt to 
skip questions/surveys they are not comfortable with. If participants skip a question(s) on the surveys (administered online via REDCap), they will be prompted by [CONTACT_217101] a question(s) and 
they can go back and answer or choose to proceed without answering. We have found that in previous studies, 
skippi[INVESTIGATOR_217070], and thus we do not expect it to affect data validity.  
 Additional ly, protocol deviations will not be reported for missed EMA assessments administered by [CONTACT_169847] -
Diary data during the home monitoring periods. We expect that there may be instances where participants are unable to complete the EMA questions (for example, i f it alerts at a time that is inconvenient for them to answer 
or they forget to answer). Previous studies have shown that compliance with these repeated assessments is ~75%. The EMA assessments do not assess safety so a missed assessment is not a safety co ncern. We expect 
that participants will miss some of these assessments and have selected the length of the home monitoring periods (7 days) to make sure data validity is not compromised if participants miss some of the EMA 
assessments.  
 Any missed safety assessments will be reported as protocol deviations. Safety assessments are conducted by [CONTACT_217102]- person or by [CONTACT_217103], [ADDRESS_260714] with the participant (e.g., phone calls).  
 
1. Prescreening to Screening/Baseline Assessment Window: Study staff will a im to schedule the 
screening/ baseline visit within 2 weeks of pre -screening. If the baseline visit is beyond 2 weeks from pre -
screening, a study staff member will ask prior to the visit if there has been any change (in fatigue, meds, 
pregnancy, MS relapses, etc.) since pre- screening.  
2. Baseline Home Monitoring Assessment Window: Participants will be given 14 days from their Baseline 
visit to complete their 7 -day home monitoring period assessment. Although participants are asked to complete 7 
days of home monitoring, a minimum of 3 full days of home monitoring data will be considered adequate (this allows for lost data d ue to technology malfunction/user error/illness/etc.).  
3. Week 8 Assessment Window: A ± 2 -week (± 14 days) window around the Week [ADDRESS_260715] not allowed modafinil treatment to 
lapse/run out during this time period.  
4. Home Monitoring Prior to Week 12: The Week [ADDRESS_260716] after modafinil has stopped; monitoring will cease following the 
last day of modafinil treatment even if an entire 7 days  of data has not been collected.  
5. Week 12 Assessment Window: The Week 12 survey (REDCap) assessment can be completed up to 2 
weeks (-14 days) prior to the Week 12 visit, but if possible should be completed within the final week of 
modafinil treatment, a nd no later than final day of modafinil administration.  
Page 19 of 37 
 6. Week 24 Assessment Window:  A ± 1-month (± 30 days)  window around the Week 24 period will be 
allowed for collection of follow -up data.   
 
6.7 Treatment Windows  
CBT:  For participants randomized to receive CBT, treatment will commence as soon after the last day of 
baseline PRO -Diary monitoring as therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]/participant schedules will allow. Efforts will be made to complete 1 
session per week for 8 consecutive weeks (main  treatment sessions) followed by 2 approximately every-other-
week maintenance sessions (maintenance sessions).  However, flexibility in the scheduling of these sessions 
will allow for, at a minimum, completion of the 8 main treatment sessions within the 12- week  treatment period. 
If needed , scheduling of >1 session/week, but no more than 2 sessions in a 7- day period is allowable to ensure 
that the full treatment is delivered in the 12 -week treatment period.  No treatment sessions will be delivered 
beyond the 12-week treatment period.   
 
Modafinil: For pa rticipants randomized to receive modafinil, treatment will commence the day after the last day 
of baseline PRO -Diary monitoring, and continue for a period of [ADDRESS_260717] day of CBT .  
 
6.8 Par
ticipant Compensation  
Participants will be compensated $300 for full completion of the study.  For those who do not complete all 
study assessments, the compensation schedule is noted on the consent form and is as follows:  
 
Baseline Assessment: Participants  will receive $100  for fully completing the baseline REDCap  surveys and 
home monitoring period  assessment. For those who do not complete both components of the baseline 
assessment, participants will receive  $25 for completing REDCap  survey measures & $75 for completing 
the home  monitoring period assessments (minimum 3 days of data).  
 
Week 8 Assessment: Participants will receive $50 for completing the Week 8 REDCap  surveys.  
 
Week 12 Assessment:  Participants will receive $100 for fully completing the Week 12 REDCap  surveys 
and home monitoring period assessment. For those who do not complete both components of the Week 12 
assessment, participants will receive $25 for completing REDCap  survey measures & $75 for completing 
the home monitoring period assessments (minimum 3 days of dat a).  
 
Week 24 Assessment: Participant will receive $50 for completing the Week 24 REDCap  surveys.  
 
Participants will be compensated for assessments after each completion; thus, they may be remitted up to 
four separate payments, after completion of each assessment period.   
  
Page 20 of 37 
 6.9 SCHEDULE OF ACTIVITIES  
 
 
Study Activity  Baseline 
(week -1 
to -2 ) Weeks  
1-7** Week 8  Weeks  
9-11 Week 12  Weeks 
13-23 Week 24  
Demographics  X       
Medical/Surgical 
History  X   
X  X  X 
Interview with a 
Neurologist for 
assessment of 
eligibility  X    
  
 
Krupp’s Fatigue 
Severity Scale 
(FSS)  X    
  
 
Patient Health 
Questionnaire -[ADDRESS_260718] if 
applicable  X    
  
 
AE/SAE review  (all 
participants)*  X  X  X  X 
Randomization X       
Modafinil 
dispensing (for 
Groups 2 and 3)  X  X  
  
 
Study Intervention 
Administration   X  
X  
X X   
Treatment 
adherence    X  X   
Treatment 
Utilization Patterns 
(post -intervention)      
  
X 
Excess modafinil 
destruction (if 
applicable)      
X  
 
Computer -based self -report measures  
Modified Fatigue 
Impact Scale 
(MFIS)  X   
X  
X  
X 
EDSS self -report  X       
STOP -BANG 
questionnaire  X       
RLS Index  X       
Page 21 of 37 
 Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_7109]  X   
X  X  X 
Insomnia Severity 
Index  X       
Sleep Hygiene 
Index  X   
X  X  X 
Patient Health 
Questionnaire -8 X   
X  X  X 
Generalized 
Anxiety Disorder -7 X   
X  X  X 
Brief Pain 
Inventory  X  X  X  X 
Exercise (Godin)  X  X  X  X 
PROMIS Self -
Efficacy Scale  X  X  X  X 
PROMIS Cognitive 
Function  X  X  X  X 
MSQOL54 - Quality 
of Life Subscale  X  X  X  X 
NeuroQoL Ability 
to Participate in 
Social Roles & 
Activities  X  X  
X  
X 
Post-Treatment 
Questionnaire      X  X 
Patient Global 
Impression of 
Change      
X  
X 
7-day home monitoring (PRO -Diary ) measures  
Physical Fatigue 
Severity (4x/day)  X    X   
Mental Fatigue 
Severity (4x/day)  X    X   
Physical Fatigue 
Impact (4x/day)  X    X   
Mental Fatigue 
Impact (4x/day)  X    X   
Wake up time 
(1x/day)  X    X   
Bed time (1x/day) X    X   
Sleep refreshed 
(1x/day)  X    X   
Rest breaks 
(1x/day)  X    X   
Cognitive clarity 
(1x/day)  X    X   
Cognitive speed 
(1x/day)  X    X   
Page 22 of 37 
 Pain Severity 
(1x/day)  X    X   
Daytime physical 
activity 
(continuous)  X    
X  
 
* For Modafinil -treated participants in Group 2 and 3, AE/SAE review will be additionally assessed at the 
following time intervals:  
- 2-4 days after starting Modafinil  
- 7-10 days after starting Modafinil  
 
**Activities marked Week 1 -7 begin after the baseline assessments, which include a 7 -day home monitoring 
period.  
 
Page 23 of 37 
 7.  ASSESSMENTS  
 
7.1.1  Primary Outcome  Assessments (see also section 7.1.3)  
The Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (MFIS, primary outcome measure)1,2: is a patient -reported 
21-item validated measure of fatigue impact based on patients’ recent personal experience as it 
relates to physical, cognitive, and psychosocial functioning.  The MFIS has been shown to be 
sensitive to changes secondary to interventions.  Scores range from 0- 84.  Higher scores indicate 
more fatigue.   
 
7.1.2
 Secondary/exploratory outcome assessments, e ffect modifier measures , screening  
measures  (see also section 7.1.3)  
Self-reported Expanded Disability Status Scale (SR -ED SS)3: is a valid ated self -report version of 
the clinician -administered EDSS; scores on the SR -EDSS correspond highly with clinician- rated 
EDSS.  
 STOP -Bang Questionnaire: The STOP -Ban
 g is a validated, 8 -item screening instrument that 
assesses characteristics known to confer risk for OSA, and form the acronym “STOP -BANG” 
(Snoring, Tiredness, Observed apneas, high blood Pressure, BMI, Age, Neck circumference, 
Gender).4 Item scores (1/0) are based on yes/no answers. Scores ≥3 indicate elevated risk for 
sleep apnea.  
 
Krupp’s Fatigue Severity Scale (FSS)5 – I/E criterion : The FSS is a validated, [ADDRESS_260719]’s clinical improvement.  Many if not most past studies on MS -related 
fatigue have used the FSS.  
 
Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_7110] (ESS)6: The ESS is an [ADDRESS_260720] objective 
polysomnographic measures.  A score ≥10 suggests excessive sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008].  
 Insomnia Severity Index (ISI)
7,8: The Insomnia Se verity Index (ISI) is a [ADDRESS_260721] moderate clinical insomnia.   
 Sleep Hygiene Index (SHI)
9: The Sleep Hygiene Index is a 13 -item self -report measure designed 
to assess the practice of  sleep hygiene  behaviors. Each item is rated on a five-point scale ranging 
from 0 (never) to 4 (always). Total scores range from 0 to 52, with a higher score representing 
poorer sleep hygiene  . 
Restless Legs Syndrome Diagnostic Index (RLS -DI)10,11: is a 10 -item questionnaire designed to 
improve diagnostic decision making in suspected cases of RLS.  This instrument incorporates 
essential diagnostic criteria with additional supportive criteria to rule out f alse positive cases, 
which can occur in patients with MS.  A score of +11 yields a 93% sensitivity and 96% specificity to diagnose RLS.   
Page 24 of 37 
  
The Patient Health Questionnaire –8 (P HQ-8)12:  assesses frequency of [ADDRESS_260722] 2 weeks. It has been validated in MS and provides clinical cut -points ranging from no 
depression to severe depression (range 0-24).  
 Patient Health Questionnaire -2
12,13 plus item 9/ i from the PHQ -914 (PHQ-3) – I/E criterion : 
assess the frequency of [ADDRESS_260723] two weeks. The PHQ -2 has been validated 
as a depression screen and item 9/i from the PHQ -9 is used to assess for suicidal ideation.   
 The Brief Pain  Invent
 ory (BPI)15,16: assesses both pain intensity (4  items) as well as pain 
interference in multiple life domains (7 items) and has demonstrated good psychometric characteristics, including validity, in MS.  
 The Generalized Anxiety Disorder – 7 (GAD
 -7)12,17: is a commonly used anxiety measure that 
assess [ADDRESS_260724] 2 weeks, and provides clinical cut -points for anxiety 
severity (scores range 0 – 21).  
 
The Godin L eisu re-Time Exercise Questionnaire18: is a brief, 4 -item measure of the frequency 
and intensity of exercise during “a typi[INVESTIGATOR_3711]” that has been frequently used in MS clinical research and has even been used to validate accelerometer measures of physical activity in MS.   
 Neuro -QoL Ability to Participate in Social Roles & Activities 8 -it
 em Short Form19,20: is an 8 -
item measure of a person’s ability to participate in various social roles and activities across a range of social domains (home/family, recreation).  Raw scores range from 8 -40, with higher 
scores indicating better ability to participate. T score s, with a Mean=50 and SD=10 can be 
calculated for comparison to a normative sample of individuals with neurological conditions.  
This measure has been validated in MS.  
 Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) Self -Effic
 acy for 
Managing Symptoms Short Form 8a21,22: is an [ADDRESS_260725] a Mean=50, SD=10; higher scores indicate greater 
self-efficacy.   
 Patient Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System (PROMIS) Cognitive Abilities 
Short Form 8a:  is an [ADDRESS_260726] a Mean = 50, SD=10; higher scores indicate greater cognitive 
functioning.  This measure has demonstrated good reliability and validity in MS23.  
 
Patient Global Impression of Change (PGIC)24: is a commonly -used single -item measure that 
assesses perceived overall change across multiple life domains since beginning treatment. Higher scores indicate greater improvement since treatment was initiated.  
 Quality of Life Subscale from the Multiple Sclerosis Quality of Life -[ADDRESS_260727]
 rument25-27: contains 
two items that as sess perceived general quality of life.  The possible range is 0- [ADDRESS_260728]-Treatment Questionnaire ; c ontains questions about the patient  intent to continue the 
treatment they received during the 1st 12 weeks (on a clinical basis), their reasons for doing so, 
and means/barriers to obtaining this treatment . This questionnaire  will be administered at 12 and 
24 weeks . 
 
Ecological Mome nta ry Assessment (EMA) measures: Eleven EMA items were created (adapted 
from validated surveys) to assess fatigue, fatigue impact, sleep, pacing, cognitive function, and pain. EMA items are as follows:  
 
1) P 
hysical Fatigue (four times daily):  
What is your level of physical (bodily) fatigue right now? on a scale of 0 – 10, where 0 = 
No Fatigue and 10 = Extremely Severe Fatigue.  
2) Mental Fatigue (four times daily):  
What is your level of mental (brain) fatigue right now? on a scale of 0 – 10, where 0 = No 
Fatigue and 10 = Extremely Severe F atigue.  
3) Physical Fatigue Interference (four times daily):  
How much is your physical fatigue interfering with what you are doing right now?  on a scale of 0 – 10, where 0 = no interference and 10 = totally interfering; not able to do what 
I want because of fatigue.  Slight change in wording for bedtime: How much did your physical fatigue interfere with what you were doing leading up to your bedtime?  On a 
scale of 0 – 10, where 0 = no interference and 10 = totally interfered, was not able to do 
what I wanted because of fatigue.  
4) Mental Fatigue Interference (four times daily):  
How much is your mental fatigue interfering with what you are doing right now?  on a scale of 0 – 10, where 0 = no interference and 10 = totally interfering; not able to do what 
I want because of fatigue.  Slight change in wording for bedtime: How much did your 
mental fatigue interfere with what you were doing leading up to your bedtime?  On a 
scale of 0 – 10, where 0 = no interference and 10 = totally interfered, was not able to do 
what I wanted because of fatigue.  
5) Wake Up Question (administered once daily):  
What time did you wake up this morning?  
6) Go To Bed Question (administered once daily):  
What time did you go to bed [last night]?  
7) Sleep (administered once daily at wake):  
How refreshed did you feel when you woke up this morning? on a scale from 0- 10 where 
0=Totally Unrefreshed (not at all rested) and 10=Totally Refreshed (restored, revitalized, 
ready to start the day).  
8) Rest Breaks (administered once daily at bedtime)  
Today, how often have you taken rest breaks to do your activities? On a scale where 0 = 
Not at all, 5 = Sometimes, and 10 = Always .  
9) Cognitive Clarity (administered once daily at bedtime)  
Today, on average, my thinking was: Please rate on a scale of 0- 10 where 0 = very clear 
to 10 = very foggy  
10) Cognitive Speed (administered once daily at bedtime)  
Today, on average, my thinking was: Please rate on a scale of 0 – 10, where 0 = very fast 
to 10 = very slow  
Page 26 of 37 
 11) Pain (administered once daily at bedtime)  Today, what was your average level of 
pain?  On a scale where 0 = no pain at all and 10 = worst pain imaginable 
 
Covid Impact Survey: The  COVID- [ADDRESS_260729] Survey (CEFIS), developed by [CONTACT_217104]. Part 1 consists of 22 items that measure the participants’ “exposure” to 
COVID- 19 and related events. The Exposure Score is a count of “yes” responses and may range 
from [ADDRESS_260730] on participant’s and family’s life; [ADDRESS_260731] / higher distress. The Impact Score 
(sum of items 23- 35) may range from [ADDRESS_260732], physical activity, and  fatigability  
(calculated using fatigue severity and activity measures) . Ratings at wake and bedtime will be 
initiated by [CONTACT_217105] (not necessarily when they get out of bed) and at 
bedtime (“lights out” or the time they intend to go to s leep, not necessarily the time they get into 
bed). An audible alarm will alert  participants to use the touch screen to log symptom ratings at 2 
times  between 11am and 7pm . The PRO -Diary  collects physical activity data as ‘activity counts’ 
in [ADDRESS_260733] protected, and HIPAA compliant web- based 
data platform hosted by [CONTACT_50223] (MICHR) at the 
UM for data capture and storage. This protected database will be accessed and maintained by 
[CONTACT_11698]. This system features both a local and remote web- based interface, secure 
data transfer, and an Oracle database. Data security, patient privacy, and HIPAA requirements are a premium consideration for clinical trials research using REDCap. A complete time- stamped 
audit of all REDCap activity (including which and when study personnel access data) is maintained, adding to the security and fidelity of the data. Study personnel can enter data into the 
database through administrative access to add to the self -report data provided by [CONTACT_4317]. For 
self-report data collection, participants will access individualized study urls to securely enter data 
either during clinic visits or at a time of their choosing on an internet -connected device of their 
choosing (for home -based assessments).  
 
Page [ADDRESS_260734] access to email address for all study participants, 
including those from University of Washington.  
 7.2.3 M+Box  
Transfer (from UW to UM) of accelerometer/EMA data from the PRO -Diary will be achieved 
via M+Box, which is Michigan's implementation of the Box.com cloud storage and collaboration 
service. It is capable of handling PHI and other sensitive data (e.g., research data). We have used 
M+Box extensively in previous studies to transfer PRO -Diary data to the lead site for data 
cleaning and analysis. After it is cleaned and scored, the PRO -Diary data will be later merged 
with the REDCap data prior to analysis.   
 
7.2.[ADDRESS_260735] their baseline visit virtually . SignNow software is an E -
Signature [CONTACT_217108] U -M staff, faculty, researchers, and students associated 
with all University of Michigan campuses (i.e., Ann Arbor, Dearborn, Flint and Michigan Medicine). SignNow is HIPAA and FDA 21 CFR Part 11 compliant for patient signatures.  
 
7.3 General Medical History  
General medical history will be assessed at baseline and in all follow -up visits.  Subjects will be 
queried about any chronic or ongoing health conditions pertinent to MS, fatigue, or potential 
Modafinil side effects that require treatment (which will be recorded in the CRF).  Subjects will 
also be asked to provide their list of medications and allergies.  
 
7.4 Concomitant Medication Use  
Concomitant medications will be assessed at each visit and/or phone contact [CONTACT_217106].  
 
7.5 Adverse Event  Assessment s 
Adverse events  that are NOT  related to the normal course or chronic symptoms of MS 
(such as relapses, MRI progression, somatic pain, weakness, numbness, visual disturbances, 
bladder/bowel symptoms) or events that are expected to occur in the course of daily life  or use of 
disease modifying therapy (injuries, infections , disease modifying therapy infusion reactions, 
disease modifying therapy injection site reactions , disease modifying therapy-induced 
lymphopenia ) will be assessed /collected  at ea ch visit , scheduled phone call,  or unscheduled 
phone call.   
Participants  will be queried about any symptoms they have been experiencing while on 
the st udy, with directed questions toward  adverse outcomes previously reported with the study 
treatments  (including headache, nausea, nervousness,  rhinitis, diarrhea, an xiety, insomnia, 
dizziness, dyspepsia , worsening depressive symptoms, psychosis, increased suicidality) or 
suspected allergic reactions: rash , hives, mouth sores, blister s, swelling of your face, eyes, lips, 
tongue, or throat , trouble swallowing or breathing, fever, shortness of breath, swelling of the 
legs, yellowing of the skin or whites of the eyes, or dark urine.  
Page 28 of 37 
  
8.  ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING  
Multiple Sclerosis is a disease with many disease- related symptoms and complications , and there are 
many common mild side eff ects associated with disease modifying therapy use .  Due to the patient 
population and the nature of the disease, as well as the lack of experimental inter ventions in this 
study (only standard of care procedures and treatments will be used) we would like to implement the 
following AE/SAE collection/reporting guidelines:  
 
SAE events that meet all 3 of the following criteria will be collected and submitted  to the IRB: 
•     Serious;  
•     Related ; and 
•     Unexpected  
 
SAEs that are unrelated, regardless of expectedness, will not be reported to the IRB.  
 In addition, the following AEs will be collected and submitted  to the IRB : 
 •     Any  related and unexpected  AE that results in a change to research  or participant’s 
treatment plan  
 
The medical monitor (see section 10.2) will also receive reports of all AEs collected in section 7.5, 
and SAEs  regardless of expectedness or relatedness.  
 8.1 AE/SAE relatedness:  
 a. Definitely related:  clearly associated with study drug/treatment  
b. Probably related:  likely associated with study drug/treatment 
c. Possibly related :  may be associated with study drug or other treatment  
d. Unlikely to be related , or 
e. Definitely not related  to the study drug/treatment  
 For reporting purposes, an AE should be regarded as definitely or probably related to the regimen if 
the investigator believes that at least one of following criteria are met:  
 a. There is a clinically plausible time sequence between onset of the AE and the administration of 
the study drug or treatment.  
b. There is a biologically plausible mechanism for the study drug or treatment causing or 
contributing to the AE.  
c. The AE cannot be attributed solely to concurrent/underlying illness, other drugs, or procedures.  
d. A potential alternative cause does not exist.  
 
 
8.2. Serious Adverse Events (SAE) Definition:   An adverse drug experience occurring at any dose 
that results in any of the following outcomes:  
 
a. Death  
b. A life -threatening adverse drug experience  
Page 29 of 37 
 c. Inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081] 
d. A persistent or significant disability  &/or incapacity  
e. A congenital anomaly or birth defect  
 
Important medical events that may not result in death, be life -threatening, or require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_45790] a serious adverse drug experience when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, they may jeopardize the patient or subject and may require medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed in this definition. A serious adverse experience includes any experience that is fatal or immediately life threatening, resul ts in a persistent or 
significant disability/incapacity, requires or prolongs in- patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or is a congenital 
anomaly, cancer, or overdose.  
 Other important medical events that may not result in death, not be life -threatening, or not require  
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_3767] a serious adverse experience when, based upon appropriate medical judgment, the event may jeopardize the subject/patient and may require medical or surgical 
intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed previously.  
 8.3 AE/SAE Expectedness:  
Expected  adver
 se events are those adverse events that are listed in the protocol, the Investigator’s 
Brochure (current edition) or in the study informed consent document.  
 Unexpected adver
 se events are those that:  
 a. are not described in the Investigator's Brochure, approved label, or the clinical protocol as far as 
the study drug is concerned.  
b. are not anticipated in the study informed consent.  This includes adverse events for which the 
specificity or severity is not consistent with the description in the informed consent.  
 
Unanticipated problem:  Per
  FDA Procedural Guidance for Clinical Investigators, Sponsors, and 
IRBs (January 2009), a serious problem that has implications for the conduct of the study (requiring a significant and usually safety- related, change in the protocol such as revising inclusion/exclusion 
criteria or including a new monitoring requirement, informed consent or investigator’s brochure).  
 
Unanticipated problem Reporting: Per 21 CFR 312.66, 312.53 (c)(1)(vii), and 56.108(b)(1), 
should an Unanticipated problem occur during the investigation, the investigator will promptly report all unanticipated problems involving risks to human subjects or others to IRBMED and 
FDA according to the reporting require ments and guidelines.  
   
8.4 
AE/SAE severity: The severi ty or grade of an adverse event may be measured using the 
following definitions:  
 
Mild:   N
oticeable to the subject, but does not interfere with subject’s expected daily activities, 
usually does not require additional therapy or intervention, dose reduction, or discontinuation of the study. 
 
Page 30 of 37 
 Moderate:   Interferes with the subject’s expected d aily activities, may require some additional 
therapy or intervention but does not require discontinuation of the study.  
 
Severe:  Extremely limits the subject’s daily activities and may require discontinuation of study 
therapy, and/or additional treatment or intervention to resolve.  
 
 
 
9.0 DATA ANALYSIS/STATISTICAL METHODS  
 
9.[ADDRESS_260736] Score (MFIS) as the primary outcome 
variable of interest.  The MFIS has been validated in MS patients, is frequently used in MS 
clinical studies as a reliable measure of fatigue, and is sensitive to changes in intervention.  The 
primary outcome measure will be the mean within -subject difference between baseline and 12 -
week MFIS values (delta- MFIS), compared between groups. Based on a power analysis of 2-
sample means (combined monotherapy groups vs. combination therapy, group weights 2:1), with 
a 2-sided alpha of 0.[ADDRESS_260737] deviation of 12, a sample size of n=300 subjects will 
provide 92% power to detect a delta -MFIS of 5 between the monotherapy and combination 
treatment arms (see power curve); this difference is similar to group differences found in  
previous fatigue trials .            
 
For Aim 2 analyses, using fatigue outcomes as the dependent variables (in separate models) a 
multiple linear regression power analysis was performed assuming a full model consisting of up 
to 11 possible predictor variables: treatment group, presence of sleep disturbance (yes/no), 
depression severity (PHQ -9 Score), disability severity (EDSS score), 3 interaction terms 
(treatment*sleep, treatment*depression, and treatment*disability), baseline fatigue level, anxiety, pain, and exercise. A similar model will also be constructed using MS subtype and 
treatment*MS subtype interaction term, (in place of EDSS) to determine if subtype conveys 
differences in fatigue outcome separate from pure disability measures.  Based on a sample size o f 
n=300, we will have 85% power to detect an R -square difference of 0.[ADDRESS_260738] 0.3.   
 For Aim 3, using treatment adherence as the dependent variable (continuous outcome), a 
multiple linear regression power analysis was performed assuming a full model consisting of up 
to 8 possible predictor variables: treatment group (independent variable of interest), age, gender, 
EDSS score, baseline fatigue level, baseline activity level, presence of sleep disturbance 
(yes/no), and depression severity (PHQ -9 Score). Based on a sample size of n=300, we will have 
95% power to detect an R -square difference of 0.[ADDRESS_260739] 0.3.   
 
9.2 Analysis of Study Aims : 
Page 31 of 37 
 Aim 1: Compare the effectiveness of 3 therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]: CBT monotherapy, modafinil monotherapy, and 
CBT+modafinil combination therapy on patient -reported fatigue impact (primary outcome), 
fatigue intensity, and fatigability among fatigued individuals with MS.  The primary outcome 
measure will be the mean difference in Modified Fatigue Impact Scale (MFIS) score between 12 
weeks and baseline (delta- MFIS), compared between treatment groups.   A repeated measures 
mixed effects model will be applied . The mean difference will also be adjusted for baseline 
covariates: age, gender, anxiety, pain, and exercise, which were included as covariates based on 
their established association between fatigue and/or activity in MS . Additional secondary 
analyses will also evaluate treatment effect on  EMA outcome measures of fatigue impact, fatigue 
intensity, and fatigability . 
 
Aim 2: Test whether depression, sleep disturbances, or MS disability level modify comparative 
treatment responsiveness across treatment arms in terms of fatigue im pact (HTE analyses).  
Treatment group effect on fatigue impact scores, fatigue intensity, and fatigability among select subgroups, including those with clinically significant depression, progressive MS subtype and 
higher EDSS scores, and confirmed/suspected sleep disorders not related to poor sleep hygiene, 
will be evaluated with interaction terms in mixed effects models as above.  
 
Aim 3: Compare adverse events, side effects, treatment adherence, and patient dropout rates 
among the three treatment arms and patient subgroups of interest.    Descriptive statistics will be 
used to analyze patterns of adverse events including side effects (incidence, type, severity, and relatedness) and treatment adherence between treatment groups (modafinil vs. CBT vs. 
combinatio n therapy)  throughout the 12- week intervention interval .  Adverse event frequency 
between treatment groups and among subgroups of interest will be evaluated using ANOVA. Multiple linear regression models adjusted for age, gender, EDSS score, baseline fatigue level, 
baseline activity level, presence of sleep disorder (yes/no), and depression severity (PHQ -8 
Score) will be used to determine association between treatment group and treatment adherence (percent usage of prescribed therapy).  We also will assess whether degree of treatment effects measured in Aim 1 are related to treatment adherence (e.g. “dose response”).       
 
9.3 Analysis of Exploratory Aims : 
Additional analyses modeled as in 9.[ADDRESS_260740] on the difference 
between 24 week and baseline MFIS scores, to assess whether treatment effects are detectable 
following the 12- week assessment period.  
 
Descriptive statistics will be used to summarize clinical treatment utilization patterns  between 
12-24 weeks , following the 12- week intervention interval.  
 Analyses modeled as in 9.2 will  also be used to evaluate treatment effects on other outcomes at 
12 and 24 weeks. We will examine differential treatment effects on changes in the following 
Page 32 of 37 
 factors (assessed via survey): ability to participate in social roles and activities, pain interference,  
quality of life, and self -efficacy for managing MS symptoms. We will also examine differential 
treatment effects on changes from baseline to 12 and 24 weeks in the following outcomes that 
were assessed via survey and/or EMA: pain intensity, perceived cognitive functioning, and 
pacing behaviors. Treatment group differences in scores on the PGIC measure at [ADDRESS_260741] whether the effects of the t reatment arms are mediated through common (simple 
mediational analyses) or different (moderated mediation) mechanisms .  
 10. MONITORING  
 
10.1 Data Safety Monitoring Plan  
The Clinical Trial Monitor from the Michigan Institute of Clinical Health Research (MICHR) 
will set up a monitoring plan to include scheduled and as needed in person and remote 
monitoring visits to confirm the accuracy of study data, review study documents  (including 
informed consents), and assess compliance with human subjects research.   
10.2 Independent Medical Monitor  
This study also has an assigned medical monitor who is not part of the study team (Brandon Moss, MD). The primary responsibilities of the  Medical Monitor include:  
 1. Provide feedback for  protocol changes, if needed  
2. Review/provide written feedback/sign off on captured AEs and withdrawals annually (in 
aggregate, to coincide with annual IRB continuing review)  
3. Review/provide verbal feedback/sign off SAEs/unanticipated problems as they arise, 
depending on relatedness of the intervention  
4.       Assist with decisions about treatment withdrawal or dose reduction, on a case by [CONTACT_217107], for AEs thought to be probably related or definitely related to one of the 
interventions , regardless of expectedness . 
 
10.3 Monitoring Plan and Information  
To assure adequate protection of the rights of human subjects, per 21 CFR 312.50 and 312.53, 
the study will be monitored to ensure that the study is implemented in accordance with the 
protocol and applicable federal and local regulations, that proper informed consent procedures 
were followed and to insure the integrity and quality of the data.  
 A qualified trial  monitor will be selected, per 21 CFR 312.53(d) to monitor this multi- site trial in 
accordance with the protocol and all applicable regulatory requirements.  A monitoring plan will be established to ensure the quality and integrity of the data through pre -investigation, periodic 
site visits  (both sites) , review of adverse events/subject records, etc.  The Michigan Institute for 
Clinical and Health Research (MICHR) will assist with the selection and support of the monitor 
assigned for this proposed clinical investigation and prepare the monitoring plan.  
Page [ADDRESS_260742] KEEPI[INVESTIGATOR_1645]  
 
11.1 CRFs / Electronic Data Record  
CRFs , in paper or electronic format, will be utilized and maintained by [CONTACT_5984].   Entries 
made in the CRF must be verifiable against source documents, unless the CRF is considered to 
be the source document.    
 
11.[ADDRESS_260743] Retention  
Per 21 CRF §312.62, study records will be retained for a minimum of [ADDRESS_260744] (IRBMED, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI).  
 
12.[ADDRESS_260745] will be informed that participation in the study is 
voluntary and that he/she may withdraw from the study at any time and that withdrawal of 
consent will not affect his/her subsequent medical treatment or relationship with the treating 
physician. 
 
This informed consent will be given by [CONTACT_3553] a standard written statement, written in non -
technical language. The subject should read and consider the statement before signing and dating it, and should be given a copy of the signed document. No patient can enter the study before 
his/her informed consent has been obtained.  
 The informed consent form is considered to be part of the protocol, and will be submitted for 
IRB approval.  
 
13.  STUDY DISCONTINUATION CRITERIA  
 Treatment Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_217071]  
 
1. Any SAE, as defined in section 8.2.  
 
2. Psychosis, severe/uncontrolled depression, or increased suicidality.  Participant behavior or 
comments that suggest imminent threat of suicide will prompt immediate [ADDRESS_260746] failed* or are not an option  
 Modafinil Specific Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_217072]  
 
1. Pregnancy.   
 
2. Suspected allergic reactions: rash, hives, mouth sores, blisters, swelling of your face, eyes, 
lips, tongue, or throat, trouble swallowing or breathing, fever, shortness of breath, swelling of 
the legs, yellowing of the skin or whites of the eyes, or dark urine.  
 
3. Participants who decide to start another fatigue treatment medication ( stimulant or wake -
promoting agent) such as amantadine (Symmetrel), modafinil (Provigil), short or long acting methylphenidate (Ritalin/Concerta), dextroamphetamine (Dexedrine), dextroamphetamine -
amphetamine (Adderall, Adderall XR), lisodexamfetamine (Vyvanse), armodafinil (Nuvigil), or amphetamine (Adzenys XR -ODT, Dyanavel XR, and Evekeo)amantadine, 
methylphenidate, or amphetamine  during the study.  
 
* Participants who experience intolerable but common side effects associated with modafinil 
(headache, nausea, nervousness, rhinitis, diarrhea, back pain, anxiety, insomnia, dizziness, and 
dyspepsia), that do not fulfill SAE criteria, will be required to stop modafinil at the dose which was 
associated with the symptoms, but upon improvement of symptoms, may be allowed to restart the 
medication at ½ of the dose that previously led to prior sym ptoms.  Participants who still continue to 
experience symptoms after a re- challenge with ½ dose modafinil will be instructed to discontinue 
modafinil.  
 Off-Study Criteria  
For participants who must have modafinil withdrawn for saf ety or ineligibility  will still be 
encouraged to stay in the study for observation (and ongoing CBT, for combination treatment 
group) until completion  unless they choose not to .  
 
Discontinuation of a Subject  
In the event a patient drops out of the study or  is lost to followup , all attempts will be made to 
exit the patient in accordance with the protocol requirements.  The reason for discontinuation 
(and the person who decided that discontinuation was necessary) will be recorded.  
 
14. ENGAGEMENT  
 All patient stakeholders and study team members will participate in  regular in -person or webina r 
meetings . At these meetings,  aspects of the study will be reviewed, including study protocol and 
progress, interim regulatory issues, patient recruitment/enrollment/retention reports, oper ational 
issues, adverse events, and treatment adherence. Stakeholders and study team will mutually decide if strategic changes are required, and if so, will require stakeholder approval.  
 Stakeholders will : 
Page 35 of 37 
 • Participate in study monitoring.  If milestones are not met, or are not likely to be met 
based on current methods, stakeholder feedback will be s olicited  to enhance delivery of 
milestones.  
• Assist with distribution of recruitment materials.  
• Assist with solicitation of clinic patients.  
• Participate in development of a pre -screening procedure so that all potentially- eligible 
patients are identified in a standardized fashion.  
• Be involved in authoring and reviewing dissemination materials.  
Page [ADDRESS_260747] of fatigue on patients with multiple sclerosis. Can J Neurol Sci. 1994;21(1):9-14. 
2. Fisk JD, Ritvo PG, Ross L, Haase DA, Marrie TJ, Schlech WF. Measuring the functional impact of fatigue: initial validation of the fatigue impact scale. Clin Infect Dis. 1994;[ADDRESS_260748] 1:S79-83. 
3. Cheng EM, Hays RD, Myers LW, Ellison GW, Beckstrand M, Vickrey BG. Factors related to agreement between self -reported and conventional Expanded Disability Status 
Scale (EDSS) scores. Mult Scler. 2001;7(6):405-410. 
4. Chung F, Subramanyam R, Liao P, Sasaki E, Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_2152] C, Sun Y. High STOP -Bang score 
indicates a high probability of obstructive sleep apnoea. British journal of anaesthesia. 2012;108(5):768-775. 
5. Krupp LB, LaRocca NG, Muir -Nash J, Steinberg AD. The fatigue severity scale. 
Application to patients  with multiple sclerosis and systemic lupus erythematosus. Arch 
Neurol. 1989;46(10):1121-1123. 
6. Johns MW. A new method for measuring daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008]: the Epworth sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_217073]. Sleep. 1991;14(6):540-545. 
7. Bastien CH, Vallieres A, Morin CM. Valida tion of the Insomnia Severity Index as an 
outcome measure for insomnia research. Sleep medicine. 2001;2(4):297-307. 
8. Morin CM, Belleville G, Belanger L, Ivers H. The Insomnia Severity Index: psychometric indicators to detect insomnia cases and evaluate t reatment response. Sleep. 
2011;34(5):601-608. 
9. Mastin DF, Bryson J, Corwyn R. Assessment of sleep hygiene using the Sleep Hygiene 
Index. J Behav Med. 2006;29(3):223-227. 
10. Benes H, von Eye A, Kohnen R. Empi[INVESTIGATOR_217074]. Sleep medicine. 2009;10(5):524-530. 
11. Benes H, Kohnen R. Validation of an algorithm for the diagnosis of Restless Legs Syndrome: The Restless Legs Syndrome -Diagnostic Index (RLS -DI). Sleep medicine. 
2009;10(5):515-523. 
12. Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JB, Lowe B. The Patient Health Questionnaire 
Somatic, Anxiety, and Depressive Symptom Scales: a systematic review. Gen Hosp 
Psychiatry. 2010;32(4):345-359. 
13. Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JB. The Patient Health Questionnaire -2: validity of a 
two-item depression screener. Medical care. 2003;41(11):1284-1292. 
14. Kroenke K, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Williams JB. The PHQ -9: validity of a brief depression severity 
measure. J Gen Intern Med. 2001;16(9):606-613. 
15. Cleeland CS, Ryan KM. Pain assessment: global use of the Brief Pain Inventory. Ann 
Acad Med Singapore. 1994;23(2):129-138. 
16. Osborne TL, Raichle KA, Jensen MP, Ehde DM, Kraft G. The reliability and validity of pain interference measures in persons with multiple sclerosis. J Pain Symptom Manage. 
2006;32(3):217-229. 
Page 37 of 37 
 17. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_4280], Kroenke K, Williams JB, Lowe B. A brief measure for assessing generalized 
anxiety disorder: the GAD -7. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166(10):1092-1097. 
18. Godin G, Shephard RJ. Godin leisure -time exercise questionnaire. Medicine and science 
in sports and exercise. 1997;29(Supplement: S36-S38). 
19. Miller DM, Bethoux F, Victorson D, et al. Validating Neuro -QoL short forms and 
targeted scales with peo ple who have multiple sclerosis. Mult Scler. 2016;22(6):830-841. 
20. Cella D, Lai JS, Nowinski CJ, et al. Neuro -QOL: brief measures of health -related quality 
of life for clinical research in neurology. Neurology. 2012;78(23):1860-1867. 
21. Hong I, Velozo C A, Li CY, Romero S, Gruber -Baldini AL, Shulman LM. Assessment of 
the psychometrics of a PROMIS item bank: self -efficacy for managing daily activities. 
Qual Life Res. 2016;25(9):2221-2232. 
22. Gruber- Baldini AL, Velozo C, Romero S, Shulman LM. Validation of  the PROMIS(R) 
measures of self -efficacy for managing chronic conditions. Qual Life Res. 
2017;26(7):1915-1924. 
23. Becker H, Stuifbergen A, Lee H, Kullberg V. Reliability and Validity of PROMIS Cognitive Abilities and Cognitive Concerns Scales Among People  with Multiple 
Sclerosis. Int J MS Care. 2014;16(1):1-8. 
24. Hurst H, Bolton J. Assessing the clinical significance of change scores recorded on 
subjective outcome measures. J Manipulative Physiol Ther. 2004;27(1):26-35. 
25. Heiskanen S, Merilainen P, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_217075]. Health -related quality of life -testing the 
reliability of the MSQOL -54 instrument among MS patients. Scand J Caring Sci. 
2007;21(2):199-206. 
26. Vickrey BG, Hays RD, Harooni R, Myers LW, Ellison GW. A Health -Related Quality -
of-Life Measure for Mult iple-Sclerosis. Qual Life Res. 1995;4(3):187-206. 
27. Vickrey BG, Hays RD, Harooni R, Myers LW, Ellison GW. Development and 
Evaluation of a New Health -Related Quality -of-Life Measure for Multiple- Sclerosis. 
Neurology. 1995;45(4):A333-A334. 
 