Zeltiq	Aesthetics	–	Confidential	and	Proprietary 	 	Page 1 of 7	
	
This	document	and	the	contents	hereof	are	considered	proprietary	and	confidential	informatio n	of	ZELTIQ	Aesthetics,	Inc.	
Disclosure	to	unauthorized	individuals	or	dissemination,	publication	or	copying	is	prohibited	without	prior	written	consent	
of	ZELTIQ.				 	Protocol Summary  
 
 
 
 
 
Study Title:     Dualsculpting The Abdomen Using Cryolipolysis 
 
Protocol Number:  ZA16-004 
 
Study Device:    Zeltiq CoolSculpting System with Vacuum Applicator  
 
Sponsor:     Zeltiq Aesthetics 
     [ADDRESS_1003022]. 
     Pleasanton, CA [ZIP_CODE] 
 
Date:     05 June 2020 
 Date of IRB Approval: 06 October 2016 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Zeltiq	Aesthetics	–	Confidential	and	Proprietary 	 	Page 2 of 7	
	
This	document	and	the	contents	hereof	are	considered	proprietary	and	confidential	informatio n	of	ZELTIQ	Aesthetics,	Inc.	
Disclosure	to	unauthorized	individuals	or	dissemination,	publication	or	copying	is	prohibited	without	prior	written	consent	
of	ZELTIQ.				 	 
 
 
1. Introduction  
1.1 Background  
ZELTIQ Aesthetics has developed and commercialized a technology to non -invasively reduce 
subcutaneous fat. The ZELTIQ technology, termed CoolSculpting and ge nerically referred to 
as cryolipolysis, enables a non -invasive alternative for subcutaneous fat reduction through 
cellular apoptosis. The CoolSculpting System, which is FDA -cleared for use in the United 
States for an indication of fat layer reduction in th e submental area, thighs, flanks, abdomen, 
bra fat, and banana roll , has been clinically proven to reduce fat bulges, allowing patients to 
achieve noticeable and measurable aesthetic results without the pain, expense, downtime, and 
risks associated with ex isting invasive and minimally -invasive procedures.  
 
The purpose of this study is to evaluate the safety and efficacy of the ZELTIQ CoolSculpting System using vacuum applicators for non -invasive subcutaneous fat reduction in the abdomen . 
Slightly different  size vacuum applicators will be used in this study .  
1.2 Device Description 
The study treatments will be performed using the ZELTIQ CoolSculpting System. The ZELTIQ CoolSculpting System is comprised of a control unit which houses the system 
controller and  power source, and a detachable vacuum applicator used to apply the cooling to 
the treatment site.  
 
This study will evaluate the safety and efficacy of the vacuum applicators to treat the  abdomen . 
The subjects will receive 4-6 cooling cycles during each of two treatment visits   The treatment 
cooling cycle on  the abdomen  will be  up to (REDACTED) minutes in du ration with a 
temperature of  (REDACTED) °C. At the investigator’s discretion, an additional cooling cycle 
may be deliv ered to cover the treatment area ..  
1.[ADDRESS_1003023] the appearance of the flanks (DEN090002), the abdomen 
(K120023), the thighs (K133212 ) the submental area (K151179), and bra fat, back fat, and 
banana roll (K160259). Additionally, the System has been cleared for flexible treatment 
parameter ranges (K142491).  
 
The ZELTIQ CoolSculpting System can also provide localized thermal therapy (hot or cold) to 
minimize pain for post -traumatic and/or post -surgical pain and to temporarily relieve minor 
aches and pains and muscle spasms. The optional massage function can also be used for temporary:  
 
· Relief of minor muscle aches, pain, and spasm  
· Improvement in local circulation  
 
Zeltiq	Aesthetics	–	Confidential	and	Proprietary 	 	Page 3 of 7	
	
This	document	and	the	contents	hereof	are	considered	proprietary	and	confidential	informatio n	of	ZELTIQ	Aesthetics,	Inc.	
Disclosure	to	unauthorized	individuals	or	dissemination,	publication	or	copying	is	prohibited	without	prior	written	consent	
of	ZELTIQ.				 	This study will investigate the use of the FDA cleared ZELTIQ CoolSculpting System and 
(REDACTED)  applicators for DualSculpting the abdomen.  
 
2. Study Protocol  
2.1 Design 
 Prospective, non -randomized interventional cohort  
 
2.2 Study Duration  
 Enrollment and follow -up is expected to take up to six (6) months for each subject.  
 
2.[ADDRESS_1003024] Recruitment  
Subjects who seek reduction of fat in the abdomen  and who the investigator has assesses to be 
eligible for multiple CoolSculpting treatments will be recruited from the general population.  
 
2.6 Sample Size  
 A maximum of twenty  (20) subjects will be treated at up to [ADDRESS_1003025] meet all of the inclusion criteria and none of the 
 exclusion criteria listed in Table 1 . 
 
 
Table 1. Eligibility criteria.  
 
Inclusion Criteria  
a) Male or female subjects > 22 years of age and <  65 years of age.  
b) Subject  who has been assessed to be eligible to receive multiple DualSculpting 
treatments on the abdomen using the (REDACTED)  and/or (REDACTED)  applicator.  
c) No weight change exceeding 5% in the preceding month.  
d) Subject agrees to  maintain his/her weight (i.e., within 5% of total body weight) by 
[CONTACT_734036]	–	Confidential	and	Proprietary 	 	Page 4 of 7	
	
This	document	and	the	contents	hereof	are	considered	proprietary	and	confidential	informatio n	of	ZELTIQ	Aesthetics,	Inc.	
Disclosure	to	unauthorized	individuals	or	dissemination,	publication	or	copying	is	prohibited	without	prior	written	consent	
of	ZELTIQ.				 	study.  
e) Subject has read and signed the study written informed consent form.  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
a) Subject has had a surgical procedure(s) in the area of intended treatment.  
b) Subject has had an invasive fat reduction procedure (e.g., liposuction, mesotherapy) 
in the area of intended treatment.  
c) Subject has had a non -invasive fat reduction and/or body contouring procedure in the 
area of intended treatment within the past 12 months. 
d) Subject needs to administer, or has a known history of subcutaneous injections into 
the area of intended treatment (e.g., heparin, insulin) within the past month.  
e) Subject has a known history of cryoglobulinemia, cold urticaria, cold agglutinin 
disease or paroxysmal cold hemoglobinuria.  
f) Subject has a known history of Raynaud’s disease, or any known condition with a 
response to cold exposure that limits blood f low to the skin.  
g) Subject has a history of bleeding disorder or is taking any medication that in the investigator’s opi[INVESTIGATOR_229283]’s risk of bruising.  
h) Subject is taking or has taken diet pi[INVESTIGATOR_511596].  
i) Subject has any dermatological conditions, such as moderate to excessive skin laxity, or scars in the location of the treatment sites that may interfere with the treatment or 
evaluation (stretch marks is not an exclusion).  
j) Subject has an active imp lanted device such as a pacemaker, defibrillator, or drug 
delivery system or any other metal containing implant.  
k) Subject is pregnant or intending to become pregnant during the study period  
l) Subject is lactating or has been lactating in the past 6 mo nths.  
m) Subject has a history of hernia in the areas to be treated.  
n) Subject is unable or unwilling to comply with the study requirements.  
o) Subject is currently enrolled in a clinical study of any other unapproved 
investigational drug or device.  
p) Any other condition or laboratory value that would, in the professional opi[INVESTIGATOR_13046], potentially affect the subject’s response or the integrity of the data or 
would pose an unacceptable risk to the subject. 	
2.[ADDRESS_1003026] (IRB) or Ethics 
Committee (EC) . 
Zeltiq	Aesthetics	–	Confidential	and	Proprietary 	 	Page [ADDRESS_1003027] (urine) prior to being treated. If the subject is pregnant, she will be excluded 
from participation.  
2.9.2 Treatment  
 
Treatment will be performed in accor dance with Zeltiq Aesthetic’s Instructions for Use for 
the CoolSculpting System and vacuum applicator.  Cooling will be delivered to the 
abdomen using two (2) applicators simultaneously. Treatment parameters such as cooling 
temperature and duration of cooling will be preset by [CONTACT_734037].  
2.9.[ADDRESS_1003028]-treatment images will be collected at all in -office follow-up visits. 
 
3. Study Endpoints  
 
The primary endpoints of the study will be defined as follows:  
 
• Safety endpoint : measurement  of device - or procedure -related adverse events  
• Efficacy endpoint:  Correct identification of pre -treatment vs. [ADDRESS_1003029] 70% correct identification of the pre -treatment images.  
 
The secondary endpoint of the study is defined as subject satisfaction as assessed by 
[CONTACT_242855] 12-weeks post-treatment.	
 
3.1 Statistical Analysis Plan  
3.1.1 Statistical Methods: Overall Plan  
 
Data will be summarized based on the nature of the data. Dichotomous (e.g., gender, 
independent photographic review) and ordinal (e.g., Fitzpatrick Skin type) data will be tabulated by [CONTACT_17203]. The mean, standard error, maximum and minimum will be tabulated for continuous data (e.g., age,). The significance level will be t wo-sided 0.05 for all statistical tests. 
 
3.1.2 Endpoint Analysis 
Zeltiq	Aesthetics	–	Confidential	and	Proprietary 	 	Page 6 of 7	
	
This	document	and	the	contents	hereof	are	considered	proprietary	and	confidential	informatio n	of	ZELTIQ	Aesthetics,	Inc.	
Disclosure	to	unauthorized	individuals	or	dissemination,	publication	or	copying	is	prohibited	without	prior	written	consent	
of	ZELTIQ.				 	[IP_ADDRESS]    Primary Safety Endpoint 
The primary safety endpoint is measurement of all device - or procedure-related adverse 
events. All adverse events reported during and following the treatment will be included 
in the safety analysis. 
[IP_ADDRESS]   Primary Efficacy Analysis 
The primary efficacy endpoint is the correct identification of pre - vs 12- week post -
treatment images. Since weight change will affect the image, the analysis will be bas ed on 
the evaluation of the PP population, (i.e. treated subjects followed for 12 weeks who did 
not became pregnant, and with weight change of no more than 5% at the 12 -week visit ). 
Success will be defined as at least 70% correct identification of the pre -treatment images.  
[IP_ADDRESS] Secondary Endpoint Analysis 
The secondary endpoint of the study is subject satisfaction  as assessed by [CONTACT_734038] 12-weeks post treatment.  The number and percentage of subjects will 
be summarized for each possible point grade of the satisfaction questionnaire at [ADDRESS_1003030] 95% confidence interval (per binomial 
distribution) will be calculated . The percentage and the exact 95% confidence interval of 
unsatisfied response (very, moderately, or mildly) will also be calculated.  
4.  Adverse Events  
 
Adverse events (AE) will be assessed continuously throughout the study. An adverse event is defined as  any untoward medical occurrence in a subject, regardless of whether the event is 
related to the device.
  
 
 Adverse Device Effect (ADE)  
 Any sign, symptom, or disease in a study subject that occurs during the course of a 
 clinical trial that is determined by [CONTACT_8127] a causal relationship or 
 possible causal relationship with the device under investigation.  
 
 Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  
Any untoward medical occurrence in a subject, regardless of whether th e event is 
related to the device that:  
a. results in death;  
b. results in a life threatening illness or injury;  
c. results in a permanent impairment of a body structure or body function;  
d. requires in- patient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_63995] g hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]  
e. results in medical or surgical intervention to prevent impairment to body structure or 
function;  
f. results in fetal distress, fetal death, or a congenital abnormality/birth defect.  
 
 Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect (UADE)  
Any serious adverse effect on health and safety or any life- threatening problem or death 
caused by, or associated with a device, if that effect, problem, or death was not 
previously identified in nature, severity, or degree of incidence in the investigational 
Zeltiq	Aesthetics	–	Confidential	and	Proprietary 	 	Page [ADDRESS_1003031](s). The Sponsor shall be respo nsible for adjudication of all reported adverse events to determine whether the event is 
reportable under federal regulations (i.e., 21 CFR 812.150[b][1]). The Sponsor will promptly 
notify all participating investigators and regulatory authorities, as appropriate, of findings that 
could affect adversely the safety of subjects, impact the conduct of the trial or alter the IRB’s 
approval opi[INVESTIGATOR_150831]. 
5.  Study Conduct  
5.[ADDRESS_1003032] (HIPAA) of 2004.  
 
Only authorized site staff, the study Sponsor or the Sponsor’s designee and IR B will have 
access to these confidential files  and case report forms . A unique identification code will be 
assigned to each subject participating in this trial. All data used in the analysis, reporting and 
publication of this clinical trial will be maintai ned without identifiable reference to the subject. 
Any data that may be published in abstracts, scientific journals, or presented at medical meetings will reference a unique subject code and will not reveal the subject’s identity.  
5.2 Ethics and Good Clini cal Practice  
 The Investigator will ensure that this study is conducted in full conformance with the 
principles of the “Declaration of Helsinki” (as amended in Tokyo, Venice, Hong Kong, 
Somerset-West and Edinburgh).  
Additionally, all Investigators and staff must follow the ICH Guidelines for Good Clinical 
Practice and the applicable C ode of Federal Regulations  (21 CFR 50, 56 and 812). 
5.[ADDRESS_1003033] (such as subject informed consent form) to an IRB with jurisdiction for his/her site. 
Approval from the IRB must be obtained before starting the Study, and should be 
documented in a dated letter to the Investigator, clearly identifying the trial, t he documents 
reviewed and the date of approval.  A list of members participating in the meeting must be provided. 
Modifications made to the protocol after receipt of the IRB approval must also be 
submitted as amendments by [CONTACT_26492].  
Since this study will be conducted as a non-significant risk trial, the IRB must also grant its 
concurrence with non-significant risk status before the study can begin at that site.  
 