 
 
Study Protocol  
 
 Study Title:  
Augmenting Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581148]: Cognitive Bias Modification  
 
Document Date:  06/8/[ADDRESS_764111]#:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Detailed Protocol  
 
PRINCIPAL/OVERALL INVESTIGATOR  
Courtney Beard (Legal last name: [CONTACT_581246]), Ph.D.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE  
Augmenting hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581149] “Establishing the Effectiveness of 
Cognitive -Behavioral Partial Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581150], Depression, and Overall Functioning” (# 
2010 -P-001047/6)  
 
VERSION DATE  
June 8th, 2021  
 
BACKGROUND AND SIGNIFICANCE  
There is an urgent unmet treatment need for individuals with Serious Mental I llness ( SMI).  
NIMH Strategic Objective 4 states that the “chronic disability an d early mortality of Serious 
Mental Illnesses (SMI)...demand a rapid response .” Over 4% of the adul t US population has a 
SMI, defined as a mental disorder associated with significant functional impairment1. SMI spans 
diagnostic categories, including individuals with a range of mood and  anxiety disorders, among 
others. Individuals with SMI die [ADDRESS_764112] 13 times more likely 
to die by [CONTACT_20673]3. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581151], with 9% estimated to have 
received inpatient care in [ZIP_CODE], not including partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581152]. 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581153], and r esidual symptoms upon discharge predict relapse and re -
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5186] n4–7. Moreover, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581154], despi[INVESTIGATOR_581155]8. The months following discharge from 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581156], as individuals transition from a highly structured and supportive 
environment to home, acute stressors, and uncertain aftercare. Interventions that efficiently 
accelerate improvement are urgently needed  to reduce residual symptoms upon discharge and 
ultimately risk of rehospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. Ideally, augmentation strategies ne ed to be reliably and 
easily delivered both in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581157].  
 
Interpretation bias is a crucial transdiagnostic target .  Daily life constantly requires the 
resolution of ambiguity. For example, not getting a job or a friend not returning a call can be 
interpreted in multiple ways. The way in which individuals automatically resolve the countless 
ambiguous situations encountered each day has a large impact on their affect and behavior. 
Interpretation b ias, the tendency to resolve ambiguity negatively, is a crucial therapeutic target 
due to its causal maintaining role in emotional disorders9,10. Interpretations are made both “ on-
line” the moment an individual encounters ambiguity and “ off-line” during retrieval of a memory for 
the event. Theoretical models propose that interpretation bias maintains  a vicious cycle in which 
an individual experiences the world as more hopeless or threatening, which heightens negative 
affect, increases behavioral avoidance and more biased cognition (e.g., 11,12). Interpretation bias 
maintains psychopathology not only due to its direct effect on affect, but also through cascading 
and interacting effects with other cognitive processes13,14, contributing to a pervasive maladaptive 
cognitive style . Individuals with this cognitive vulnerability ha ve difficulty generating multiple 
interpretations for ambiguous situations, more easily get “stuck” in repetitive negative thinking, 
have poor emotion regulation, and more suicidal ideation (see 15). In a psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581158], interpretation bias was a better predictor of suicidal ideation at discharge than any other 
demographic or clinical variable available (see preliminary studies). Moreover, interpretation 
bias upon admission prospectivel y predicted treatment response.  
 3 Interpretation bias is an important mechani sm across species and diagnoses.   
1)   Animals in stress and depression -like states exhibit interpretation bias16,17. 
2)   Self -report, reaction time, behavi oral, and neurophysiological measures of interpretation 
bias correlate with psychopathology (Maj or Depressive Disorder (MDD)/ dysphoria18–22; 
anxiety15,23,24; ruminators 21,22; Bipolar Disorder25; e.g., Interpretation bias explained 20% to 30% 
of symptom variance in individuals with MDD18).  
3)   Interpretation bias is a risk factor for developi[INVESTIGATOR_581159].  
• Children at familial risk for mood disorders exhibit interpretation bias26 . 
• Interpretation bias prospectively predicts depressive symptoms in adults27. 
• Inducing a negative bias in healthy individuals leads to impaired emotion regulation28.  
• Interpretation bias better predicts avoidance behavior than self -report symptom 
measures29. 
• Experimentally modifying interpretation affects other cognitive biases (attention14, 
memory30,31, imagery32), emotion regulation (attentional control and worry33, rumination34, 
intrusive memories35) and clinical symptoms when delivered over multiple sessions36,37. 
 4)   Interpretation bias influences treatment outcome.  
• Baseline level of interpretation bias predicts treatment response in SMI (see preliminary 
studies).  
• Change in interpretation bias mediates symptom improvement in treatment 38,39 ,40–42. 
• Rate of change in negative cognitions early in psychotherapy predicts overall symptom 
change43. 
• Successful reduction of interpretation bias leads to continu ed symptom improvement44.  
Given the wealth of data linking interpretation bias to p sychopathology  across diagnostic 
categories, engaging this target is consistent with the RDoC framework. Interpretati on bias is 
linked to several  RDoC constructs,45 primarily  within the Negative Valence domain (rumination, 
worry, attentional bias, hopelessness, interpretation of facial expressions, risk assessment, 
avoidance behavior, memory retrieval). Interpretation bias has been validated as an important 
mechanism across multipl e units of analysis and translationally across animal and human models. 
Targeting interpretation bias has positive effects on behavior, cognition, and clinical symptoms.  
 
CBM -I is a simple, efficient , and effective, method to engage interpretation bias . 
The current proposal aims to develop an efficient and scalable method for engaging 
interpretation bias to improve outcomes during and following hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. Cognitive bias 
modification tasks targeting interpretation bias (CBM -I) are low -intensity, computerized 
interventions  that facilitate a more adaptive interpretive style via repeated practice on a training 
task. Importantly, the CBM -I task proposed here aims to engage interpretation bias in an “on -
line” manner - the moment of encountering ambiguity - which more closely matches the manner 
that interpretation bias naturally operates and may not require as much insight  as alternative 
methods. The proposed intervention, called HabitWorks , uses a  Word -Sentence Association 
Paradigm (WSAP23,41) to reinforce 
an adaptive interpretation style. 
Specifically, this task presents  a word 
representing either a negative or 
benign interpretation (“criticize” or 
“praise”)  of an ambiguous sentence 
that follows (“Your boss wants to 
meet with you”) . Individuals then 
indicate by [CONTACT_581219] w ord is related to the sentence. 
The feedback, “ You are correct! ” is 
displayed if they endorse benign 
interpretations or reject negative 
ones (Figure 1). This task taxes 
+ 
500 ms  
criticize  
500 ms  
Your boss wants to meet with you  
Participant presses button for (‘not related’)  
You are correct!  
TIME  
Feedback about accuracy  
CBM -I task  
 [ADDRESS_764113] that CBM -I has large effects on its target  
(Hedges ’s g = 0.81)37,48. For studies  delivering multiple sessions of CBM -I, effects on clinical 
symptoms  are also large . Most relevant to the current proposal , 10 studies  support the ability 
of the WSAP  CBM -I task to engage its target and improve clinical symptoms40–42,56 –61. Of these, 
[ADDRESS_764114] sizes (d’s = .48 to 1.05) 
for clinical symptoms that are comparable to existi ng evidence -based treatments . Of 
note, moderator analyses found that individuals with more biased cognition at baseline benefit 
more from CBM62,63. Thus, it is likely that effect sizes will be larger and more reliable in future 
studies that target this intervention to participants based on this dimension.  
 
To date, the available data is limited primarily by [CONTACT_25211], but are rigorous in design 
with double -blind randomized controlled trials comparing CBM -I to a placebo task. Additionally, 
few studies have tested the long -term effects of CBM -I. Preliminary evidence suggests that 
cognitive and symptom changes may e ndure for at least two weeks and up to six months64–68. 
The proposed study will provide crucial follow -up data to determine whether chan ges endure at  
[ADDRESS_764115] -dischar ge. 
 
CBM -I is an ideal hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581160] (i. e., 10 -minute sessions), 
standardized to ensu re reliable delivery , require s minimal staff  time, require s minimal language 
skills and  does not require patients to appl y complex theories on their own.  Combining CBM -I 
with hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581161] -
line treatments recommending a standardized, concentrated dose followed by [CONTACT_581220], 
booster sessions69. 
 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_263345] a partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. Participants ( n = 65) met criteria for a range of diagnoses, and 
70% met criteria for moderate or high suicide risk on the clinician -administered MINI75(specific 
suicide plans and suicidal gestures and attempts).  The average number of prior hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581162] 2 (range 0 to 20). This pi[INVESTIGATOR_581163] a measure of functional impairment; 
however, a prior sample from the same  partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581164] ( M = 7 (out of 10) for each domain).  
Does interpretation bias matter in a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_63840]?  Almost all prior studies of interpretation 
bias have compared a healthy control group to a psychopathology group; thus, we first 
examined the clinical relevance of interpretation bias within  a SMI sample. Even in a restricted 
range of high symptom severit y in our partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], robust associations were found with 
interpretation bias.  Controlling for baseline symptom severity, patients who endorsed fewer 
benign interpretation s at admission were less likely to respond to treatment (defined as 
“very much i mproved” on the self -reported Clinical Global Improvement Scale), and  this model 
accounted for 28% of the variance in treatment response. Interpretation bias upon 
admission also prospectively predicted suicidal ideation at discharge  better than any other 
demographic or clinical variable76.  
Rand omized Controlled Trial.  Patients  were randomly assigned to CBM -I or a neutral control 
condition. All individuals received treatment as usual at the partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. Patients completed 
the 10 -minute task each day they attended the partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_52123] a laptop computer. 
Assessments of interpretation bias and symptoms occurred upon admission and discharge.  
Feasibility and acceptability:  99% of participants completed daily sessions of CBM -I. Attrition 
rate for the discharge assessment was low (11%), typi[INVESTIGATOR_581165] 
 5 unexpected discharge. Patients easily fit the brief task into either their lunch break or be tween 
appointments. A bachelor’s level clinic staff member delivered CBM -I in this pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Thus, 
the CBT treatment providers were not directly involved. Not requiring a mental health clinician 
substantially improved the scalability of the intervention . An exit questionnaire revealed 
moderate to high satisfaction. On a scale of 1 to 7, patients’ mean helpfulness rating was 5.2 
(SD=1.3). Qualitative feedback revealed that most patients found the intervention relevant and a 
helpful complement to CBT. Pati ents noted an increased awareness of negative thought 
patterns, a flexible interpretation style, and interruption of their automatic associations. Patients 
connected CBM -I with the CBT they received even without the CBT therapi[INVESTIGATOR_581166]: “ It 
helped  me examine and challenge my Negative Automatic Thoughts” – a term presented in the 
CBT groups and “It helped solidify the program”.  
Target engagement:  Following an average of 7 sessions, CBM -I decreased negative 
interpretations ( d =2.59) and increased be nign interpretations ( d =2.28) of ambiguous situations, 
both of which significantly differed from a neutral comparison condition. In the CBM -I group, 
number of sessions correlated with change in negative interpretations  (r = .37, p =.03), 
providing preliminary evidence for a dose -response relationship.  
Clinical outcomes:  In patients who exhibited an interpretation bias upon admission (defined as 
endorsing ≥ 60% of negative interpretations), there was a significant treatment effect on the 
Clinical Global Improvement Scale: 36% of patients completing CBM -I were classified as 
responders (“very much improved”) compared to 0% in the control,  χ2 = 4.41, p < .[ADDRESS_764116] size for improvement in well -being ( d = 0.6 ).  
 
In sum, this pi[INVESTIGATOR_581167] , target engagement , and 
preliminary evidence that CBM -I may augment partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581168] -being . However, this initial study did not include a comprehensive 
assessment of interpretation bias, nor any mid -point or follow -up assessm ents. Moreover, it only 
offered a basic, non -personalized, computer version of CBM -I during hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (~7 
sessions). Given the preliminary evidence for a dose -response relationship, the proposed study 
will allow patients to continue treatment followi ng discharge from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581169]. The proposed study 
will follow patients 3 -months after discharge to evaluate the durability of cognitive changes, and 
the link t o primary (clinical global improvement; psychosocial functioning) and secondary 
outcomes (e.g., suicidal ideation, rehospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]).   
     
Rationale for Proposed Study .        
Individuals who require a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581170], reho spi[INVESTIGATOR_059], and 
suicide, particularly during the months post-discharge . Augmentation s trategies  that can be 
reliably delivered both in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581171]. Interpretation bias, a crucial mechanis m underling many  forms of 
psychopathology, is not sufficiently altered for all individua ls by [CONTACT_581221]. CBM -I, a 
low-intensity intervention, engages interpretation bias and leads to symptom imp rovement . 
However, apart from our pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], CBM -I hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581172]. Thus, we propose to dev elop a smart -phone delivered intervention, 
HabitWorks , to allow  better accessibility, patient engagement, assessment, and a means to 
bridge the transi tion from partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581173]. R esults will provide pi[INVESTIGATOR_581174] R01 ef fectiveness trial.  
 
We will test HabitWorks  as an augmentation to partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (PH) treatment. Over 400 PHs in 
the US are used either as a step -down strategy or alternative to inpatient treatment. PHs 
provide intensive treatment during the day, allowing patients to return home in the evening. 
Results obtained from proposed study should generalize because the structure of the proposed 
 6 site is consistent with the structure of partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581175] (e.g.,70). 
Acceptability data should also be relevant to individuals receiving inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581176].  
 
I. SPECIFIC AIMS  
 
The primary goals of this R34 pi[INVESTIGATOR_581177] a fully -
powered R01 effectiveness trial.  
 
Aim 1: Deve lop a smart -phone delivered intervention to augment hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581178] 2: Obtain pi[INVESTIGATOR_209926] a fully -powered RCT, including measures of:  
(a) Target engagement (improvement in interpretation bias)  
(b) Feasibility and acceptability of HabitWorks  and procedures for hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581179]  
(c) Clinical g lobal improvement and functioning  
We hypothesize that the HabitWorks  intervention and research procedures will meet a priori 
goals for feasibility, acceptability, and clinical utility (see data analysis section).  
 
 
Aim 3 : Obtain pi[INVESTIGATOR_581180]’s effect on suicidal ideation and behaviors.  
 
 
III. SUBJECT SELECTION  
 
Phase 1: Development  (COMPLETED)  
In this first phase of this R34 pi[INVESTIGATOR_20036], there will be no human subjects.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_581181] (e.g., clinicians at study site , clinic directors, BHP Patient 
Advisory Board ) to obtain feedback about the HabitWorks  app and research procedures.  
 
Phase 2: Open Trial  (Enrollment COMPLETE)  
We will enroll 16 par ticipants meeting the following inclusion criteria.  
 
Inclusion criteria: a) currently receiving partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581182]; b) age ≥18; c) at 
least moderate symptom severity (PHQ -9 or GAD -7 score  > 10); d) n o current psychiatric 
symptoms that would prevent informed consent or understanding of research procedures (e.g., 
active symptoms of psychosis, mania) , e) no current/active suicidal ideation (PHQ -9 item 9 > 1) 
and f) signing a release of information for t reatment  provider s is an inclusionary requirement for 
study participation . Consistent with the RDoC, DSM -[ADDRESS_764117] a minimal level of i nterpretation bias <80%  accuracy on the WSAP) will be offered 
participation.  
 
Source of subjects. The Behavioral Health Partial Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_283758] (BHP) at McLean Hosp ital 
admits over [ADDRESS_764118]. Bjorgvinsson (Co -I) is Director. The BHP delivers group and 
individual CBT to patients with a range of psychiatric disorders, p rimarily mood, anxiety, 
personality, and psychotic disorders. Treatment focuses on concepts such as self -monitoring, 
cognitive restructuring, and behavioral activation. The average length of stay is 8 days. Patients 
are assigned a case manager, psychiatris t, and skills coach.  
 
 7 Recruitment methods.  Study staff will review partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_20889]’ scores on the PHQ -9 
and GAD -7 to determine initial eligibility. On patients’ second day at the BHP, study staff will 
offer participation to those who score above the cut -offs. Interested patients will complete the 
interpretation bias assessment to determine eligibility. Patients may a lso express interest to 
study staff via fl yers posted at the BHP.  
 
Phase 3: Randomized controlled trial.  
In this Randomized Control Trial , we will recruit 64 partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_20889]. All inclusion and 
exclusion criteria, sources of subjects, and recruitment methods are the same as detailed in the 
Phase 2: Open Trial , except that current/active suicidal ideation criteria will be removed, such 
that individuals with all scores for phq9 item [ADDRESS_764119] ENROLLMENT  
Procedures under existing BHP protocol:  
Upon arrival to the Behavioral Health Partial Program, all patients will be oriented by [CONTACT_581222]/or Nurse Practitioner (all CITI certified staff members) to 
the program, building and set -up of the treatment.  Once oriented, pa tients will also be informed 
that as part of their treatment at the BHP they will be completing extensive self-report measures 
and a diagnostic interview. The Community Residence Counselors will explain to patients about 
our current research study examinin g the efficacy of CBT in naturalistic settings and ask 
whether or not they would like to consent to having their assessments be de -identified and 
included in our research database. It will also be explicitly instructed to patients, that if they were 
to ref use consent/participation, their treatment at the BHP will not be affected in any way.  
Patients will have the option to rescind their consent/participation at any point, and subsequently 
the Research Coordinator will take the appropriate measures to accom modate this decision. 
After obtaining informed consent from patients for the main effectiveness study, clinical staff will 
review a flyer about other studies being conducted in the program. Thus, clinical staff will inform 
patients of the research prior to  staff approaching eligible participants. BHP clinical and 
research staff will reinforce that participation is voluntary and the decision not to participate will 
not affect their care at any time.   
 
Procedures under proposed protocol:  
The research coordina tor or another member of the study staff will approach potentially eligible 
patients on their second day in the program and inform them about the study.  During the Open 
Trial patients approached scored above a 9 on PHQ -9 or GAD -7, PHQ -9 item9 < [ADDRESS_764120] sheet for 
remote consent with trained study staff.  They will then complete the interpretation bias 
assessment to determine eligibility to participate in the trial.  
 
Randomization.  We will use MINIMPY software to randomize participants to  HabitWorks or 
Symptom Tracking. MinimPy is a desktop application pro gram for sequential allocation of subjects to 
treatment groups in clinical trials by [CONTACT_581223]  
(https://sourceforge.net/p/minimpy/wiki/Home/ ).  
We will enter age and baseli ne level of interpretation bias as variables for which the program will 
balance group assignment. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_581183].  
 8 V. STUDY PROCEDURES  
 
Phase 1: Development  (COMPLETED)  
 
The team will develop the HabitWorks  smartphone app:     
Harnessing the strength of smart -phone technology to enhance skill acquisition, HabitWorks  will 
prompt patients to complete a practice session at set times to ensure adequate dosage and 
spacing of ses sions. We will employ techniques known to enhance user engagement, such as 
progressing through levels, assigning points for correct responses, and tracking of progress. 
These reinforcing features may improve adherence, which may ultimately enhance effects on 
interpretation bias. W e will develop the HabitWorks  intervention to address common barriers to 
eventual implementation (e.g., customizability/personalization, ease of use)88. As part of a 
different project (MH 097820 ), the PI [INVESTIGATOR_581184] a personalized CBM 
intervention for anxiety disorders based on demographic and clinical characteristics. We will 
develop a similar algorithm for a SMI population. Specifically, HabitWorks  will use demographic 
questions, measures of symptom sever ity (see Measures), and questions about specific types 
of situations that are most relevant for the patient to create a personalized stimulus set (e.g., 
someone with financial worries will see trials related to this domain; a participant without 
children w ill not see stimuli related to parenting). We will create the stimulus pool from our 
previous trials, comprising a minimum of [ADDRESS_764121] -sentence pairs in  each session.  
 
We will work with th e software programmer  to create a user -friendly and visually appealing 
smart -phone app, as well as the back -end infrastructure to access and manage the data  
through Partners RedCap . The app will use SSL encryption, and no HIPAA -defined personally 
identifiable information will be collected via the app. The app will be developed through Apple’s 
Research Kit and Android’s ResearchStack , both of which are open source frameworks that 
allow researchers and developers to create apps for medical research.  
 
 
Phase 2: Open Trial  (Enrollment COMPLETE)  
We will conduct an open trial to obtain pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299]. In the open trial, we will enroll [ADDRESS_764122] iteration ( n=4), the PI [INVESTIGATOR_581185]. Deviations from target outcomes will prompt investigation 
and discussion with the research team and advisory board, and possible revision of the 
intervent ion or research procedures. We will repeat this process in [ADDRESS_764123].  
 
This is a sub -study under the existing protocol entitled “Establishing the Effectiveness of 
Cognitive -Behavioral Partial Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581150], Depression, and Overall Functioning” (# 
2010 -P-001047/6). Data obtained under the existing BHP protocol will be shared with 
Investigators from this study.  
 
Procedures under existing BHP protocol:  
This research will be conducted with each patient who enters our program (up to 900 adult 
patients each year).  As the Behavioral Health Partial Program is an adult CBT -based program, 
all patients are at least 18 years of age and up.  Upon registration in ou r program, patients will 
receive the Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.), a 20 -45 minute non -invasive, 
structured diagnostic psychiatric interview to assess for psychiatric diagnostic criteria. Patients 
will also be asked to complete a  self-report questionnaire assessing for demographic variables, 
symptom severity, functional impairment, and CBT skill acquisition upon registration, and upon 
 9 discharge. Information will be stored on -site, in a locked drawer, in a secure office. Patients’ 
original questionnaires will be maintained for no longer than five years.  Only the Principal 
Investigator (Courtney Beard), Research Coordinator, Nurse Director (Lynn Kopeski), and 
Program Director (Throstur Bjorgvinsson) will have access to PHI.  However , the majority of PHI 
will be stored electronically.  The proposed research will be using RedCap Database, an 
encrypted, electronic database that is both HIPPA compliant (Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act) and approved by [CONTACT_581224] (for addition al information on the RedCap Database feature see 
http://rc.partners.org ).  To minimize inconvenience and provide maximum benefit to patients, 
data collection will be streamlined as a part of standard clinical care. Clinically salient 
information, including diagnostic output and patient's self report scores, will be highlighted and 
presented to clinical team managers and others involved in patien t services. Non -BHP patients 
will not be able to participate in this research.  
 
Procedures for Proposed Protocol:  
Participants’ data collected as part of protocol (# 2010 -P-001047/6) will be used to determine 
eligibility  for this study , and to characterize the demographic and clinical characteristics of the 
sample and as outcome assessments. Thus, only participants who consent to the main BHP 
study protocol will be eligible for the current study.  
 
On patients’ second day at the BHP, staff will o ffer participation  Interested patients will complete 
the eligibility assessment. Study staff will immediately review scores on the measure of 
interpretation bias (WSAP; see Measures) to determine eligibility. If eligible, they will complete 
the remaining p re-assessment measures. If ineligible, patients will be compensated and 
continue with treatment as usual at the BHP,  
 
The partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581186] a bachelor’s level progress monitoring coordinator who collects 
self-report data from patients and transmits this information to treatment teams. Identical to the 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], the PI [INVESTIGATOR_581187]. The staff member 
will also conduc t brief, in -person “check -ins” as often as desired by [CONTACT_102], to answer 
questions about the intervention, provide accountability for the patient, and to provide 
encouragement. This extra support and human connection with the HabitWorks  program should 
ensure adherence during the acute phase of treatment. On occasions when the progress 
monitoring coordinator is unavailable, a member of the study staff may provide the orientation 
and check -ins. 
 
Participants will complete a task designed to improve interpretation biases. Each session 
includes 150 trials of the previously validated wor d-sentence association paradigm  during each 
session (~10 min). The task presents ambiguous sentences (“You failed a n exam”) and 
provides positive feedback (“you are correct!”) when participants endorse benign 
interpretations/attributions (“difficult test”) and negative feedback (“you are incorrect!”) for 
negative interpretations/attributions (“stupid”).  
 
Once enrolled,  participants will complete HabitWorks  daily on their smart phones in a quiet room 
while attending the partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], three times per week at home for [ADDRESS_764124]-acute period , participants will complete assessments of symptoms 
(PHQ -9 and GAD -7) as often as desired , including optional once weekly check -ins and daily 
assessment of affect (see EMA description in Measures). These surveys will be administered 
 [ADDRESS_764125] participants’ privacy, confidentiality, and data 
security. Only research personnel will have access to study information. Data collected by [CONTACT_581225], and downloaded by [CONTACT_581226] a de -identified format 
(i.e., subject ID number). The local research server is only accessible by [CONTACT_464]. Study staff will 
provide orientation to the app and answer any questions regarding the assessments and data collected.  
 
 
 
Following Long -Term phase  (post 3months from discharge) EPIC Research trained study staff 
will check every patients EMR, whether or not they completed the 3month assessment, for data 
on rehospi[INVESTIGATOR_581188]. This data will then be de -ident ified and 
kept in partners secure storage (Dropbox).  
 
Retention.  Post-discharge, staff will monitor participants’ progress with the HabitWorks  app 
daily and will call participants who have not completed any sessions in the past week. The 
purpose of these phone calls will be to help identify barriers and brainstorm potential solutions. 
To increase retention, we will: a) obtain contact [CONTACT_581227]; b) pay participants for assessments; and c) provide transportation if 
needed , flexible scheduling for the assessments , and in rare individual cases conduct interviews 
via telephone.  
 
 
Measure s. 
Participants will complete measures that are already administered as part of standard clinical 
care at the BHP.  
The Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview  (MINI ) is a structur ed interview assessing for 
DSM -V Axis I disorders. The MINI will be administered by [CONTACT_581228] -doctoral fellow.  
The PHQ -9 is a brief self -report questionnaire assessing symptoms of depression. Patients 
complete the PHQ -9 at daily. 
The GAD -7 is a brief self -report questionnaire assessing symptoms of anxiety. Patients 
complete the GAD -7 daily.  
The Quality of Life Enjoyment and Satisfaction Questionnaire (Q-LES-Q97) will assess 
satisfaction and quality of life . 
To assess suicidal ideation and behaviors (lifetime, past month ), we will use the interview 
administered Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale  (CSSRS98). During remote assessments, 
when clinical interview is not possible, we will use an adapted form of the CSSRS as a self 
report m easure.  
 
Participants in proposed study will complete the following additional measures:  
 
WSAP23,41. Word -sentence pairs representing benign or negati ve interpretations are presented, 
and patients decide if they are related or not . In the assessment version of this task, no 
feedback is given about the accuracy of participants’ responses. T he task  will record reaction 
times for 4 WSAP trial types (endors e benign, reject benign, endorse negative, reject negative), 
reflecting the relative speed or ease with which participants make interpretations. We will Treatment phas e Location  Frequency of sessions  Session 
duration  
Acute  (1 to 14 days)  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581189] -based hospi[INVESTIGATOR_23047]  10 min  
Transition (1-month)  Home  3x per week to transition from intensive hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581190]  5 min  
Long -Term  (2 mo)  Home  Sessions completed as desired by [CONTACT_29569]  5 min  
 11 calculate reaction time bias scores for each trial typ e (negative vs. benign). The task  will also 
recor d participants’ responses (yes/no) for each trial type (negative vs. benign) to allow 
calculation of the percentage of negative and benign interpretations endorsed.   In the case of 
remote recruitment in phase 2b and 3, the assessment version of the WSAP wi ll be used as a 
screening tool prior to the Pre -treatment.  
 
The Scenario recognition 
task is the most widely 
used assessment of 
interpretation bias in CBM -
I91 and will ensure that 
effects are not solely 
attributable to practice or 
method effects. In brief, 
participants first read 10 
ambiguous scenarios and 
a comprehension question 
to ensure they actually 
read the scenario. In the 
second phase, 
participants read  the title 
of the ambiguous scenario 
followed by [CONTACT_581229] a random 
order. Sentences 
represent a) a possible 
positive interpretation, b) a 
possible negative 
interpretation, c) a positive 
foil, and d) a negative foil. 
Participants rate each sentence for its similarity in meaning to the original story using a 4 -point 
scale ranging from 1 (very different in meaning) to 4 (very similar in meaning). We will calculate 
the average similarity rating for negative and positive i nterpretations.  
 
 
Co-primary clinical outcomes will include stake -holder relevant measures of glob al improvement 
and functioning. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_581191].  
Clinician -administered Clinical Global Improvement Scale (CGIS93) to assess global 
improvement.  
Clinician -rated 5 -item Work and Social Adjustment Scale (WSAS94) to assess interference 
caused by [CONTACT_102]’s symptom s in the domains of work, home management, leisure, and 
family relationships.  
 
Other self -report measures will include:  
 
Credibility Expectancy Questionnaire104 to assess patients’ beliefs about the treatment 
expectancy (affectively based) and treatment rationale credibility (cognitively based).  
 
Exit Questionnaire  to asse ss patients’ satisfaction with the treatment provided.  
 
Beck Hopelessness Scale (BHS99)) to assess  negative attitudes about the future.   Schedule of Assessments  Pre Daily  Post  1-mo 3-mo 
Interviews  
MINI  X     
CGIS    X X X 
WSAS  X  X X X 
Longitudinal Interval Follow -Up Eval         X X 
Qualitative Exit Interview (open trial  
and first [ADDRESS_764126] )    X  
CSSRS  X   X X 
App or Computer Delivered  
*The HabitWorks  app will deliver all daily surveys. Redcap will be used to 
deliver computerized surveys during in -person assessments.  
Demog. Form, CEQ  X     
PHQ -9; GAD -7 X X X X X 
Q-LES-Q, BHS, CFI, MPS, GSE  X  X X X 
Exit Questionnaire     X  
WSAP  X X X X X 
Scenario Recognition Task     X  
EMA PANAS  X X X X X 
CSSRS - Self Report  X   X X 
System Usability Scale - HW condition     X  
TWEETS - HW condition     X  
 12 Cognitive Flexibility Inventory:  The Cognitive Flexibility Inventory is a measure of mental 
flexibility and assesses the degree to which individuals are able replace maladaptive thoughts 
with adaptive ones and maintain a balanced mindset.  
 
15-Item Multidimensional Perfectionism Scale (short f orm): The MPS is a widely used self -report 
measure of perfectionism.  
 
10-item General Self Efficacy Scale : The GSE is a widely used self -report measure of self  
efficacy.  
 
Ecological Momentary Assessment (EMA)  
We will pi[INVESTIGATOR_581192] -X 100. During the 1 -month transition phase, 
participants will complete the PANAS -X 4 times every day via the smartphone app. The surveys 
will be administer ed at random times during each one of 4 stratified blocks of time (9am -12pm, 
12-3pm, 3 -6pm, 6 -9pm).  
 
Other interview measures will include:  
The Longitudinal Interval Follow -Up Evaluation (LIFE103) to assess psycho -pharmacotherapy 
use, including an y medication or dosage changes . 
  
 
Study staff will conduct a qualitative exit interview  with prompts about overall patient 
experiences, acceptability and feasibility, relevance of the stimuli, and user -experience of the 
app. 
 
Treatment adherence. Number of sessions completed will be recorded by [CONTACT_581230] a measure of feasibility/ acceptability, and as needed as a control variable in 
analyses.  
 
Compensation.  Participants will receive compensation for their time to complete assessments. 
Participants will receive $20 for the eligibility assessment  and pretreatment assessment, and an 
additional $[ADDRESS_764127]-treatment assessments . They will receive  $30 for the 1 -month and 3 -
month follow -up assessments, $[ADDRESS_764128] 80% of the EMA surveys each week 
for 1 month, a nd $[ADDRESS_764129] -treatment qualitative interview (open trial only).  
 
 
Phase 3: Randomized Controlled Trial  
We will recruit [ADDRESS_764130] we will randomize individuals to receive  the 
experimental condition HabitWorks  or a Symptom Tracking condition. Those in the HabitWorks 
group will complete the CBM task via smartphone application as an augmentation to treatment 
as usual (TAU) , while those in the Symptom Tracking Group will comple te weekly symptom 
monitoring surveys as an augmentation to TAU.  
 
Procedures under existing protocol:  
All procedures under existing BHP protocol are remaining the same as the Open Tria l, except 
for the change s in the inclusion criteria that eliminates the PHQ -9 item 9 score <2 requirement  
and restricts additional recruitment to BIPOC participants with the goal of reaching our proposed 
percentage of BIPOC participants.  
 
 13 Procedures for Proposed Protocol:  
The rese arch coordinator or another member of the study staff will approach potentially eligible 
patients (scoring above a 9 on PHQ -9 or GAD -7) on their second day in the program and inform 
them about the study , and send them a brief screening survey to assess initial eligibility prior to 
study consent and enrollment (i.e., owns an iPhone, willing to sign a release of information for 
outpatient providers, willing to use the app per protocol and willing to complete  follow -up 
assessments). If patients are eligible based on this initial screening questionnaire, they will then 
receive a detailed description of the study procedures, risk, and benefits and will review a study 
fact sheet for remote consent with trained st udy staff. Additionally, those patients who did not 
originally consent to the BHP main study, will have to consent to the main study in order to be 
eligible for the RCT. They will then complete the interpretation bias assessment to determine 
eligibility to  participate in the trial.  
 
On patients’ second day at the BHP, staff will offer participation. Interested patients will 
complete the eligibility assessment. Study staff will immediately review scores on the measure 
of interpretation bias (WSAP; see Measur es) to determine eligibility. If eligible, they will 
complete the remaining pre -assessment measures. If ineligible, patients will be compensated 
and continue with treatment as usual at the BHP.  A fter the eligibility session, patients will be 
randomized in to either HabitWorks or Symptom Tracking groups  by [CONTACT_978] . 
 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_581193] .  
 
HabitWorks  
Participants assigned to HabitWorks will complete the same procedures as outlined in the Open 
Trial.  Specifically, participants will complete a task designed to improve interpretation biases. 
During each session, participants complete the previously valida ted word -sentence association 
paradigm (~10 min). The task presents ambiguous sentences (“You failed an exam”) and 
provides positive feedback (“you are correct!”) when participants endorse benign 
interpretations/attributions (“difficult test”) and negative  feedback (“you are incorrect!”) for 
negative interpretations/attributions (“stupid”). Sessions during the transition phase are shorter 
(~5 min).  
 
Once enrolled, participants will be asked to complete HabitWorks daily on their smart phones in 
a quiet room while attending the partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], at least three times per week at home for [ADDRESS_764131] -
acute period, participants may complete assessments of symptoms (PHQ -9 and GAD -7) as 
often as desired , including optional once weekly check -ins for the study. For people in the 
HabitWorks condition, these surveys are administered via the HabitWorks app.  
 
During the [ADDRESS_764132] (see EMA description in Measures). These surveys will be administered via Metricwire.  
The HabitWorks and Metricwire app was designed to protect participants’ privacy, 
confidentiality, and data security. Only research personnel will have access to study information. 
Data collected by [CONTACT_581231], and downloaded by [CONTACT_581232] a de -identified format (i.e., subject ID number). The local research 
server is only accessible by [CONTACT_464]. Study staff will provide orientation to the app and 
answer any questions regarding the assessments and data collected.  
 
HabitWorks  
Treatment phase  Location  Frequency of sessions  Duration  
 [ADDRESS_764133] discharge , participants can 
complete weekly symptom monitoring surveys as desired.  
 
 
If under any circumstance  in-person assessments are not possible , all study assessments and 
procedures can be completed remotely via telephone , encrypted email, or video -call, depending 
on the preference of the participant  (see Risks and Discomforts section) . Additionally, in cases  
of remote recruitment, participants will be screened over the phone and will be sent the 
assessment version of the WSAP (see measures) to assess eligibility prior to consent.  
 
Retention.  Post-discharge, staff will monitor participants’ progress with the H abitWorks app and 
MetricWire app and will call participants who have not completed any sessions in either app 
over the past week.  They will monitor this each week for the month of transition phase.  The 
purpose of these phone calls will be to help identify barriers and brainstorm potential solutions. 
To increase retention, we will: a) obtain contact [CONTACT_581233] l always know 
how to reach participants; b) pay participants for assessments; and c) provide transportation if 
needed, flexible scheduling for the assessments, and in rare individual cases conduct interviews 
via telephone. In the event that a participant i s unable to attend follow -up assessments , or 
follow -up assessments are not occurring  in person, we will conduct the entire assessment 
through remote methods such as encrypted email, phone call, and video call. We will follow 
these procedures for both treat ment conditions.   
 
Measures:  
 
All measures from the Open Trial will remain the same . Additionally, the RCT will include the 
following new measures:   
 
Edinburgh Handedness Inventory - Short Form116 is a 4 -item widely used validated measure of 
handedness. The EHI will be used to determine eligibility for the EEG Assessment. Participants 
rate how often they use their left or right hand in 4 different practical examples on a scale of 
+100 (“Always Righ t”) to -100 (“Always Left”). We will consider a score of +50 or above as right 
handed and eligible for EEG.  Acute  (1 to 14 days)  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581189] -based hospi[INVESTIGATOR_23047]  10 min  
Transition (1-month)  Home  3x per week to transition from intensive hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581194], 4x daily affect surveys, weekly symptom 
monitoring survey  15 
min/day  
Long -Term  (2 mo)  Home  Sessions completed as desired by [CONTACT_29569]  5 min  
Symptom Tracking  
Treatment phase  Location  Frequency of sessions  Duration  
Acute  (1 to 14 days)  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581195] , self-monitoring as part of TAU  na 
Transition (1-month)  Home  4x daily affect surveys as well as weekly symptom monitoring 
survey  15 
min/day 
Long -Term  (2 mo)  Home  Symptom monitoring surveys as desired  2min/week  
 15  
 
The System Usability Scale(SUS117): The SUS is a [ADDRESS_764134] or service, and was intended to be used fo r all types of technological 
interventions. It collects the subjective self -report of usability and specifically relates to user 
experience of effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction. Participants will rate their agreement on 
a 5point likert scale rang ing from 1(Strongly Disagree) to 5(Strongly Agree).  This survey will be 
administered at the 1-Month  Assessment, only for individuals in the HabitWorks condition.  
 
The Twente Engagement with Ehealth Technologies Scale (TWEETS118): The TWEETS is a [ADDRESS_764135] with 
the HabitWorks app. Participants will rate their  agreement on a 4point likert scale ranging from 
0(strongly disagree) to 4(strongly agree). This survey will be administered at the [ADDRESS_764136] 20 participants regarding 
questions similar to the Open Trial, but pertinent to either Symptom Tracking or HabitWorks 
treatment conditions. Additionally participants will be asked about their experience in relation to 
the EMA in transition phase.  
 
Finally,  the Symptom Tracking condition will receive a different version of the Exit Questionnaire  
and the Credibility and Expectancy Questionnaire.  
 
Compensation.  Participants will receive compensation for their time to complete assessments. 
Participants will receive $20 for the pretreatment assessment, and an additional $[ADDRESS_764137]-treatment assessments. They will receive $30 for the 1 -month and 3 -month follo w-up 
assessments, and $[ADDRESS_764138] -treatment qualitative interview ( first 20 participants only ). 
Participants will also be compensated for completing EMA surveys - they will receive $10 each 
week they complete any surveys at all, and a bonus $30 for eve ry week they complete 70% 
surveys (19/28).  
 
If, for whatever reason, a participant cannot or will not accept checks, the study will compensate 
with a one -time $[ADDRESS_764139] been studied extensively by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_581196], with no adverse events reported . 
 
Common Risks  include: transient negative emotional reactions to the computer task , EMA 
protocol or questionnaires.  
 
Uncommon Risks include: coercion, breach of confidentiality, and clinical deterioration ,  
 
All treatments carry with them the risk of loss of confidentiality, increased distress due to 
assessment or intervention procedures, and risk of ineffective intervention. Pharmacotherapy 
carries with it the risk of associated physical problems, including b oth mild and severe side 
 [ADDRESS_764140] on other services they receive at the partial 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], or at other departments of McLean Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. Potential participants will not be 
recruited  by [CONTACT_581234]. All individuals will be reminded that there is no penalty 
for patients who choose not to participate or to withdraw from the study; they may refuse 
to participate or drop out of the study at any time without any negative repercuss ions 
from study staff, health care providers, or affiliated institutions. Consent will be 
documented through the individual’s signature [CONTACT_75288]. In the case of 
remote assessment, we will waive the documentation of consent, and verbal consent wi ll 
be obtained through Zoom or telephone call. We will maintain e -copi[INVESTIGATOR_581197], which will indicate who obtained consent and by [CONTACT_581235] (telephone or 
Zoom), on our Partners Dropbox. During remote consent, we will provide participant  with 
a copy of the consent form, which we will send via email. We will also include the 
following Partners required language in the summary sheet that provided to participants, 
regarding HIPAA: We are required by [CONTACT_581236] (HIPAA) to protect the privacy of health information obtained for research. This is an 
abbreviated notice, and does not describe all details of this requirement (see Partners 
Privacy Notice*). During this study, identifiable information about  you or your health will 
be collected and shared with the researchers conducting the research. In general, under 
federal law, identifiable health information is private. However, there are exceptions to 
this rule. In some cases, others may see your identif iable health information  for purposes 
of research oversight, quality control, public health and safety, or law enforcement. We 
share your health information only when we must, and we ask anyone who receives it 
from us to protect your privacy.   [CONTACT_581248] ha s extensive experience supervising post -
doctoral fellows and research assistants in conducting informed consent processes. The 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_581198]. Additional ly, in the case of remote 
recruitment , verbal consent for release  of information will be obtained instead of physical 
signatures. E lectronic copi[INVESTIGATOR_581199] , explicitly stating who 
obtained  consent  and how (ie. Verbally) , will be stored on Partners approved  Dropbox. 
Participants who decline participation or who do not meet inclusion/exclusion criteria will 
continue with treatment as usual at the partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].  
 
2. Potential risks due to loss of con fidentiality will be minimized by [CONTACT_581237]. All participants will be informed about the limits of confidentiality 
concerning suicidal intent,  homicidal intent, suspected child abuse, and suspected elder 
abuse.  Moreover, all information will be treated as confidential material and will be 
 17 available only to research and clinical staff. All self -report and interview data will be 
collected and sto red in a Partners Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581200] (using RedCap) 
which is stored on a secure server that is backed up on a daily basis. Cognitive bias data 
files will be available only to authorized personnel and no names or obvious identifying 
informa tion will be stored in computer files containing study data. Patient identifying 
information will be stored in a separate database and will be password protected. Any 
paper files will be kept in a locked filing cabinet in a secured office. No subject will be 
identified in any report of the project.  Further, when contact[CONTACT_581238] -treatment or follow -up assessments, no identifying information 
other than the name [CONTACT_581247]. Participants 
will be asked to provide informed written consent for audio -recording  at the time of study 
entry  (except for participants in Phase 2b) .  To assure the confidentiality a nd protection 
of participants with respect to audio  recording , the following steps will be taken: a) audio  
-recordings will be labeled with the date and participant id number only; b) all recordings 
will be stored on a secure sever or in locked files in a secured office; c) access to the 
audio -recordings will be limited to individuals who will be rating the recordings for 
reliability and to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_581201]; and d) all participants will 
have the right to revoke their consent for a udio-recording or ask that any of the 
recordings be erased immediately or at any point during or after the study.  
 
To assure the confidentiality and prot ection of data collected  through the smart -phone 
application, no identifying information will  be colle cted. The survey/ intervention 
application is being developed using ResearchKit(TM) for Apple devices and 
ResearchStack for Android —now the standard open source frameworks for deploying 
clinical research applications. The app will reside on patients’ devic es and only transmit 
data to the REDCap datastore . The survey app will transmit data to the REDCap  
datastore hosted by [CONTACT_145485]. The app will only request data from the datastore in two 
circumstances: (1) to perform username/ password authentication, and (2) in the event 
that participant installs the app on a new or wiped phone, the app will retrieve r esponses 
to the customization portion of the intervention to personalize their instance of the app.  
Some remote assessments may be conducted through Partners Enterprise  licensed  
Zoom accounts assigned to each sta ff. This version of Zoom is configured to be  HIPAA 
compliant. Staff will send password protected links to individual participants at the time 
of assessment. Zoom implements a range of encryption technology to ensure all content 
remains between the intended recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840]. Video, audio and screen sharing  are protected 
across platforms with a combination of asymmetric and symmetric encryption using 
AES-[ADDRESS_764141] ion is available for them to be pushed to the datastore using 128 bit SSL 
encryption, at which time the local copi[INVESTIGATOR_581202]. The app uses a unique ID 
assigned to the patient; no PII is generated or transmitted by  [CONTACT_9426].  The Master Key 
(with subject ID and names) will only be accessible by [CONTACT_581239], and located 
on our secure server . The server stores patient data using only the unique ID, no PII. 
The app requires a password for patient sign -in. All data obtained  via the smartphone  
app is for research only and will not be placed in medical records or  shared with clinical 
 18 staff.  
 
Metricwire was designed to ensure data security, privacy, and confidentiality. Data are 
encrypted on the phones and uploaded to a secure server (using HIPA A compliant 
software which has been reviewed and approved by [CONTACT_581240]) and downloaded by [CONTACT_427017] a de -
identified format. All subject names will be coded. The master key (linking deident ified 
IDs to identifying information) will be stored securely on the Partners network and will 
only be accessible to study staff. No identifiable data will be stored on mobile devices.  
 
3. We also plan to make the de -identified data from this study available  via the 
NIMH Data Archive (NDA) accordance with NIMH policy, to be stored in the 
National Database of Clinical Trials  (excluding Phase 2b) . 
 
4. The risks of possible distress due to the assessment and treatment procedures will be 
minimized by:  a) using assessments and procedures which have been widely used in 
previous clinical and research studies; b) conducting assessments at the clinic  that the  
participant attends (and is familiar with); c) reminding all individuals that they do not have 
to answer assessment questions that they find too distressing, and that they can 
discontinue participation at anytime; and d) having licensed clinica l psychologists (Drs. 
Beard, Björgvinsson , or McHugh ) on call during all assessments, sessions, and daily 
throughout the course of the study to counsel participants and help facilitate the 
stabilization processes for participants who report experiencing di stress. Patients who 
complete sessions at home will be given phone numbers of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_6012], as 
well as hours that each individual may be reached via telephone. They will be instructed 
to call should they experience any distress while completing t he smart phone app.  It is 
also possible that participants may become distressed should they experience technical 
difficulties at home. Prior to any home sessions, participants will have already completed 
daily sessions and will be fully competent to self -administer the program before 
attempting to complete at home. They will be instructed to call study staff should they 
experience any trouble with the program during regular work hours, and we will work 
with the patient to solve the problem. If they are acc essing the program during non -
working hours, they will be instructed to leave a voicemail for study staff, who will return 
their call as soon as possible the next business day. Of note, in previous CBM protocols 
delivered at home, patients did not report e xperience any distress completing the 
computer programs.   
 
5. Minimization of risk of ineffective intervention  
 
The overall risk of possible ineffective intervention will be minimized by: 1) 
frequent monitoring ( daily for all study participants); 2) allowing study 
participants to receive standard partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581203],  
including pharmacotherapy and psychotherapy ; 3) reminding all participants at 
each contact [CONTACT_581241] a 
significant worsening of symptoms and/or suicidal ideation; and 4) the study 
protocol specifying that, in the event of clinical deterioration of anxiety or 
depression symptoms, or increased suicidality, study subjects will be 
evaluated by a licensed clinician .  
 
To mi nimize risk of clinical deterioration of anxiety and/or depression, a 
protocol for close clinical monitoring has been established . 
 19 See SOP.  In brief, we will not be monitoring symptoms and suicide risk via 
app surveys AT ALL throughout the study. Patients will be reminded multiple 
ways that they should not use study surveys as a means to communicate a 
need for clinical attention (see Lab SOP). If they are in distress they may 
reach out to outpatient providers or emergency services. As part of TAU, 
patients will create a safety plan with their providers at the time of discharge 
from the program and research staff will go over this plan with them, as 
another reminder of what to do in cases of emergency, as we are not following 
them . Upon discharge from the BHP , we will also be providing participants 
with a contact [CONTACT_581242] c risis services throughout the state, and helpi[INVESTIGATOR_581204] a few resources they could use. Participants will be 
reminded before each survey that they may skip the survey or stop the survey 
at any time, and that they should reach out to outpatie nt providers, suicide 
crisis numbers, or 911 in case of emergencies.  
 
 
 
VIII. POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
Potential benefits to all participants include a detailed psychiatric evaluation and increased 
assessment and monitoring of their anxiety and depression sympto ms. If a participant’s anxiety 
or depression worsens substantially, we will provide feedback to the partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581205] (acute phase ). If the participant is at risk for a suicide attempt, we will take immediate 
action to safeguard that patient.  All participants may also benefit from the opportunity to practice  
self-assessment skills (i.e., symptom tracking). We believe that serious risks (e.g., loss of 
confidentiality or major psychological distress due to study participation) to subjects are very 
unlikely. We have attempted to minimize these risks (as describe d above). While some risks 
may be more likely to occur (e.g., minor, transient psychological distress), these risks are much 
less serious. Therefore, the potential benefits of the proposed study seem to outweigh the 
potential risks of this study for the in dividual participants.  
 
The overall goal of this research project is to learn more about the development of efficacious 
and easily disseminated treatments for SMI, thus, indirectly, all participants may eventually 
benefit from furthering science in this field, as may other individuals who suffer from these 
disorders.  
 
Importa nce of the Knowledge to be Gained.  
 
The results of this study will provide important information about the feasibility and acceptability 
of HabitWorks  as a personalized, augmentation intervention for SMI . Approximately 4.1% of the 
adult US population suff ers from SMI, defined as a mental disorder associated with significant 
functional impairment. In addition to serious functional impairment, individuals with SMI die [ADDRESS_764142] -effective and easily disseminated interventions. We believe that serious risks 
(e.g. loss of confidentiality  or major psychological distress due t o study participation) to subjects 
are very unlikely.  While some risks may be more likely to occur (e.g. minor, transient 
psychological distress), these are much less serious.  Thus, in relation to the importance of the 
knowledge to be gained, the minimal  risk to participants is reasonable.  
 
IX. MONITORING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE  
Oversight of the participants’ safety will be conducted by [CONTACT_978] [CONTACT_19731] a Data Safety and 
Monitoring Board ( DSMB) comprising Efrat Shavit , M.D., Eliza Menninger, M.D. , and Ma risa 
Silveri, PhD. [CONTACT_581249]  is a psychiatrist at the BHP (study site). She has experience treating 
individuals with SMI, managing their safety, and training residents in these areas. [CONTACT_581250] 
is Medical Director of the BHP and has decades of experie nce managing suicide risk in acute 
treatment settings. Finally, [CONTACT_581251] is a Neuroscientist and Director of the 
Neurodevelopmental Laboratory on Addictions and Mental Health at McLean Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. Her NIH -
funded research examines cognitive ability and cli nical indicators of mood, anxiety, and 
impulsivity, across healthy adolescent, emerging adult, and adult cohorts, and those with 
addictions and co -occurring psychiatric illnesses.  Please see attached DSMB Charter.  
Efficacy plan .   
To ensure that valid, reliable, and accurate data are collected, we will audio -record all 
assessment interviews with the patient’s permission.  Self -report data will be obtained directly 
from the computer and stored in the secure database. Data collected f rom interviews will be 
entered into a secure  database. All data will be reviewed and entered into the computer 
database a second time. Files from the two data entries will be compared in order to check for 
accuracy of data entry. [CONTACT_581248] has extensive ex perience training research assistants and 
post-doctoral fellows in diagnostic and symptomatic assessments. Training involves a multi -
stage process in which study staff:  1) meet regularly with [CONTACT_581248] to obtain education about 
DSM criteria for the disord ers being assessed and general interviewing techniques; 2) view 
training videotapes on the MINI, CGI, and other assessments being utilized; 3) attend a half to 
full day meeting in which the administration of the interview measures are reviewed in detail an d 
role-plays are conducted; 4) view a skilled interviewer conducting two or more interviews with 
actual participants (with consent of these participants) and conduct interviews with actual 
participants while [CONTACT_581248] is present; 5) are scored by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Beard  on aspects of their skill in 
completing the assessments and are deemed fully trained to conduct interviews independently, 
after achieving a passing score.  Ongoing checks of assessment technique are conducted in a 
process to assure calibration and prevent  rater drift, while also obtaining inter -rater reliability 
data.  Assessment staff and research assistants regularly independently listen to and rate a 
MINI assessment. This provides inter -rater reliability data. After each staff member rates a given 
interview, we discuss ratings as a group, a process that ensures calibration with an expert 
diagnosis, and helps to prevent rater drift.  
 
Safety Plan .   
See Lab SOP attached.  
 
The DSMB will review rates of adverse events to determine any changes in participant risk. A 
brief report will be generated quarterly for the study record and forwarded to the DSMB and 
annually to the Partners Healthcare Institutional Review Board. The DSMB members will be 
available to meet outside of the quarterly meetings, if  necessary, to discuss concerns regarding 
a particular participant or research problem. If necessary, they will make appropriate 
recommendations for changes in protocol.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_581206].  Al l adverse events will be reported to the IRB  per PHRC 
 21 guidelines: https://partnershealthcare -public.sharepoint.com/ClinicalResearch  
/Reporting_Unanticipated_Problems_including_Adverse_Events.pdf . The DSMB will inform NIH 
of any significant action taken as a result of DSMB findings.  This study will use the NIH’s 
Common Adverse Events (AEs) and Serious Adverse Events (SAEs) definitions for clinical 
research. Adverse events are defined as any event or outcome that has resulted in harm to the 
participa nt, has affected the participant detrimentally, has worsened as a result of participation 
in the study, or that has resulted in increased risk to the participant or others whether or not the 
risk actually results in harm.  
  
In the event that a participant either withdraws from the study or the investigator decides to 
discontinue a client due to SAE, the participant will be monitored by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_581207] 1) a resolution is reached i.e., the problem requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581208]; 2) the SAE is determined to be clearly 
unrelated to the study intervention; or 3) the SAE results in death. Unexpected events are 
defined as any event or outcome that was not described as a risk of partic ipation in the 
research, or though described as a risk, the event or outcome has occurred with unexpected 
severity or frequency.  
 
 
 
 
  
 [ADDRESS_764143] Operating Procedure (SOP)  
Version date:  January 20th, 2021  
 
Procedures during partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (while patient attends BHP)  
All participants in this study will be receiving intensive partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581209]. Therefore, deterioration or suicide risk during this phase will be reported to the patient’s clinical 
team manager at the BHP. At tha t point, the treatment team will manage the safety of the patient and 
determine whether inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_59029].  
We will maintain regular communication with the patients’ treatment team throughout the 
course of their partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408]. D r. Beard’s office is in the same hallway as all of the BHP 
clinical team managers and psychiatrists. We will use the BHP’s confidential voicemail 
system for non -urgent information and pagers for urgent clinical  information .  
 
Clinical Deterioration  
As part  of standard clinical care, the BHP’s Progress Monitoring Coordinator (PMC) w ill monitor 
depression symptoms daily, via use of the PHQ -[ADDRESS_764144] clinical care, the PMC will notify the clinical team manager of 
any patient whose experiences an increase from the baseline assessment (e.g., from a 0 to 1, from a 1 to 
2, etc.). At that point, the treatment team will manage the safety of the patient  and determine whether 
inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_59029]. Each time item [ADDRESS_764145] -BHP treatment. Answers of 
"Yes" to questions 4 or 5 on C -SSRS will result in emergent e valuation by [CONTACT_581243] (either BHP 
clinical team manager or [CONTACT_581248]) . During periods where the BHP is operating remotely, participants will 
complete the self -report version of the C -SSRS during study assessments. In these instances, study staff 
will monitor their responses in real -time, and will ensure that a licensed clinician is available  at time of 
study assessment  for emergent evaluation if necessary (Answers of “Yes” to questions 4 or 5).  
 
Procedures following partial hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (post -discharge from BHP)  
At discharge as part of treatment as usual participants will create a safety aftercare plan with 
their BHP provider, and this plan will be gone over in their discharge session with research 
staff. In addition, staff will provide participants with a list of  local crisis resources across the 
state, and ask participants to identify a few they could contact [INVESTIGATOR_243103]. In this session we 
will reiterate that the research team will not be checking patients Weekly Check -Ins 
(PHQ/GAD)  or the EMA surveys . Following discharge from the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], patients are 
expected to follow their aftercare plan with outpatient providers. During this time s tudy staff 
will not be monitoring safety of  any Mood Check ins completed by [CONTACT_4317] , nor will they 
be following th e daily EMA surveys .  
 
The smart phone app will clearly remind patients as they complete these forms each day that study staff 
will not see the data and thus, if they feel that they need attention, they should call their outpatient 
 23 providers, call 911, use the crisis text hotline, or go to their local Emergency Department.  Additionally, if a 
patient indicates any level of suicidal ideation on the PHQ -9 (item 9 score ≥ 1) , the app will generate a 
message urging the patient to call their outpatient provide rs, contact [CONTACT_9150], or utilize the 
crisis text line  if they are feeling unsafe . Additionally, the list of crisis resources provided to patients upon 
discharge will be available to view in the app FAQs.  
 
Additionally, any symptom monitoring surveys completed in the Long Term phase will not be monitored at 
all by [CONTACT_3655].  
 
Suicidality  
 As part of this study, participants will complete the Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale at 1 and 3 -
month follow -up assessments. Answers of "Yes" to questions 4 or 5 on C -SSRS will result in emergent 
evaluation by [CONTACT_581244] ([CONTACT_581248]) for appropriate assessment and triage  
(see risk assessment section below) . In addition to clinical interv iew, as well as when clinical interview 
cannot be scheduled,  participants will complete a self -report version of the C -SSRS. When this occurs , 
study staff will monitor their responses in real -time, and will ensure that a licensed clinician is available  
remotely  at time of study assessment for emergent evaluation if necessary (Answers of “Yes” to questions 
4 or 5).  If [CONTACT_581248] is unavailable to conduct a risk assessment another pre -determined licensed clinical 
psychologist will reach evaluate the patient. I f multiple risk assessments are required for the same 
participant, we will attempt to have the same clinician speak with the patient at all risk assessment 
timepoints  
 
 
Risk Assessment  
Risk assessments for suicidality ( CSSRS) will be conduc ted by [CONTACT_581245]. If the study participant has experienced significant deterioration but is not in 
immediate danger of hurting him or herself, we may take the following actions. First, we will inform  the 
patient about procedures for contact[CONTACT_254616] -
harm. Second, we will urge the patient to make an appointment with their outpatient provider as well. 
Third, with the patient’s consent, we will sp eak with one of their family members so that he/she can be 
aware of the seriousness of the patient’s symptoms and the agreed -upon treatment plan. Fourth, if the 
patient wishes additional treatment referrals or other referrals, we will facilitate these refe rrals.  
[CONTACT_581248] will conduct a suicide risk assessment to determine whether it is necessary to take immediate 
action to prevent the participant from causing harm to themselves.  If [CONTACT_581248] is unavailable to conduct a 
risk assessment another pre -determin ed licensed clinical psychologist will reach evaluate the patient. If 
multiple risk assessments are required for the same participant, we will attempt to have the same clinician 
speak with the patient at all risk assessment timepoints.  If needed, actions that [CONTACT_581248] may take 
include having a family member bring the person to McLean Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581210].  
Documentation  
Study staff will document each time a participant is identified for clinical deterioration or suicidality. 
Documentation will include the following:  
• Date of identification  
• Reason for identification (e.g., increase on GAD -7) 
• Date and time clinician contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]  
• Outcome  
 
  
 24 REFERENCES  
1. National Survey on Drug Use and Health (NSDUH). Available at: 
https://nsduhweb.rti.org/respweb/homepage.cfm. (Accessed: 22nd April 2016)  
2. Walker, E. R., McGee, R. E. & Druss, B. G. Mortality in Mental Disorders and Global Disease 
Burden Implications: A Systematic Review and Meta -analysis. JAMA Psychia try 72, 334 
(2015).  
3. Osborn, D., Levy, G., Nazareth, I. & King, M. Suicide and severe mental illnesses. Cohort 
study within the [LOCATION_006] general practice research database. Schizophr. Res.  99, 134–138 
(2008).  
4. Schennach, R. et al.  Predictors of Relapse in th e Year After Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_581211]. Psychiatr. Serv.  63, 87–90 (2012).  
5. Cougnard, A. et al.  Pattern of health service utilization and predictors of readmission after a 
first admission for psychosis: a 2 -year follow -up study . Acta Psychiatr. Scand.  113, 340–
349 (2006).  
6. Monnelly, E. P. Instability before discharge and previous psychiatric admissions as predictors 
of early readmission. Psychiatr. Serv. Wash. DC  48, 1584 –1586 (1997).  
7. Csernansky, J. G. & Schuchart, E. K. Re lapse and rehospi[INVESTIGATOR_581212]: effects of second generation antipsychotics. CNS Drugs  16, 473–484 
(2002).  
8. Jaeger, J., Berns, S., Uzelac, S. & Davis -Conway, S. Neurocognitive deficits and disability in 
major depressive disorder. Psychiatry Res.  145, 39–48 (2006).  
9. Beck, A. T. & Clark, D. A. An information processing model of anxiety: automatic and 
strategic processes. Behav. Res. Ther.  35, 49–58 (1997).  
10. Mathews, A. & MacLeod, C. Cognitive vulnerability to emotional  disorders. Annu. Rev. 
Clin. Psychol.  1, 167–195 (2005).  
 25 11. Everaert, J., Koster, E. H. W. & Derakshan, N. The combined cognitive bias hypothesis in 
depression. Clin. Psychol. Rev.  32, 413–424 (2012).  
12. Hirsch, C. R. & Mathews, A. A cognitive model of p athological worry. Behav. Res. Ther.  
50, 636–646 (2012).  
13. Everaert, J., Tierens, M., Uzieblo, K. & Koster, E. H. W. The indirect effect of attention bias 
on memory via interpretation bias: Evidence for the combined cognitive bias hypothesis in 
subclinic al depression. Cogn. Emot.  27, 1450 –1459 (2013).  
14. Amir, N., Bomyea, J. & Beard, C. The effect of single -session interpretation modification on 
attention bias in socially anxious individuals. J. Anxiety Disord.  24, 178–182 (2010).  
15. Hirsch, C. R., Meet en, F., Krahé, C. & Reeder, C. Resolving Ambiguity in Emotional 
Disorders: The Nature and Role of Interpretation Biases. Annu. Rev. Clin. Psychol.  12, 
281–305 (2016).  
16. Enkel, T. et al.  Ambiguous -Cue Interpretation is Biased Under Stress - and Depression -Like 
States in Rats. Neuropsychopharmacology  35, 1008 –1015 (2010).  
17. Kloke, V. et al.  Hope for the Best or Prepare for the Worst? Towards a Spatial Cognitive 
Bias Test for Mice. PLoS ONE  9, e105431 (2014).  
18. Moser, J. S., Huppert, J. D., Foa, E. B. & Simons, R. F. Interpretation of ambiguous social 
scenarios in social phobia and depressi on: Evidence from event -related brain potentials. 
Biol. Psychol.  89, 387–397 (2012).  
19. Foland -Ross, L. C. & Gotlib, I. H. Cognitive and neural aspects of information processing in 
Major Depressive Disorder: An integrative perspective. Front. Psychol.  3, 489 (2012).  
20. Hindash, A. H. C. & Amir, N. Negative interpretation bias in individuals with depressive 
symptoms. Cogn. Ther. Res.  36, 502–511 (2012).  
21. Mogg, K., Bradbury, K. E. & Bradley, B. P. Interpretation of ambiguous information in 
clinical depre ssion. Behav. Res. Ther.  44, 1411 –1419 (2006).  
 26 22. Lawson, C., MacLeod, C. & Hammond, G. Interpretation revealed in the blink of an eye: 
Depressive bias in the resolution of ambiguity. J. Abnorm. Psychol.  111, 321–328 (2002).  
23. Beard, C. & Amir, N. Inter pretation in social anxiety: When meaning precedes ambiguity. 
Cogn. Ther. Res.  33, 406–415 (2009).  
24. Ouimet, A. J., Gawronski, B. & Dozois, D. J. A. Cognitive vulnerability to anxiety: A review 
and an integrative model. Clin. Psychol. Rev.  29, 459–470 (2 009).  
25. Holmes, E. A. et al.  Mood stability versus mood instability in bipolar disorder: A possible 
role for emotional mental imagery. Behav. Res. Ther.  49, 707–713 (2011).  
26. Dearing, K. F. & Gotlib, I. H. Interpretation of ambiguous information in gir ls at risk for 
depression. J. Abnorm. Child Psychol.  37, 79–91 (2009).  
27. Rude, S. S., Wenzlaff, R. M., Gibbs, B., Vane, J. & Whitney, T. Negative processing biases 
predict subsequent depressive symptoms. Cogn. Emot.  16, 423–440 (2002).  
28. Wilson, E. J.,  MacLeod, C., Mathews, A. & Rutherford, E. M. The causal role of interpretive 
bias in anxiety reactivity. J. Abnorm. Psychol.  115, 103–111 (2006).  
29. Kuckertz, J. M., Amir, N., Tobin, A. C. & Najmi, S. Interpretation of ambiguity in individuals 
with obses sive-compulsive symptoms. Cogn. Ther. Res.  37, 232–241 (2013).  
30. Salemink, E., Hertel, P. & Mackintosh, B. Interpretation training influences memory for prior 
interpretations. Emotion  10, 903–907 (2010).  
31. Tran, T. B., Hertel, P. T. & Joormann, J. Cogn itive bias modification: Induced interpretive 
biases affect memory. Emotion  11, 145–152 (2011).  
32. Hertel, P. T., Mathews, A., Peterson, S. & Kintner, K. Transfer of training emotionally 
biased interpretations. Appl. Cogn. Psychol.  17, 775–784 (2003).  
33. Hirsch, C. R., Hayes, S. & Mathews, A. Looking on the bright side: Accessing benign 
meanings reduces worry. J. Abnorm. Psychol.  118, 44–54 (2009).  
34. Hertel, P., Mor, N., Ferrari, C., Hunt, O. & Agrawal, N. Looking on the Dark Side: 
Rumination and Cognit ive-Bias Modification. Clin. Psychol. Sci.  2, 714–726 (2014).  
 27 35. Woud, M. L., Holmes, E. A., Postma, P., Dalgleish, T. & Mackintosh, B. Ameliorating 
intrusive memories of distressing experiences using computerized reappraisal training. 
Emotion  12, 778–784 (2012).  
36. Beard, C. Cognitive bias modification for anxiety: current evidence and future directions. 
Expert Rev. Neurother.  11, 299–311 (2011).  
37. Menne -Lothmann, C. et al.  How to Boost Positive Interpretations? A Meta -Analysis of the 
Effective ness of Cognitive Bias Modification for Interpretation. PLoS ONE  9, e100925 
(2014).  
38. Goldin, P. R. et al.  Cognitive reappraisal self -efficacy mediates the effects of individual 
cognitive -behavioral therapy for social anxiety disorder. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol.  80, 
1034 –1040 (2012).  
39. Kwon, S. -M. & Oei, T. P. S. Cognitive change processes in a group cognitive behavior 
therapy of depression. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry  34, 73–85 (2003).  
40. Amir, N. & Taylor, C. T. Interpretation training in individ uals with generalized social anxiety 
disorder: A randomized controlled trial. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol.  80, 497 (2012).  
41. Beard, C. & Amir, N. A multi -session interpretation modification program: Changes in 
interpretation and social anxiety symptoms. Behav. Res. Ther.  46, 1135 –1141 (2008).  
42. Steinman, S. A. & Teachman, B. A. Reaching new heights: Comparing interpretation bias 
modification to exposure therapy for extreme height fear. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol.  82, 404 
(2014).  
43. Niles, A. N. et al.  Cognitive Mediators of Treatment for Social Anxiety Disorder: Comparing 
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy and Cognitive -Behavioral Therapy. Behav. Ther.  
45, 664–677 (2014).  
44. Teachman, B. A., Marker, C. D. & Clerkin, E. M. Catastrophic misinterpretations as  a 
predictor of symptom change during treatment for panic disorder. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol.  
78, 964–973 (2010).  
 28 45. Henje Blom, E. et al.  The development of an RDoC -based treatment program for 
adolescent depression: ‘Training for Awareness, Resilience, and Action’ (TARA). Front. 
Hum. Neurosci.  8, 630 (2014).  
46. Isaac, C. & Januel, D. Neural correlates of cognitive improvements following cognitive 
remediation in schizophrenia: a systematic review of randomized trials. Socioaffective 
Neurosci. Psychol.  6, (2016).  
47. Disorders, F. on N. and N. S., Policy, B. on H. S., Medicine, I. of & Medicine, T. N. A. of S., 
Engineering, and. Enabling Discovery, Development, and Translation of Treatments for 
Cognitive Dysfunction in Depression: Workshop Summary . (National Academies Press, 
2015).  
48. Hallion, L. S. & Ruscio, A. M.  A meta -analysis of the effect of cognitive bias modification on 
anxiety and depression. Psychol. Bull.  137, 940–958 (2011).  
49. Beard, C., Weisberg, R. B. & Primack, J. Socially Anxious Primary Care Patients’ Attitudes 
Toward Cognitive Bias Modification ( CBM): A Qualitative Study. Behav. Cogn. Psychother.  
40, 618–633 (2012).  
50. De Hert, M. et al.  Physical illness in patients with severe mental disorders. I. Prevalence, 
impact of medications and disparities in health care. World Psychiatry  10, 52–77 (2011) . 
51. Keefe, R. S. E. et al.  Cognitive Effects of Pharmacotherapy for Major Depressive Disorder: 
A Systematic Review. J. Clin. Psychiatry  75, 864–876 (2014).  
52. Weightman, M. J., Air, T. M. & Baune, B. T. A Review of the Role of Social Cognition in 
Major Depressive Disorder. Front. Psychiatry  5, (2014).  
53. McHugh, R. K., Whitton, S. W., Peckham, A. D., Welge, J. A. & Otto, M. W. Patient 
Preference for Psychological vs. Pharmacological Treatment of Psychiatric Disorders: A 
Meta -Analytic Review. J. Clin. Psychiatry  74, 595 (2013).  
54. Kazdin, A. E. & Blase, S. L. Rebooting Psychotherapy Research and Practice to Reduce 
the Burden of Mental Illness. Perspect. Psychol. Sci.  6, 21–37 (2011).  
 29 55. Bowler, J. O. et al.  A comparison of cognitive bias modific ation for interpretation and 
computerized cognitive behavior therapy: Effects on anxiety, depression, attentional 
control, and interpretive bias. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol.  80, 1021 –1033 (2012).  
56. Beard, C.; Fuchs, C., Asnaani, A.; Schulson, M., Schofiel d, C.A.; Clerkin, E.M.; Weisberg, 
R.B. A pi[INVESTIGATOR_581213]. Cogn. Ther. Res.  
(in press).  
57. Gonsalves, M.; Fuchs, C., Beard, C., Weisberg, R.B. A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_581214]:_A 
Cognitive Bias Modification Tr eatment for Anxiety Disorders in Primary Care. in (2016).  
58. Brosan, L., Hoppi[INVESTIGATOR_32887], L., Shelfer, L., Sillence, A. & Mackintosh, B. Cognitive bias 
modification for attention and interpretation reduces trait and state anxiety in anxious 
patients referred to a n out -patient service: results from a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. 
Psychiatry  42, 258–264 (2011).  
59. Beard, C., Weisberg, R. B. & Amir, N. Combined cognitive bias modification treatment for 
social anxiety disorder: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251]. Depress. Anxiety  28, 981–988 (2011).  
60. Amir, N., Kuckertz, J. M., Najmi, S. & Conley, S. L. Preliminary Evidence for the 
Enhancement of Self -Conducted Exposures for OCD using Cognitive Bias Modification. 
Cogn. Ther. Res.  39, 424–440 (2015).  
61. Lichtenthal, W.G.; Corner, G. ; Slivjak, E.; Roberts, K.; Li, Y.; Lacey, S.; Tuman, M.; 
Breitbart, W.; DuHamel, K.; Beard, C. A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_581215]. Rev. 
62. Amir, N., Taylor, C. T. & Donohue, M. C . Predictors of response to an attention 
modification program in generalized social phobia. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol.  79, 533–541 
(2011).  
63. Kuckertz, J. M. et al.  Moderation and mediation of the effect of attention training in social 
anxiety disorder. Behav. Res. Ther.  53, 30–40 (2014).  
 30 64. Blackwell, S. E. et al.  Positive Imagery -Based Cognitive Bias Modification as a Web -Based 
Treatment Tool for Depressed Adults: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Clin. Psychol. Sci.  3, 
91–111 (2015).  
65. Torkan, H. et al.  Positive Imagery Cognitive Bias Modification in Treatment -Seeking 
Patients with Major Depression in Iran: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]. Cogn. Ther. Res.  38, 132–145 
(2014).  
66. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_581216], A., Jermann, F. & Ceschi, G. When less could be more: Investigating the effects of 
a brief internet -based imagery cognitive bias modification intervention in depression. 
Behav. Res. Ther.  84, 45–51 (2016).  
67. Hoppi[INVESTIGATOR_32887], L. et al.  Modifying social anxiety related to a real -life stressor using online 
Cognitive Bias Modification for interpreta tion. Behav. Res. Ther.  52, 45–52 (2014).  
68. Brettschneider, M., Neumann, P., Berger, T., Renneberg, B. & Boettcher, J. Internet -based 
interpretation bias modification for social anxiety:  A pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. 
Psychiatry  49, 21–29 (2015).  
69. Hitchcock, P. Best Learning Practices for Internet Treatments.  
70. Drymalski, W. M. & Washburn, J. J. Sudden Gains in the Treatment of Depression in a 
Partial Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_405533]. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol.  79, 364–368 (2011).  
71. The N -MHSS Report: Highlights of the National Mental Health Services Survey, 2010. 
Available at: http://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/NMHSS -SR191 -
2010Highlights2014/NMHSS -SR191 -2010Highlights2014.htm. (Accessed: 19th April 2016)  
72. Shiffman, S., Stone, A. A. & Huf ford, M. R. Ecological momentary assessment. Annu. Rev. 
Clin. Psychol.  4, 1–32 (2008).  
73. Salemink, E. & Wiers, R. W. Alcohol -related memory associations in positive and negative 
affect situations: Drinking motives, working memory capacity, and prospectiv e drinking. 
Psychol. Addict. Behav.  28, 105–113 (2014).  
 31 74. Rozenman, M., Amir, N. & Weersing, V. R. Performance -Based Interpretation Bias in 
Clinically Anxious Youths: Relationships With Attention, Anxiety, and Negative Cognition. 
Behav. Ther.  45, 594–605 (2014).  
75. Sheehan, D. V. et al.  The Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.): The 
development and validation of a structured diagnostic psychiatric interview for DSM -IV and 
ICD-10. J. Clin. Psychiatry  59, 22–33 (1998).  
76. Beard, C., Rifkin, L. S. & Bjorgvinsson, T. Lack  of a Positive Interpretation Bias Predicts 
Suicidality. J. Affect. Disord.  (revise and resubmit).  
77. Beard, C. et al.  Psychometric properties of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS) in a 
longitudinal study of African Americans with anxiety disorders . J. Anxiety Disord.  25, 722–
726 (2011).  
78. Beard, C., Rodriguez, B. F., Weisberg, R. B., Perry, A. & Keller, M. B. Psychometric 
Properties of the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale in a Longitudinal Study of Latinos With 
Anxiety Disorders. Hisp. J. Behav. Sc i. 34, 269–278 (2012).  
79. Bjornsson, A. S. et al.  Two-year course of generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety 
disorder, and panic disorder with agoraphobia in a sample of Latino adults. J. Consult. 
Clin. Psychol.  82, 1186 –1192 (2014).  
80. Sibrava, N. J. et al.  Two-year course of generalized anxiety disorder, social anxiety 
disorder, and panic disorder in a longitudinal sample of African American adults. J. 
Consult. Clin. Psychol.  81, 1052 –1062 (2013).  
81. Carper, M. M., McHugh, R. K. & Barlow, D. H. Th e Dissemination of Computer -Based 
Psychological Treatment: A Preliminary Analysis of Patient and Clinician Perceptions. 
Adm. Policy Ment. Health Ment. Health Serv. Res.  40, 87–95 (2013).  
82. McHugh, R. K. & Barlow, D. H. The dissemination and implementatio n of evidence -based 
psychological treatments: A review of current efforts. Am. Psychol.  65, 73–84 (2010).  
 32 83. Santucci, L. C. et al.  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_581217] a University Health Setting. Adm. Policy Ment. Health Ment. Health Serv. Res.  41, 514–
521 (2014).  
84. Behar, E., McHugh, R. K., Peckham, A. & Otto, M. W. d -Cycloserine for the augmentation 
of an attentional training intervention for trait anxiety. J. Anxiety Disord.  24, 440–445 
(2010).  
85. Otto, M. W. et al.  A Randomized, Controlled Trial of the Efficacy of an Interoceptive 
Exposure -Based CBT for Treatment -Refractory Outpatients with Opi[INVESTIGATOR_238354]. J. 
Psychoactive Drugs  46, 402–411 (2014).  
86. McHugh, R. K. et al.  Changes in Distress Intolerance and Treatm ent Outcome in a Partial 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_204094]. Behav. Ther.  45, 232–240 (2014).  
87. McHugh, R. K. et al.  Changes in Sleep Disruption in the Treatment of Co -Occurring 
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder and Substance Use Disorders: Sleep Disruption in 
Treatment for P TSD and SUDS. J. Trauma. Stress  27, 82–89 (2014).  
88. Glasgow, R. E. & Emmons, K. M. How Can We Increase Translation of Research into 
Practice? Types of Evidence Needed. Annu. Rev. Public Health  28, 413–433 (2007).  
89. Wei, L. J. An Application of an Urn M odel to the Design of Sequential Controlled Clinical 
Trials. J. Am. Stat. Assoc.  73, 559–563 (1978).  
90. Randomizing research participants: Promoting balance and concealment in small samples 
- Matthews - 2010 - Research in Nursing & Health - Wiley Online L ibrary. Available at: 
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/nur.[ZIP_CODE]/abstract. (Accessed: 6th May 2016)  
91. Salemink, E. & van den Hout, M. Validation of the “recognition task” used in the training of 
interpretation biases. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psych iatry 41, 140–144 (2010).  
92. Farchione, T. J. et al.  Unified Protocol for Transdiagnostic Treatment of Emotional 
Disorders: A Randomized Controlled Trial. Behav. Ther.  43, 666–678 (2012).  
 33 93. Guy, W. Clinical global impression scale. ECDEU Assess. Man. Psychopharmacol. -Revis. 
Vol. DHEW Publ No ADM 76  338, 218–222 (1976).  
94. Mundt, J. C. The Work and Social Adjustment Scale: a simple measure of impairment in 
functioning. Br. J. Psychiatry  180, 461–464 (2002).  
95. Kroenke, K. & Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], R. L. The PHQ -9: A new depression diagnostic and severity 
measure. Psychiatr. Ann.  32, 509–515 (2002).  
96. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], R. L., Kroenke, K., Williams, J. B. W. & Löwe, B. A brief measure for assessing 
generalized anxie ty disorder: the GAD -7. Arch. Intern. Med.  166, 1092 –1097 (2006).  
97. Endicott, J., Nee, J., Harrison, W. & Blumenthal, R. Quality of Life Enjoyment and 
Satisfaction Questionnaire: a new measure. Psychopharmacol. Bull.  29, 321–326 (1993).  
98. Posner, K. et al. The Columbia –Suicide Severity Rating Scale: Initial Validity and Internal 
Consistency Findings From Three Multisite Studies With Adolescents and Adults. Am. J. 
Psychiatry  168, 1266 –1277 (2011).  
99. Beck, A. Beck Hopelessness Scale. (1988).  
100. Watson , D. & Naragon -Gainey, K. On the specificity of positive emotional dysfunction in 
psychopathology: Evidence from the mood and anxiety disorders and 
schizophrenia/schizotypy. Clin. Psychol. Rev.  30, 839–848 (2010).  
101. Fresco, D. M. et al.  The Liebowitz So cial Anxiety Scale: a comparison of the psychometric 
properties of self -report and clinician -administered formats. Psychol. Med.  31, (2001).  
102. Houck, P. R., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_16614], D. A., Shear, M. K. & Rucci, P. Reliability of the self -report version 
of the panic dis order severity scale. Depress. Anxiety  15, 183–185 (2002).  
103. Keller, M. B. The Longitudinal Interval Follow -up Evaluation: A Comprehensive Method for 
Assessing Outcome in Prospective Longitudinal Studies. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry  44, 540 
(1987).  
104. Devilly, G. J. & Borkovec, T. D. Psychometric properties of the credibility/expectancy 
questionnaire. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry  31, 73–86 (2000).  
 34 105. Larsen, D. L., Attkisson, C. C., Hargreaves, W. A. & Nguyen, T. D. Assessment of 
client/patient sat isfaction: Development of a general scale. Eval. Program Plann.  2, 197–
207 (1979).  
106. Sobo, E. J. Rapid Assessment with Qualitative Telephone Interviews: Lessons from an 
Evaluation of [LOCATION_004]’s Healthy Families Program &amp; Medi -Cal for Children. Am. J. 
Eval.  24, 399–408 (2003).  
107. Sobo, E. J. Parents’ perceptions of pediatric day surgery risks: unforeseeable 
complications, or avoidable mistakes? Soc. Sci. Med.  60, 2341 –2350 (2005).  
108. Cowden Hindash, A. H. & Rottenberg, J. Turning quickly on myse lf: Automatic 
interpretation biases in dysphoria are self -referent. Cogn. Emot.  1–8 (2015).  
109. Bind, M. -A. C., Vanderweele, T. J., Coull, B. A. & Schwartz, J. D. Causal mediation 
analysis for longitudinal data with exogenous exposure. Biostatistics  kxv02 9 (2015). 
doi:10.1093/biostatistics/kxv029  
110. VanderWeele, T. J. & Vansteelandt, S. Mediation Analysis with Multiple Mediators. 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. Methods  2, 95–115 (2014).  
111. Valeri, L. & VanderWeele, T. J. Mediation analysis allowing for exposure –mediator 
interactions and causal interpretation: Theoretical assumptions and implementation with 
SAS and SPSS macros. Psychol. Methods  18, 137–150 (2013).  
112. Armey, M. F., Crowther, J. H. & Miller, I. W. Changes in Ecological Momentary 
Assessment Reported Affect Associated With Epi[INVESTIGATOR_581218] -Injury. Behav. 
Ther.  42, 579–588 (2011).  
113.  Woodward, T. S., Moritz, S., Cuttler, C., & Whitman, J. C. The contribution of a cognitive 
bias against disconfirmatory evidence (BADE) to delusions in schizophrenia. Journal of Clinical 
and Experimental Neuropsychology , 28(4), 605 –617 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13803390590949511 (2006).  
114. Everaert, J., Bronste in, M. V., Cannon, T. D., & Joormann, J. (2018). Looking through 
 35 tinted glasses: Depression and social anxiety are related to both interpretation biases and 
inflexible negative interpretations.  Clinical Psychological Science , 6(4), 517 -528. 
 
116. Veale, J.  F. (2014). Edinburgh handedness inventory –short form: a revised version based 
on confirmatory factor analysis. Laterality: Asymmetries of Body, Brain and Cognition, 19(2), 
164-177. 
 
117. Brooke, J. (1996). SUS -A quick and dirty usability scale.  Usability  evaluation in 
industry , 189(194), 4 -7. 
118. Kelders, S. M., Kip, H., & Greeff, J. (2020). Psychometric Evaluation of the TWente 
Engagement with Ehealth Technologies Scale (TWEETS): Evaluation Study.  Journal of medical 
Internet research , 22(10), e17757. https://doi.org/10.2196/[ZIP_CODE]  
 
119. Birmaher, B., Brent, D. A., Chiappetta, L., Bridge, J., Monga, S., & Baugher, M. (1999). 
Psychometric properties of the Screen for Child Anxiety Related Emotional Disorders 
(SCARED): a replication study. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent 
Psychiatry, 38(10), 1230 –6.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 