(CCI) Comm ittee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 1 of 9 
 
Study Description –  Part B  
CCI Form:  9 -2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  09/25/[ADDRESS_1149045]  
 
September 25, 2017  
 
(CCI) Comm ittee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 2 of 9 
 
Study Description –  Part B  
CCI Form:  9 -2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  09/25/2017  
 
PART B  
STUDY DESCRIPTION 
 
TITLE OF PROTOCOL  Prevention of Early Postoperative Decline  
Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_6085] O’Gara MD  
 
 
B1. PURPOSE OF PROTOCOL  
Hypothesis:  
Patie nts undergoing cardiac surgery have a high risk of postoperative cognitiv e decline.  Patients who 
participate in a neurocognitive trai ning program  pre- and post -operatively will have a lower incidence of 
postoperative cognitive decline after cardiac surger y than do controls  receiving standard of care.    
 
Specific Aim:  
A feasibility study aiming to outline subject interest, adherence to protocol and generation of  preliminary 
data regarding the ability of a neurocognitive training program to reduce the incid ence of postoperative 
cognitive decline after cardiac surgery.   
 
 
B2. SIGNIFICANCE AND BACKGROUND FOR THE STUDY  
 
Exposure to surgical stress and general anesthesia is associa ted with the occurrence of 
postoperative cognitive decline (POCD), with an incidence found to be betw een 26- 40% after the first 
postoperative week and 15% incidence after three months compared to age matched controls (Moller 
1998, Ballard 2012).  POCD has been found to be especially prevalent after cardiac surgery, with 
incidences reported between 30- 80% in the first post operative week and persistent decline found in 
24% of patients at six months (Arrowsmith 2000, Newman 2001).  A number of surgical, 
inflammatory, and anesthetic factors are thought to be associated with the increased i ncidence of  
POCD in this group of patients , but so far preventative strategies targeting these areas have not been 
shown to be effective. 
With the increasing age and number of comorbid conditions of the cardiac surgical patient in today's 
health care clima te, a new focus for the perioperative team has been optimizing the preoperative 
condition of the surgical  patient through prehabilitation.  While promising results have been shown 
through preoperative physical prehabilitation programs, to date there has been no recommendation 
for cognitive prehabilitation for cardiac surgical patients to minimize the severity or reduce the 
incidence of POCD (Debes 2014).   Similarly, while the need for physical rehabilitation to recover from 
the physical stress of cardiac surgery is a well- established and integral aspect of each patient’s 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_828043], a regimen focused on neurocognitive rehabilitation is not 
prescribed.     
Specific areas of cognition thought to be most affected in the post operative period include attention, 
working memory, orientation, and speed of processing (Newman 2001, Hudetz 2009, Saczynski 
2012).  Lumosity, a neuroscience- based training program, has been shown in various studies to 
improve subjects' cognitive performance in many  of the same cognitive areas (Mayas 2014, 
Ballesteros 2014, Hardy 2015).  We hypothesize that pre - and post -operative training with tailored 
neuroscience programs provided by [CONTACT_828048] a decreased incidence of POCD.    
 
(CCI) Comm ittee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 3 of 9 
 
Study Description –  Part B  
CCI Form:  9 -2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  09/25/2017  
 
B3. DESCRIPTION OF RE SEARCH P ROTOCOL  
A. Study Design –  Overview, Methods, Procedures 
 
Research Question:  
Does prehabilitation with Lumosity neuroscience training programs reduce the incidence of 
postoperative cognitive decline after cardiac surgery? 
Study Design Overview:   
Prosp ective, randomized, assessor -blinded feasibility trial.   Enrolled patients will be randomized into 
one of two research arms: Neurocognitive training with Lumosity or no training (standard of care 
control  group) .  Subjects will then be assessed for the development of postoperative cognitive decline 
and the incidence of delirium in the postoperative period up until postoperative day [ADDRESS_1149046] -operatively .     
Methods:  
Preoperative Study Procedures:  If deemed a candidate for enrollment, patients will be approached by 
[CONTACT_828049].  Once informed consent 
has been obtained, b aseline assessment of cognitive function for both groups will take place at that 
time and patients with severe baseline cognitive impairment will be excluded.  S ubjects will then be 
randomized int o either the intervention or control group.   Cognitive assessments for the primary 
outcome in this study will be conducted with the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), which has 
been shown in randomized study to be both highly sensitive and specific for the identification of mild 
cognitive impairment as compared to the mini mental status exam (Nasreddine 2005).  
Creation of Lumosity Accounts:  Once enrolled, subjects in the treatment group will be assigned a 
specific , anonymized user name [CONTACT_828055].  Subscriptions to the service will be offered free of charge to the subject without the need for 
identifying information to be shared with the company by [CONTACT_57216] a pre- existing  research agreement.         
Intervention:  Subjects randomized to the treatment group will undergo 30-[ADDRESS_1149047] t wo 15 minute sessions of Lumosity training per day, 
but will be limited to a maximum of three sessions per day to minimize long term fatigue in completing 
the protocol.  Subjects  randomized to the control group will not participate in Lumosity training.  
TREATMENT  GROUP : 
Lumosity Neurocognitive training program:  Subjects will undergo at least two 15- minute training 
sessions a day utilizing a customized training package provided by [CONTACT_828050] (Newman, Hudetz, Sacynski).  Subjects will be expected to train for at least 10 days 
preoperatively and then for four weeks postoperatively.   Subscription and access to the training 
programs will be provide d free of charge from the company  on iPads, provided by [CONTACT_828051].   
(CCI) Comm ittee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 4 of 9 
 
Study Description –  Part B  
CCI Form:  9 -2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  09/25/2017  
 
 
Protocol Adherence:  Login details, time spent training, and scoring performance statistics will be 
provided for each user by [CONTACT_828052] c ompany via email to the study  team .  Subject data will 
be de- identified for this purpose and only subject username [CONTACT_828056].   
CONTROL GROUP : 
Control Condition:  Subjects  in the control group will be r equired to refrain from creating a 
Lumosity account  and using their program during the course of the study.  They will otherwise 
prepare for cardiac surgery and undergo perioperative care according to the current standard of 
care.   To date there are no for mal recommendations for neurocognitive preparation or 
rehabilitation in the  perioperative cardiac surgical period.       
Assessments:  A baseline MoCA will take place on the day of informed consent as described above,  
after enrollment but before randomizati on.  On the day of surgery  (or when the subject is admitted for 
surgery) , a repeat MoCA will take place.  Cardiac surgery and anesthesia care will  proceed in the 
usual fashion according to current hospi[INVESTIGATOR_137288] , which includes general anesthesia and 
cardiopulmonary by[CONTACT_6476] .  Patients will be assessed for the presence o f POCD and delirium in the 
postoperative period using two commonly used methodologies : MoCA and the Confusion 
Assessment Method (CAM) .  The MoCA  will then again be completed on post operati ve day ( POD ) 7 
or discharge (whichever comes first) , in order to identify trends in POCD .  The MoCA will not be used 
daily during the postoperative period so as to minimize learning effect on test performance.    
Delirium assessment will take place every post operative day  until day 7  or discharge ( whichever 
comes first ) with the use of t he CAM  or CAM -ICU assessment tool, which has been used extensively 
in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_828044] (Wei 2008).   To improve the sensitivity of the delirium 
assessments, a delirium symptom interview (DSI) will also be performed in conjunction with the 
CAM/CAM -ICU assessments.     
Once the patient is discharged, a telephonic version of the MoCA will take place at 1  month (+/ - 7 
days) , 3 months (+/ - 14 days) , and 6 months (+/- 14 days) postoperatively.   Should a subject return a 
phone call from the research team outside of the allowable window, the assessments will still occur 
and the data obtained will be used.  A patient satisfaction survey will be administered at the patient’s 
1-month follow -up which will be entered directly into REDCap.  If the patient is unable to complete the 
survey at the visit, a link directly to the anonymous REDCap survey will be emailed to them.  
Data to be Collected:   Additionally, to track ot her important factors related to patient outcome and 
protocol adherence we may  extract clinical data from the medical record such as : 
• Anthropometric data (e.g. age, height, weight, race/ethnicity)  
• Comorbidities  
• Admission type 
• Medications  
• Respi[INVESTIGATOR_828045]  
• Hemodynamic data (e.g. heart rate, blood pressure)  
• Laboratory data  
• Complications data  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] -related time data (e.g. admitting diagnosis, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_144857])  
• Vital status  
(CCI) Comm ittee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 5 of 9 
 
Study Description –  Part B  
CCI Form:  9 -2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  09/25/2017  
 
Primary Outcome:  
Feasibility of utilizing an ele ctronic neurocognitive training program preoperatively, during the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_828046], and postoperatively in a geriatric cardiac surgical population.  Feasibility will be assessed by 
[CONTACT_828053], protocol adherence rates, and patient satisfaction scores.  
Secondary Outcomes:  
Incidence of postoperative delirium  
- Defined according to the Confusion Assessment Method (CAM):  
o Acute onset and fluctuating course  
o Inattention  
AND EITHER  
o Disorganized thinking 
OR 
o Altered Level of consciousness  
- Assessed dai ly until day of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345]  
- Assessments will take place using the CAM or CAM -ICU depending on patient condition 
 
Incidence of Postoperative Cognitive Dysfunction (POCD)  
- Defined by a decrease of 3 points or greater on the Montreal Cognitive Assessmen t from 
baseline 
- Assessed on day of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345], as well as 1 month, 3 months, and 6 months  
postoperatively  
- In person assessments of POCD will be performed using the MoCA, postoperative 
assessments at 1,3 and 6 months will be conducted with the telephonic MOCA version  
 
Study -Related Encounters:  
With a baseline assessment, an assessment on day of surgery, daily assessments on POD 1- 6, POD 7 
or discharge, and assessments at 1, 3 , and 6 months  postoperatively, we anticipate a maximum of 12 
study related  encounters per patient.   
 
Adverse Event Reporting:  
This patient population is undergoing high risk surgery and it is expected that they may have a number of 
unrelated adverse health events during their hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2779].  Therefore, we will limit the scope  of AE 
monitoring and reporting to the following:  
• All Serious Adverse Events believed to be related to the study procedures  
• All non -serious Adverse Events believed to be related to the study  procedures  
 
Adverse event s will be assessed through the [ADDRESS_1149048].  
 
B. Statistical Considerations 
a. Sample Size Justification:    
A convenience sample of [ADDRESS_1149049] seen in the feasibility trial.   
 
(CCI) Comm ittee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 6 of 9 
 
Study Description –  Part B  
CCI Form:  9 -2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  09/25/2017  
 
b. Data Analysis:   
Data Analysis : Patients will be prospectively randomized using 1:1 block randomization of equal sizes.  
Analyses will be conducted using SAS version 9.3 (SAS Institute, Cary, North Carolina) or later.  
Descriptive statistics of the data will be performed.  Continuous data will be represented using mean (± 
standard deviation) or  median (interquartile range) for variables not normally distributed and compared 
using parametric or non- parametric t -tests as appropriate.  Categorical data will be presented using 
proportions and compared using a chi -square or Fishers Exact test.  
 
Analysis of the Primary Outcome:  
The primary outcome of the study is feasibility.   Feasibility will be defined in terms of achieving 
satisfactory recruitment, adherence to protocol, and patient satisfaction.   Satisfactory recruitment will 
be defined as enrollm ent of greater than 50% of eligible patients during the study period.   Adherence 
to the protocol will be assessed using automated data reports of user activity generated in 
collaboration with Lumosity.   Per protocol patients are expected to complete the in tervention twice 
daily for 10 days preoperatively and 4 weeks  postoperatively unless they are incapacitated due to 
critical illness or intubated.   We will define satisfactory adherence as completion of the protocol for 
greater than 70% of days in which the patient maintains capacity and completes both sessions.   
Patient satisfaction will be assessed using qualitative data techniques including patient surveys and 
testimonials  
                                                                                                                                              
Analysis of Secondary Outcomes:  
Differences in the incidence of postoperative delirium and POCD will be presented as proportions and 
assessed with the use of a chi -square test.  Odds ratios and 95%  confidence intervals will be reported 
and interpreted.   Although randomization should eliminate baseline confounders, univariate and 
multivariable logistic regression modeling may be employed to assess the relationship between 
preoperative luminosity use and both delirium and POCD, adjusting for any differences that may 
persist between groups.  
  
All data storage and analysis will take place on the BIDMC protected research server.  Once collected, 
patient data will be placed into a REDCap database.  Study s taff at BIDMC will analyze all data from 
this project.       
 
 
C. Subject Selection  
 
Inclusion criteria:  
1. Adult age patients (60-90 years) undergoing cardiac surgery  
2. Adequate time to implement prehabilitation training intervention: at least [ADDRESS_1149050] a high school level of education or equivalent   
 
Exclusion criteria:  
1. Pre-existing history of psychiatric illness  as documented in the medical record or divulged in 
history taking in pre- enrollment patient intervi ew, such as anxiety,  depression or bipolar 
disorder  
2. History of cerebrovascular accident or seizure, or a history of dementia, P arkinson’ s disease, 
Alzheimer’s disease,  other forms of cognitive decline  
3. Non-English speak ers. (Justification: Lumosity tools are provided only in English; cognitive 
assessment instruments are not validated in a sufficient range of languages, and the research 
team lacks polylingual capabilities or the financial resources to hire interpreters for the 
(CCI) Comm ittee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 7 of 9 
 
Study Description –  Part B  
CCI Form:  9 -2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  09/25/2017  
 
duration of all proposed assess ments)  
4. Currently enrolled in another study assessing cognitive ability  
5. Significant visual impairment  
 
Drop Out Criteria:  
1. After recruitment, enrollment and randomization, patients will be withdrawn  from the study if 
they have a baseline MoCA score of less t han 10 as this  indicates severe cognitive 
dysfunction.  
 
**Note:  If a patient meets inclusion criteria of being enrolled at least 10 days prior to surgery (adequate 
time to implement prehabilitation), and surgery is rescheduled to an earlier date by [CONTACT_941] c linical team, 
allowing less than [ADDRESS_1149051] -operative period.                
 
B5. POSSIBLE RISKS AND ANALYSIS OF RISK/BENEFIT RATIO  
As there are no physical interventions planned in this study, we do not anticipate any risk of physical 
harm to any of the research subjects.  T he training program has not been used in this arena prior to this 
study, therefore,  there is no published information regarding psychological risk in the perioperative period 
and any statement of risks would be specula tive.  Given this, we speculate that there could be 
psychological or emotional risk to patients in this study if they were to become aware of their cognitive 
decline more so than they would be if they were not participating in the study.  Patients will not  be given 
the scores of their MoCA or CAM assessments, but if they were to become aware of a decline in their 
performance this could be stressful or disconcerting to the patient.  Additional counseling regarding any 
psychological or emotional distress stem ming from this will be  provided by [CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_828047].  A second potential risk stems from possible dissemination of 
protected patient information . No identifiable health information will be exchanged between the Lumosity 
company and the investigators.  All PHI  will be saved on password protected BIDMC research server s. 
(CCI) Comm ittee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 8 of 9 
 
Study Description –  Part B  
CCI Form:  9 -2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  09/25/2017  
 
 
B6. RECRUITMENT AND CONSENT PROCEDURES  
 
Recruitment  
Eligible patients will be identified by [CONTACT_6100], cardiac surgical cli nic visit schedules, 
and pre- admission testing (PAT) clinic visit scheduling lists.  If the patient’s surgery is to be scheduled 
at least [ADDRESS_1149052] Protection  
Although patients of co- investigators may be approached for inclusion in this study, it will be clearly 
stated that the subjects ’ decision to participate or refrain from participation in the research study will 
not affect the performance or outcome of their upcoming surgery.  Patients who cannot consent for 
themselves for reasons of a cognitive disability suc h as dementia will be excluded from this study.  
 
 
B7. STUDY LOCATION  
  
Privacy  
All study interactions and assessments will take place at BIDMC facilities.  For patients being 
approached for informed consent, if they are uncomfortable answering questions regarding their 
medical history with someone other than a medical provider than an approved MD participating in the 
study will be contact[CONTACT_828054]- enrollment interview.  Interactions and 
assessments will take place in private cl inical settings with curtains/doors closed so as to provide 
privacy and comfort.  Family members will be asked to be present or leave for assessments at the 
patient’s request, so long as they do not interfere with study assessments via provision of answers  or 
coaching.   For the follow up telephonic MoCA assessment the patient will be asked if they are 
comfortable providing answers to the questionnaire at that time.  If not, an appropriate time within the 
same day will be agreed upon between the patient and the study  team  member conducting the follow 
up assessment.       
 
Physical Setting  
Pre-enrollment screening and informed consent will take place in  the BIDMC cardiac surgical or PAT 
clinics.  Assessments will take place in the cardiac surgery or PAT clinic s, preoperative holding area 
and/or  patient rooms.  Post-operative assessments at 1, 3, and [ADDRESS_1149053] via 
telephone.   Return of study -related equipment (iPad tablets) will be coordinated with return visits for 
clinical care.      
 
 
(CCI) Comm ittee on Clinical Investigations  
Page 9 of 9 
 
Study Description –  Part B  
CCI Form:  9 -2015 
 PI [INVESTIGATOR_2762]:  09/25/[ADDRESS_1149054] protected computers  and entered into a REDCap  database; paper files will be 
stored in locked file cabinets/ offices  at BIDMC .  At enrollment , all patients will be given a unique , 
anonymized study user name [CONTACT_828057].  A log of this information will be kept only on BIDMC servers. Limited 
information will be retained on patients who are prescreened and do not qualify, or who are 
approached and declined, for the purposes of generating a CONSORT diagram at the conclusion of 
the trial.  Only final analysis produced from the REDCap  database will be shared with the Lumosity 
company.    
 
B9 Multi -Site Studies  
 
Is the BIDMC the coordinating site?        Yes     No  
 
Is the BIDMC PI [INVESTIGATOR_2783] -site study?      Yes     No  
 
 
B10 Dissemination of Research Results  
Patients will be thanked for their time throughout the study. There is no plan to share the data at the 
conclusion of the trial. Because study results are likely to be published a few years after a given 
subject’s participation, it is not feasible to send subjects follow -up with the published results. The 
study investigators are concerned that mailing the published manuscript and an additional thank -you 
note years after participation risks violating subject  privacy, as mailing addresses are increasingly 
likely to change with passing time. It is out of the scope of this study to continue tracking mailing 
addresses after completion of enrollment since this is not a longitudinal study.  
 