 
  Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan 
 
Title:  Sulforaphane Treatment of Child ren with Autism Spectrum Disord er (ASD). 
NCT:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date:  11/28/2016, most recently approved by [CONTACT_1744] 07/03/2019  
 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 1 of 50   1) Title 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD). 
2) IRB Review History* 
NA 
3) Objectives* 
 
We propose to conduct a phase I/ II, randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled, one-
arm crossover clinical trial to test the safety and efficacy of orally administered sulforaphane in young boys and girls with autism.   Our long term research goal  is to discover and develop pharmaceuticals of low toxicity 
that treat core cellular mech anisms underlying behavioral featu res of ASD. Our objective 
in this application is to define  the clinical effects of sulfor aphane in children with ASD, 
along with the biomarkers and cellular mechanisms that may explain these effects.   Our specific aims are: 
1. To determine if there are measur able effects on social respo nsiveness and 
problem behaviors during treatment with orally administered Sulforaphane-rich Broccoli Seed Powder (referred t o as sulforaphane hereafter) in 3-[ADDRESS_227599] 
similar and measurably greater c linical effects in children with ASD;  
 2. To determine if treatment with sulforaphane is safe and well  tolerated . Our 
working hypothesis, based on our previous work and othe r studies, is that there wil l be 
few or no signs of toxicity;    3. To elucidate cellular biomark ers that support the hypothesiz ed mechanism of 
action of sulforaphane in ASD. Our working hypothesis is that sulforaphane will 
increase levels of Nuclear factor -erythroid factor 2 (Nrf2), im prove antioxidant capacity, 
upregulate expression of heat shock proteins, and modify mTOR s ignaling pathways and 
cytokine expression.  
 Our overarching hypothesis  is that ASD results from underexpressed or abnormal genes 
that converge on common metabolic  pathways which affect synapti c development and 
function. Our long term goal is to discover agents, such as sulforaphane, that are safe and 
effective in treating ASD, based on their known effects on thes e pathways, and to define  
these effects insofar as it is reasonably possible, in clinical  trials. Sulforaphane 
exemplifies this goal, in that it is a nontoxic natural substan ce that has the potential to 
improve both underlying cellular abnormalities, as reflected in  redox imbalance
1, Nrf22, 
heat shock proteins3 and mTOR expression,[ADDRESS_227600] greater p otential for clinical 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 2 of 50   improvement due to the compoundin g effects of treatment during dynamic brain 
development in childhood.  
  
4) Background* 
 
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_191400], direct treatment o f underlying physiologic 
mechanisms is limited. Several findings in ASD suggest that different types of cellular dysfunction, including neuroinflammation
5, oxidative stress1, mitochondrial 
abnormalities6, and abnormal synaptic  plasticity/connectivity7 may involve a number of 
related, interacting metabolic pathways.    Fever effect: The widespread anecdotal reports  that febrile illness dramatically but 
temporarily ameliorates the disordered behavior of a substantia l fraction of autistic 
patients have been corroborated and may provide important clini cal clues to cellular 
mechanisms in ASD
8. The degree of improvement in the se patients (mostly in reduce d 
stereotypic behavior and speech) was unrelated to the severity of fever or of ASD. The 
mechanisms for this “fever e ffect” in ASD are unknown, but may include direct thermal 
effects, as well as indirect eff ects, such as increased cytokin es, changes in the 
hypothalamic-pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117]-adrenal ax is, locus coeruleus and centra l noradrenergic function9, 
and increased expression of heat  shock proteins (HSP) and cellu lar stress responses3,10. 
Fever stimulates the HSP and cellu lar stress responses that may ultimately lead to 
changes in synaptic function and increased long-range connectiv ity,11 and thereby [CONTACT_191451]. The  expression of gene transcriptio n by [CONTACT_191452]2L2 (Nrf2), 
which is reduced in ASD2, may also be increased during f ever, thereby [CONTACT_191453]. Sulforphane, by [CONTACT_191454]2, enhances antiox idant expression in 
astrocytes and protects against n eurotoxicity in experimental h erpes encephalitis12. 
 
Sulforaphane , an isothiocyanate (1-isothiocy anato-4R-(methylsulfinyl)butane ), is 
obtained from lyophilized extract s of 3-day-old broccoli sprout s or as its glucosinolate 
precursor glucoraphanin, from broccoli seeds. Both broccoli sprouts and seeds contain the glucosinolate precursor gluc oraphanin; neither contains any  sulforaphane, which is 
produced from glucoraphanin by [CONTACT_191455]. Sulforaphane 
induces HSP and Nrf2 with positiv e effects on redox regulation,  DNA damage sensing 
and repair, molecular chaperones , fatty acid and lipid metabolism and energy 
metabolism
13,14. Sulforaphane has been shown to suppress lipopolysaccharide in duced 
inflammation in rat microglia15 and may regulate neuroi nflammation in degenerative 
disorders of the CNS through its induction of Nrf216. Sulforaphane and related 
compounds are hormetic drugs that induce a general “cell-protec tive” response, as 
demonstrated in vitro in sickle cell disease as well as X-linke d adrenoleukodystrophy17,18, 
fragile X syndrome and spi[INVESTIGATOR_11902]19. Sulforaphane crosses the blood brain 
barrier and is bioavailable orally20,21. Recent evidence shows that dysregulation in the 
mTOR/AKT signaling and cell surv ival pathway is present in anim al models of ASD and 
tuberous sclerosis with ASD4. The lack of suppression of mTOR leads to excessive 
synapse formation due to fa ilure of autophagy and pruning of synapses during brain 
development, which may be improved by [CONTACT_191456]22. Sulforaphane 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_227601] and apoptosis in primary lymphoblasts from 
children with acute lymphoblasti c anemia (ALL), and does so, in part, through its 
inhibition of the AKT and mTOR survival pathways23. Sulforaphane, therefore, has at 
least several possible modes of action that may benefit ASD through common cellular 
mechanisms that underlie its  heterogeneous phenotypes.  
 
Preliminary data: We completed a randomized, double blind, placebo-controlled pi [INVESTIGATOR_191401]/MassGeneral Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_191402] 01/2011 to 
12/2013 (clinical trials identifier [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] )[ADDRESS_227602] the efficacy of sulforaphane in 
44 male adolescents and adults ( 13-30 years) with ASD. Fifteen participants were 
randomized to placebo and 29 to sulforaphane. Forty participants (14 on placebo and 26 on sulforaphane) completed the  trial; of those 32 (80%) had a h istory of positive 
behavioral responses to fever. A ll participants were treated for 18 weeks with study visits 
at baseline, 4, 10 and 18 weeks, followed by a final visit at 22 weeks, 4 weeks after treatment ended. Parent/caregivers completed the Aberrant Behav ior Checklist (ABC)
25 
and Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS)26 and study physicians completed the Ohio 
Autism Clinical Impressions Severity and Improvement Scales (OA CIS-S and OACIS-
I)27,28 to document severity of autisti c behavior at each visit. OACIS-S and -I evaluate 
severity and improvement of ASD s ymptoms in the following subdo mains: general level 
of autism, social interaction, a berrant/abnormal  behavior, stereotypi[INVESTIGATOR_5485], verbal 
communication, non-verbal communi cation, hyperactivity and inattention, anxiety/fears, 
sensory sensitivities and restricted interests. Participants were monitored with regular 
physical examinations and clin ical laboratory studies. 
 
Results from clinical trial in young adult males with ASD: Sulforaphane was well 
tolerated and there were no significant toxic effects. SRS scor es decreased by [CONTACT_191457] -15 units in the sulforaphane group compared to -3 units in participants on placebo  
(p=0.02); considering the 4 dr op-outs as non-responders, 31% (9 /29) sulforaphane 
participants vs 0% placebo part icipants had a 25% decrease in total SRS score from 
baseline (p=0.018).  The average change in total A BC score was -18 units in the 
sulforaphane group as compared to -1 units in the placebo group  (p=0.0001), and after 
considering the 4 drop-outs as non-responders, 52% (15/29) sulf oraphane participants vs. 
13% (2/15) placebo partic ipants had a 25% decrease in their total ABC score from the 
baseline (p=0.02). On the OACIS-I , participants on sulforaphane  were much improved or 
very much improved on the following subdomains:  social interac tion, 41% (12/29) 
sulforaphane participants vs. 0% on placebo (p=0.003); aberrant/abnormal behavior, 48% (14/29) on sulforaphane vs. 6.7%  (1/15) on placebo (p=0.007); repetitive/stereotypi[INVESTIGATOR_191403], 21% (6/29) on sulforaphane vs. 0% placebo (p=0.08); and verbal communication, 38% (11/29) on sulfo raphane vs. 0% placebo (p=0. 008). Seventeen of 
the [ADDRESS_227603] one subdomain of  the OACIS-I. Ninety-four percent (16) of those 17 
on sulforaphane had a history of pos itive behavioral effects du ring febrile illness. In 
comparison, of the remaining 9 partic ipants who were taking sul foraphane but were not 
much/very much improved on OACIS -I, only 55% (5/9) had a histor y of positive effects 
of febrile illness (p=0.03).  
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 4 of 50    
5) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria* 
 
 Inclusion criteria 
o Autism (ASD) diagnosis. Quantitative autism traits and severity  for diagnosis 
of autism will be assessed by [CONTACT_191458]-G 
and DSM-V checklist of symptoms.  ASD symptoms moderate to sever e, 
based on ADOS criteria. 
o Age from 3 through 12 years. 
 
 Exclusion criteria for subjects will include:  
o Absence of a parent or legal guardian and consent 
o Inability to speak/understand English language 
o Seizure within 1 year of screening:  This exclusion is base d on the theoretical 
concern that cellular activation by [CONTACT_191459]. As previously noted in o ur previous 
trial of sulforaphane in young adult males, a seizure occurred in each of 2 
participants: one during treatment (in a participant with a pre viously 
undisclosed seizure), the other  3 weeks after discontinuing sul foraphane. 
o Impaired renal function (serum c reatinine > 1.2 mg/dl), impaire d hepatic 
function (AST/ALT > 2x upper limi t of normal), impaired thyroid  function 
(TSH outside normal limits):  This exclusion is based on a theoretical 
possibility of activat ion of underlying cellular metabolic abno rmalities by 
[CONTACT_191460]. Current infection or  treatment with antibiotics:  this exclusion is 
to avoid complications of inter- current illness that may occur due to the 
clinical trial or obscure possible effects of sulforaphane. 
o Medications that may modify the  course or testing of ASD parame ters (e.g., 
prednisone):  This exclusion is necessary in order not to interfere with or 
complicate effects of sulforaphane.  
o Chronic medical  disorder (e.g., cardiovascular dis ease, stroke or diabetes) or 
major surgery within 3 months prior to enrollment:   Serious medical illness in 
the child may be complicated by [CONTACT_191461] a change in ASD associated with treatment.  
o Less than 3 years or more than 13 ye ars of age: this age range was selected to 
cover the ages from usua
l diagnosis of ASD up to adolescence. 
o A diagnosis of autism spectrum disorder other than autism, for example, 
Asperger disorder, PDD-NOS, not consistent with moderate to sev ere autistic 
disorder, according to ADOS criteria. 
o Prisoners 
o Pregnant women 
 
6) Study-Wide Number of Subjects* 
NA 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 5 of 50   7) Study-Wide Recruitment Methods* 
NA 
8) Study Timelines* 
 
Duration  of intervention : [ADDRESS_227604] (double blind, Phase 1), and 15 weeks in 
open-label (Phase2).  
 
Prior to the main clinical trial , we will carry out a pi[INVESTIGATOR_9985] 10 children with ASD, 6-
12 years of age, who will receive sulforaphane, 2.2 micromoles/ kg daily for 14 days 
(details below in “10: Procedur es Involved (Study design)”). 
 
The entire clinical trial is e stimated to last [ADDRESS_227605] recruitmen t: 
 
SPECIFIC AIMS/TASKS TIMELINE 
(UMASS) TIMELINE 
(JH) 
SPECIFIC AIMS 1 AND 2:  Clinical trial: To determine if there 
are measurable effects on social responsiveness and problem behaviors during treatment with orally administered 
Sulforaphane-rich Broccoli Seed Powder (referred to as 
sulforaphane hereafter) in 3-12 y ear old boys and girls with AS D; 
To determine if treatment with sulforaphane is safe and well tolerated.    
  Task 1: Obtain regulatory approvals for clinical trial (submit 3+ mo. before start date)      
Subtask 1.1: [LOCATION_003]MRMC Human Research Protection   
                      Office  (-) 3-4 mo.  
Subtask 1.2: UMass and JH IRB application  (-3) mo. (-) 3 mo.
Subtask 1.3: Apply to FDA for IND  (-) 3 mo.  
Task 2: Organize study staff: recruit Primary Care MD and 
Clinical Research Assistant, Training sessions to assure rating s 
reliability on CGI and review c onsent/assent procedures and 
patient privacy protections. Review clinical data collection methods and safeguards 0-1 mo.  
Task 3: Recruit for Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116] (10 subjects with ASD), 
administer SF (broccoli seed pow der) for 2 weeks; collect 
blood and urine samples before and after BSP; process and ship samples to JH .  1-3 mo.  
Task 4: Recruit for rolling enrollmen t in main SF Clinical Trial 
(50 subjects)   
Subtask 4.1: Screen potential participants by [CONTACT_648], email 
or in person. Obtain inform ed consent and assent when 
possible at screening/enrollment visit. Explain the study in 
detail and answer all questions. Availability 24/7 with pager/phone. Perform ADOS, p hysical exam, phlebotomy 
for screening clinical labs and baseline CGI-S, ABC and SRS on each participant. Obtain SF-BSP/placebo from 2-24 mo.  
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 6 of 50   Pharmacy at dose specific fo r child, dispense but hold 
before starting until review of clinical lab studies, then call  
to start medication.  
7-week visit: Review progress; Perform CGI-I; ABC and 
SRS by [CONTACT_3654]; physical exam; phlebotomy/urine for clinical and research lab studies. Dispense BSP. 15-week visit: Review progress; Perform CGI-I; ABC and 
SRS by [CONTACT_3654]; physical exam; phlebotomy/urine for clinical and research lab studies. Dispense BSP. 
22-week visit: Review progress; Perform CGI-I; ABC and 
SRS by [CONTACT_3654]; physical exam; phlebotomy/urine for 
clinical and research lab studies. Dispense BSP. 30-week visit: Review progress; Perform CGI-I; ABC and 
SRS by [CONTACT_3654]; physical exam; phlebotomy/urine for clinical and research lab studies. Discontinue medication 
36-week visit: Review progress; Perform CGI-I; ABC and 
SRS by [CONTACT_3654]; physical exam; phlebotomy/urine for 
research lab studies. Record exit comments on study. 
 
Task 5: Data storage and analysis 0-36 mo.  
SPECIFIC AIM 3: To elucidate cellular biomarkers that support 
the hypothesized mechanism of action of sulforaphane in ASD. Blood and urine samples will be c ollected at UMass in Pi[INVESTIGATOR_191404], processed, stored and shipped on dry ice to JH    
Task 1: Labwork at JH for Pi[INVESTIGATOR_191405]: Nrf2, 
oxidative stress markers, heat shock proteins, mitochondrial functions, mTOR, cytokine  3-6 mo. 3-6 mo. 
Task 2: Labwork at JH for Main Clin ical Trial: biomarkers and 
mechanisms  6-36 mo. 6-36 mo. 
 
 ANTICIPATED TARGET ENROLLMENT (QUARTERLY):  
  Year 1 Year 2 Year 3   
  Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 TOTAL
Target Enrollment Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]  1 0  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  1 0  
Target Enrollment Main Study (per quarter) (does 
not include the pi[INVESTIGATOR_191406], who will not take part in the 
main study because they 
will no longer be sulforaphane naïve) -  7  1 0  8  8  5  3  3  2  2  2  0  5 0  
 
9) Study Endpoints* 
a) Primary study endpoint:  
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 7 of 50   i) Ohio Autism Clinical Impressions Scale – Improvement (OACIS-I) 
Average Score. 
b) Secondary study endpoints: 
i) OACIS-I response rate (much or very much improved) on aberrant 
behaviors 
ii) OACIS-I response rate (much or very much improved) on social communication 
iii) Change in total ABC score (as well as subscales of Irritability , lethargy and 
social withdrawal, stereotypic  behavior, hyperactivity and inappropriate 
language) from baseline 
iv) Change in total SRS score (as w ell as subscales of social awareness, social 
cognition, social communication, social motivation and autistic  
mannerisms) from baseline 
v) Determination of Nrf2 levels 
vi) Determination of oxidative stress biomarkers 
vii) Determination of Heat Shock Response biomarkers 
viii) Determination of mitochondr ial function biomarkers 
ix) Determination of mTOR si gnaling pathway markers 
x) Determination of immune functi on and inflammatory biomarkers 
c) Safety endpoints 
i) Liver function tests (ALT/AST) 
ii) Renal function tests ( serum creatinine) 
iii) Thyroid function (TSH levels) 
iv) Complete blood counts (WBC count, RBC count, platelet counts) 
v) Urinalysis 
Description of surveys used as t he primary and secondary study endpoints: 
1. Ohio Autism Clinical Impression s Scale - Severity (OACIS-S)
27,28 is a 7 point, 
10 domain scale that requires the clinician to rate the severit y of the patient's ASD 
at the time of assessment, rela tive to the clinician's past exp erience with patients 
who have the same diagnosis. The q uestions are rated on a scale  from 1 to 7 in the 
increasing order of severity, where  “1” is normal (symptoms ind istinguishable 
from typi[INVESTIGATOR_191407] n) and “7” is the most severe symptoms causing 
significant problems with indi vidual functioning on a daily bas is. The 10 items on 
the OACIS-S scale cover different domains of patients’ behavior, including global 
autism severity, socia l interaction, aberrant behavior, repetit ive or ritualistic 
behaviors, verbal communicat ion, non-verbal communication, 
hyperactivity/inattention, anxiet y, sensory sensitivities and r estricted/narrow 
interests. These are rated in a  similar way to the NIMH CGI Severity scale, but it 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 8 of 50   is focused on autism spectrum symptoms. This scale will be used  to acquire 
clinician-assessed severity of autistic symptomatology in the s tudy. 
2. Ohio Autism Clinical Impression s Scale – Improvement (OACIS-I)27,28 is a 7 
point, 10 domain scale that require s the clinician to assess ho w much the patient's 
ASD has improved or worsened relative to a baseline state at th e beginning of the 
intervention and rated as: “1”, very much improved; “2”, much i mproved; “3”, 
minimally improved; “4”, no change; “5”, minimally worse; “6”, much worse; or 
“7”, very much worse. The [ADDRESS_227606] bo groups. 
This scale will be used to gauge the clinician assessment of im provement in 
autistic symptomatology at all follow up visits as compared to the previous study 
visits.  
3. Social Responsiveness Scale (SRS)26: SRS is a parent- and/or teacher-reported 
65 point scale covering 5 treatment subscales focusing on the s ocial 
communication domain of ASD as obs erved in natural (non-clinica l) settings. 
Each item on the scale inquires about an observed aspect of rec iprocal social 
behavior that is rated on the que stionnaire on a scale from “1”  (never true), “2” 
(sometimes true), “3” (often t rue), and “4” (almost always true ). Its quasi-interval, 
ordinal design facilitates asse ssing degrees of change and/or s everity of symptoms 
in response to an intervention. T he SRS scale scores is subdivi ded into 5 
subscales (social awareness, soc ial cognition, social communica tion, social 
motivation and autistic mannerisms). This scale will be used at  all study visits and 
the scores (as well as change the reof from the baseline visit) will be used as one 
of the clinical outcome measures  assessing social interaction s kills in the study. 
4. Aberrant Behavior Checklist (ABC)25: ABC is a 58-item rating scale was 
developed for persons with develo pmental disab ilities living in the community, 
and to assess medication effect s. Its 58 questions are rated by [CONTACT_191462] a scale of 0 to 3, where a score  of “0” for particular behav ior is not a problem 
at all, “1” indicates that the  behavior is a problem but slight  in degree, “2” 
indicates that the pr oblem is moderately s erious, and “3” indic ates that the 
problem is severe in degree. The A BC score is sub-divided into 5 subscales 
(Irritability, lethargy and socia l withdrawal, stereotypic beha vior, hyperactivity 
and inappropriate language). This scale will be used at all stu dy visits and the 
scores (as well as change thereo f from the baseline visit) will be used as one of 
the clinical outcome measures a ssessing severity of aberrant/ab normal behaviors 
in the study. 
5. Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS)29: ADOS is an instrument 
for diagnosing and assessing autis m. The protocol consists of a  series of 
structured and semi-structured t asks that involve social intera ction between the 
examiner and the subject. The exa miner observes and identifies segments of the 
subject's behavior and assigns  these to predetermined observati onal categories. 
Categorized observations are subsequently combined to produce q uantitative 
scores for analysis. Research-de termined cut-offs identify the potential diagnosis 
of autism or related autism spect rum disorders, allowing a stan dardized 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_227607] will be used as one  of the primary measures to ens ure eligibility 
criteria for diagnosis  of ASD in the study. 
6. Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale (VABS)30: VABS is a valid and reliable 
nonverbal test to measure a pers on's adaptive level of function ing. VABS aids in 
diagnosing and classifying cogniti ve impairment in ASD and deve lopmental 
delays. The focus of VABS is the measurement of the adaptive be haviors, 
including the ability to cope wit h environmental changes, to le arn new everyday 
skills and to demonstrate independence. VABS will be administer ed at all study 
visits to help assess changes in adaptive skills during the stu dy. 
7. Leiter-3 scale31: Leiter scale is used as a measure of nonverbal IQ. It will be u sed 
at the screening visit in order t o classify study participants’ nonverbal IQ.  
 
10) Procedures Involved* (Study design): 
 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_191408]: Prior to the main clinical trial, we will carry out 
a pi[INVESTIGATOR_9985] 10 children w ith ASD, 6-12 years of age, who w ill receive sulforaphane, 
2.2 micromoles/kg daily for [ADDRESS_227608] effectiv e measures. Further details of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_191409].*     Study Design (Specific Aim 1): Following the pi[INVESTIGATOR_191410], we will 
conduct a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase-2 clinical trial of 
sulforaphane in a single-arm crossover design in 3 phases, in 50 boys and girls (ages 3-12 years) with moderate to severe A SD (see Figure 1 below). In Pha se 1 we shall treat 
participants for 15 weeks (50% w ith sulforaphane ((2.2 micromol es/kg body weight)), 
50% with placebo of identical appe arance). In Phase 2, all children will receive 
sulforaphane (2.2 micromoles/ kg b.w.) on open label for an additional 15 weeks. In Phase 
3 (6 weeks), participants will receive no sulforaphane, then re turn for followup at the end 
of the study. We project that tr eatment with sulforaphane will be associated with 
statistically significant improvements in physicians’ global im pressions, aberrant 
behaviors, social responsiveness and adaptive be haviors (see descriptions of outcome 
measures and statistical plan below).  Study variables will include clinician and parent assessments, and both clinical and 
scientific laborator y test measurements to evaluate for signs of toxicity and potential 
biomarkers of sulforaphane’s effects. Our primary outcome measu re will be the Ohio 
Autism Clinical Global Impression Scale (OACIS)
27,28. Secondary outcome measures 
will include the Aberrant Behavior Checklist (ABC)25, Social Responsiveness Scale 
(SRS)26, and Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale (VABS)30. The OACIS will be 
completed at each of 5 visits by [CONTACT_15098]; the ABC, SRS and V ABS will be completed 
by [CONTACT_7903]. All participants w ill have moderate to severe A SD, according to ADOS 
criteria as part of the screening process. Control subjects will be those children who 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 10 of 50   receive placebo for 15 weeks duri ng Phase 1. All children will receive active 
sulforaphane during Phase 2.  
 
 
              
 
  Figure 1: Flowchart of progress  of study participants through t he 3 phases of the clinical 
trial (flowchart not to scale) 
  At an initial screening visit, f ollowing informed consent by [CONTACT_3433] e parents and assent by [CONTACT_191463], a complete pre- and postnatal, pediatric and neurodevelopmental history will be obtained. We will also review the child’s histo ry of behavioral responses 
to fever and illness, and rate the parents’ recall of subjectiv e impressions of changes in 
ASD according to the OACIS. Child ren will be tested using the A utism Diagnostic 
Observation Schedule (ADOS)
29 by a trained clinician. If the diagnosis of ASD is 
confirmed, nonverbal intelligen ce will be measured using the Le iter-331.  
 Monitoring for safety (Specific Aim 2):  A complete physical exam will be performed 
at each of the 6 study visits. Phlebotomies will be performed 6 times, along with urine collection:  1) After screening and prior to randomization; 2) at 7 weeks after starting 
treatment in Phase 1; 3) at 15 w eeks, at the end of Phase 1; 4)  at 22 weeks; 5) at 30 
weeks, at the end of Phase 2; a nd 6) at 36 weeks, at the end of  the study. Blood samples 
will be sent for routine laboratory studies at screening, 7, 15 , 22 and 30 weeks: complete 
blood count with differential white  blood count; comprehensive metabolic profile, 
including AST and ALT; thyroi d stimulating hormone, in order to monitor for possible 
adverse effects of sulforaphane in children. Portions of the bl ood and urine samples will 
also be processed and stored for research studies as outlined b elow at screening, 7, 15, 
22, 30 and 36 weeks.   Following screening, participating children will be assigned to  receive either 
sulforaphane (2.2 micromoles/ kg b.w.) or placebo in Phase 1 by [CONTACT_191464] 50% 
RANDOMIZED 
SULFORAPHANE 15 WEEK VISIT - 
SINGLE ARM 
CROSSOVER: ALL 
ALLOCATED 
SULFORAPHANE
50% 
RANDOMIZED 
PLACEBO 30 WEEK 
VISIT (Rx 
STOPS) 36 WEEK 
VISIT (FINAL 
FOLLOW-UP) 
PHASE 1 (15 
WEEKS): DOUBLE 
BLIND PHASE PHASE 2 (15 WEEKS): 
OPEN LABEL PHASE  PHASE 3 (6 
WEEKS): 
WASHOUT PHASE
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 11 of 50   using a table of random number s, by [CONTACT_191465] e UMass Memorial 
Medical Center. Medic ation will be supplied to the Research Pharmacy at UMass by [CONTACT_191466].  
 The Research Monitor, Christy S tine, MD, is responsible to oversee the safety of the 
research and report observati ons/findings to the study DSMB and  IRB of Record or a 
designated official.  The Researc h Monitor will review all unan ticipated problems 
involving risks to subjects or ot hers associated with the proto col and provide an 
independent report of the event to the IRB of Record. The Resea rch Monitor may discuss 
the research protocol with the i nvestigators and the DSMB, shal l have authority to stop 
the research protocol in progress, remove individual human subjects from the study, and take whatever steps are necessary to protect the safety and wel l-being of human subjects 
until the IRB can assess the monitor's report; and shall have t he responsibility to 
promptly report their observat ions and findings to the IRB or o ther designated official 
and the HRPO.  We shall obtain an IND from the F DA, as well as approvals from the [LOCATION_003]MRMC 
Human Research Protection Office , UMass and Johns Hopkins IRB f or this study, and it 
will be listed on Clinicaltrials .gov. Study clinicians will rem ain blinded at all times to 
subject assignment until the last subject has completed the stu dy. Blinding may be broken 
for any subject who develops advers e effects or illness, and ev ery such event will be 
reviewed by [CONTACT_941] P.I. and DSMB. Stoppage will be determined by t he P.I. in consultation 
with the DSMB, and appropriate med ical care will be provided in  consultation with the 
participant’s primary care physic ian. Subjects will be entered into the study on a rolling 
basis, according to the time of t heir screening and entry into the study. All families will 
be followed on a regular basis and encouraged to call with ques tions or concerns 
regarding possible side  effects of sulforaphane. A visit will take place at 7 weeks into 
Phase 1, as well as at 15 weeks , for clinical testing and phleb otomy. At 22 weeks, 
progress will be reviewed and c linical testing and phlebotomy performed. At the end of 
Phase 2 (30 weeks), all treatment with sulforaphane will end an d a fifth phlebotomy will 
take place, for clinical and res earch lab studies. Testing of O ACIS, ABC, SRS and VABS 
will be obtained at each visit . At the end of Phase 3 (36 weeks ), an exit interview will be 
carried out, along with repeat OACIS, ABC, SRS and VABS, and the sixth phlebotomy for research studies.  Subjects will receive a gift card for $1 5/visit for the 6 visits.  
 Monitoring of biochemical and mo lecular biomarkers of ASD (Specific Aim 3):   
Over the last two decades many studies have shown that the ASD phenotypes (defined on the basis of behavioral manifes tations) are associated with rob ust physiological 
abnormalities in a wide variety of systemic and central nervous  system processes. These 
abnormalities include oxidative stress and reduced antioxidant capacity, depressed 
synthesis of reduced glutath ione, dysfunction in mitochondrial energy capture, increase 
lipid peroxidation, immune dysf unction, and (neuro)inflammation
5,32-34.  Although it is 
unclear whether these ASD-associ ated anomalies are of etiologic al significance or 
secondary manifestations of ASD, it is clear that their correct ion often improves 
behavioral abnormalities substantially35. Quantifying these biomarkers before, during, 
and after sulforaphane interven tion can therefore provide bioma rkers for monitoring the 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 12 of 50   effects of therapeutic interve ntions and for correlating the effects with behavioral 
changes. They are also likely to p rovide important information as to the mechanisms of 
action of sulforaphane in ASD.  
 We propose to monitor selected examples of various types of bio markers in peripheral 
blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), in plasma, and in urine of the patients undergoing sulforaphane treatment and compa re them with matched placebo co ntrols.  
Determinations will be made at the time of enrollment, at 7, 15 , 30 weeks (end of 
treatment), and at 36 weeks, after  discontinuation of the inter vention.  
 
*Pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]:  Before running assays on the sam ples we collect from participa nts in the 
main study, we will first carry out a pi[INVESTIGATOR_191411] (1 
micromole/lb or 2.2 micromoles/kg) to 10 children (6-12 years o ld) with ASD who 
donate samples of blood (PBMCs) and urine, before and after 14 days of daily 
treatment. By [CONTACT_5634], we will be able to identify the precise biomarker endpoints and the reproducibility of individual  biomarker values and magnitud es of changes resulting 
from (short term) sulforaphane intervention. We will standardiz e the assays below and 
in the process will also determine the most effective and parsi monious group of assays 
to perform on samples from the children in our main study. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells will be obtai ned by [CONTACT_191467] (Becton Dickinson). The  following will be 
studied in the Cullman Chemopr otection Laboratory at Johns Hopk ins University 
School of Medicine: 
 
1. Determination of Nrf2 Levels . The transcription factor  Nrf2 (Nuclear factor-
erythroid factor 2) regulates a significant fraction of the gen ome (perhaps 4-5%) 
that codes mostly for cytoprotective gene products
14,36,37. It orchestrates protective 
responses to a diversity of endogenous and exogenous stresses. Nrf2 levels are 
substantially depresse d in ASD to 45% of t ypi[INVESTIGATOR_191412]2.  
Determination of PBMC Nrf2 level s and the effects of sulforapha ne treatment will 
be one of the primary biomarkers to be examined. Effects of sul foraphane treatment 
on the expression and activities of  Nrf2-dependent enzymes such as nicotinamide 
nucleotide quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) and heme oxygenase 1  (HO-1) will 
be also examined in PBMC of autistic children.     
2. Oxidative Stress Biomarkers .  Most of the methods for the se analyses are described 
in Rose (2014)
38. These biomarker endpoints will  be examined in PBMC, plasma, 
and urine, as appropriate. Biomarkers we will measure include: (a) levels of 
oxidized and reduced glutathione , and their ratios, (b) reactiv e oxygen species and 
their generation as determined by [CONTACT_191468], (c) plasm a and urine F2 
isoprostanes which are considered the most sensitive indicators  of redox 
dysfunction39, (d) plasma levels of 3-chloroty rosine (measure of reactive ni trogen 
species and myeloperoxidase ac tivity) and of 3-nitrotyrosine (m easures of chronic 
immune activation and oxidative protein damage)40, and (e)  urinary levels of 8-
hydroxydeoxyguanosine.   
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 13 of 50   3. Heat Shock Response Biomarkers.  The heat shock response is complex and 
evolutionarily conserved. Much evidence points to the neuroprotective role of heat 
shock proteins (HSPs), and the e nhanced susceptibility of cells  to damage when 
HSPs are depressed. HSPs are i nvolved in sensing and repairing DNA damage, and 
function as chaperones for a number of misfolded proteins41.  Since fever can 
dramatically but temporarily ameliorate abnormal symptoms in a substantial 
fraction of autistic patients8, and fever is associated w ith activation of heat shock 
proteins42, we will examine expression of heat shock proteins, focusing o n heat 
shock factor 1 (HSF-1), HSP70 and HSP90, which are also upregul ated by 
[CONTACT_191460]3,43. 
 
4. Mitochondrial Function Biomarkers.  In the light of persuasive evidence for 
extensive mitochondrial dysfunction in autism2,44, we will survey mitochondrial 
oxygen consumption and evidence fo r increased glycolysis (pyruv ate and lactate 
levels and ratios in plasma). Determinations will also include measurements of 
mitochondrial NADH oxidase and pyruvate dehydrogenase activities, production of hydrogen peroxide, and mitochondrial DNA over-replication (comp ared to nuclear 
DNA).   
 
5. mTOR signaling pathway. Synaptic dysfunction caused by [CONTACT_191469] a key pathogenic mechanism for ASD
45. The 
PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway pl ays central roles in synaptic  protein 
synthesis46, and its dysregulation results in many behavioral abnormalitie s, and may 
contribute to the pathogenesis of ASD4. Specifically, the phosphatase and tensin 
homolog on chromosome 10 (PTEN), t he negative repressor of the 
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, may be a s ignificant regul ator of this pathway in 
mediating the ASD phenotype. Deletion of PTEN results in autism -like behavioral 
deficits, hyperactivity of PI3K/ AKT/mTOR pathway and alteration s in synaptic 
scaffolding proteins47. We will therefore also examine biomarkers of this pathway 
in PBMCs, including gene expres sion of PTEN, AKT, and mTOR by r eal time 
PCR, and phosphorylated AKT and mTOR by [CONTACT_27187]. 
 6. Immune Function and Inflammatory Biomarkers.  A number of studies have 
reported increases in cytokine e xpression, immune-related genes , and other 
biomarkers of inflammation and neuroinflammation in individuals  with ASD
5,34,48. 
Inflammation at birth may have l ong term detrimental effects on  Nrf2 and with 
chronic neuroinflammation, Nrf2 i s downregulated in some neurod egenerative 
diseases49. Sulforaphane can attenuate inf lammation in a model of spi[INVESTIGATOR_191413]-κB (NF-κB) pathway, and  the enzymatic 
activity of the proinflammatory c ytokine macrophage inhibitory factor (MIF)50.  
Therefore, in addition to Nrf2 lev els, plasma cytokine levels a nd cytokine gene 
expression, iNOS and COX-2 will be monitored in PBMC as well du ring the pi[INVESTIGATOR_191414]. 
 
7. Bioavailability of sulforaphane: Our study drug is administered in the form of 
glucoraphanin rich broccoli see d powder with endogenous myrosin ase. 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 14 of 50   Glucoraphanin (GR) is rapi[INVESTIGATOR_191415]51. Myrosinase is present in plant cells and is normally segregated from the 
glucoraphanin, until the cellular vacuoles are ruptured when the tissue containing 
glucoraphanin is ingested by [CONTACT_1966]52,53. Sulforaphane, in turn, is metabolized rapi[INVESTIGATOR_191416], and successive steps o f hydrolysis of the 
conjugates lead to the ultimate formation of the N-acetylcysteine derivatives 
(mercapturic acids). All of these conjugates are chemically des ignated dithiocarbamates 
(DTC) and can be quantified by [CONTACT_191470] a complete and accurate measure of the bioavailability 
of sulforaphane
54. We will collect a urine sample to perform measurement of 
Dithiocarbamate levels to assess the conversion of glucoraphani n to sulforaphane 
by [CONTACT_191471]. 
 
In consideration of Specific Ai m 3, we will carry out studies o f all [ADDRESS_227609] than others.     
 
The pi[INVESTIGATOR_191417] 2 study visits. 
 
* Pi[INVESTIGATOR_191418] 1 - Screening visit:  This visit will take around 2.5 hours to 
complete. All participants will  undergo a pre-screen assessment  to determine if basic 
eligibility criteria are met .  Qualified study staff will ask questions related to the above 
described inclusion/exclusion cr iteria.  The pre-screen may be completed by [CONTACT_191472].  Some subjects may require a more extensiv e examination to ensure 
that their autism meets the st udy’s inclusion criteria. The sub ject will be enrolled after 
he and/or his legal guardian agree to a comprehensive informed consent. An informed 
consent will then be obtained. Autism diagnosis will be confirm ed clinical judgment 
corroborated by [CONTACT_17814] t he Autism Diagnostic Observational Scale 
(ADOS)29.  Those who have had an ADOS admi nistered by [CONTACT_191473] [ADDRESS_227610] at e nrollment (DSM-V checklist of s ymptoms).  
 
At the visit, vital signs will be obtained. Then clinical labor atory tests (CBC and 
platelets, complete metabolic p rofile, including liver and rena l function tests and 
thyroid stimulating hormone), bloo d for research laboratory tes ts (Nrf2, heat shock 
proteins, measures of oxidative stress and mTOR) and a urine sa mple for urinalysis will 
be obtained. The maximum amount of blood to be drawn at any sta ge during this study 
will not exceed 2 ml/kg body weight; we will also not exceed th e minimal risk 
limitation of 3 ml/kg in an 8 week period. 
 If the blood tests done at the t ime of screeni ng visit (liver function tests, renal function 
tests and thyroid function tests) are within study’s acceptable limits (AST/ALT < 2x 
upper limit of normal, serum creatinine < 1.2 mg/dl, TSH within  normal limits), we will  
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 15 of 50   either mail the study drug to subj ects or ask their parents to pi[INVESTIGATOR_191419]. We will 
provide the study participants  a 14 day supply of study medication (sulforaphane – 
dosage details below). We will pr ovide detailed instructions to  
subjects/parents/guardians on how  to take the medication and in clude these instructions 
along with the medication package, and they will be made aware (and given written 
instructions) on how to recognize an y side effects associated w ith the medication. They 
will be asked to call the study s taff in case they have any que stions or concerns.  
 
* Pi[INVESTIGATOR_191418] 2 – 14 day follow-up visit: The second visit will take ~[ADDRESS_227611] experienced. They will be asked to return the 
completed study medication diary and any unused medication. Als o, a blood sample for 
research laboratory tests (N rf2, heat shock proteins, measures of oxidative stress and 
mTOR) and safety labs (liver, r enal and thyroid function tests)  and a urine sample for 
urinalysis, isoprostanes and sul foraphane bioava ilability will be obtained. The 
maximum amount of blood to be drawn at any stage during this st udy will not exceed 2 
ml/kg body weight; we will also not exceed the minimal risk lim itation of 3 ml/kg in an 
8 week period. 
 
Intervention details: Sulforaphane Sulforaphane, an isothiocyanate (1-isothiocyanato-4R-(methylsul finyl)butane), is 
obtained from lyophilized extract s of 3-day-old broccoli sprout s or as its glucosinolate 
precursor glucoraphanin, from broccoli seeds. Both broccoli sprouts and seeds contain the glucosinolate precursor gluc oraphanin; neither contains any  sulforaphane, which is 
produced from glucoraphanin by [CONTACT_191455]. Sulforaphane 
induces HSP and Nrf2 with positiv e effects on redox regulation,  DNA damage sensing 
and repair, molecular chaperones , fatty acid and lipid metabolism and energy 
metabolism
13,14. Sulforaphane has been shown to suppress lipopolysaccharide in duced 
inflammation in rat microglia15 and may regulate neuroi nflammation in degenerative 
disorders of the CNS through its induction of Nrf216. Sulforaphane and related 
compounds are hormetic drugs that induce a general “cell-protec tive” response, as 
demonstrated in vitro in sickle cell disease as well as X-linke d adrenoleukodystrophy17,18, 
fragile X syndrome and spi[INVESTIGATOR_11902]19. Sulforaphane crosses the blood brain 
barrier and is bioavailable orally20,21. Recent evidence shows that dysregulation in the 
mTOR/AKT signaling and cell surv ival pathway is present in anim al models of ASD and 
tuberous sclerosis with ASD4. The lack of suppression of mTOR leads to excessive 
synapse formation due to fa ilure of autophagy and pruning of synapses during brain 
development, which may be improved by [CONTACT_191456]22. Sulforaphane 
has been shown to induce cell cy cle arrest and apoptosis in primary lymphoblasts from 
children with acute lymphoblasti c anemia (ALL), and does so, in part, through its 
inhibition of the AKT and mTOR survival pathways23. Sulforaphane, therefore, has at 
least several possible modes of action that may benefit ASD through common cellular mechanisms that underlie its  heterogeneous phenotypes.  
 
Dosage and administration:  
 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 16 of 50   Sulforaphane (SF) will be administered in an approximate dosage of 1 µmol SF/lb (2.2 kg 
µmol/kg) body weight. This dosag e roughly approximates the dosage that was used in 
our previous clinical trial of sul foraphane in male adolescents  and adults with autism. The 
sulforaphane will be supplied as  glucoraphanin (GR)-enriched br occoli seed extract 
tablets (manufacturing details f ollow). Each active tablet will contain 125 mg broccoli 
seed powder (source of glucoraph anin, equivalent to [ADDRESS_227612] ~ 15 µmol SF), [ADDRESS_227613] (source o f myrosinase), 15 mg 
ascorbic acid, 55.90 mg microcrystalline cellulose, and 4.10 mg  silicon dioxide. 
The total dose per day will depend of study participants’ body weight: 
 30-50 lb  3 tablets (45 µmol/day) 
 50-70 lb   4 tablets (60 µmol/day)    
 70-90 lb   6 tablets (90 µmol/day)    
 90-110 lb   7 tablets (105 µmol/day) 
 110-130 lb   8 tablets (120 µmol/day) 
 If a child is unable to swallow tablets, parents will be asked to grind the tablets and mix 
the contents of capsules into small cups of applesauce. This me thod is commonly used to 
dispense medications in childre n. There has been extensive expe rience by [CONTACT_191474], in administering sulfora phane and its precursor 
glucoraphanin in a number of for ms, both encapsulated and in various types of juice 
(mango, pi[INVESTIGATOR_70945], lime)
58-62. Placebo tablets identical in size and similar in appearance 
to the active tablet s will be used.  
 
Route and frequency of administration : The study drug (sulforaphane or placebo) will 
be administered orally, at approximately the same time, once a day, and preferably 
avoiding to take it with a heavy meal.  
 
Duration  of intervention : [ADDRESS_227614] (double blind, Phase 1), and 15 weeks in 
open-label (Phase2).  
Storage: prior to dispensing the study dr ug to the participants, the dru g will be stored in 
temperature controlled conditions ( -20C) at the UMass Memorial Investigational 
Pharmacy. During the study visits, we will directly dispense th e medication to patients’ 
parents (except the first visit where we will wait for the scre ening visit lab results before 
either mailing the study drug or asking the parents to pi[INVESTIGATOR_191420]). The parents will be 
instructed to keep the medication stored in their freezer for t he duration of the study.  
 
Concomitant  medications  allowed : Patients will con tinue taking previous 
psychopharmaceutical medications they are using to treat autism . However, we will 
request, insofar as possible, that no changes take place in the  type or doses of their 
psychopharmaceutical medications for the duration of the study. They will also be allowed to continue taking any other medications, such as anti- epi[INVESTIGATOR_191421].  
 
Study visits narrative:  
The main study will consist of [ADDRESS_227615] ing 15 weeks per patient. 
Phase 1 is the double blind phase, in which 50% of study partic ipants will receive active 
drug (sulforaphane) and the other 50% will receive active place bo, according to the 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 17 of 50   dosing schedule as detailed above. In Phase 2, from 15 weeks un til 30 weeks is an open-
label phase during which all study participants will receive th e active drug 
(sulforaphane). All safety laboratory tests will be performed i n a CLIA certified 
laboratory at the University of [LOCATION_005] Memorial Medical Center. Phase [ADDRESS_227616] a ny possible adverse event s. Following is a 
description of procedures that will be performed at each study visit: 
 
1. Screening/baseline visit  (double blind Phase 1):  This visit will take around 2.5 
hours to complete. All participants will undergo a pre-screen a ssessment to 
determine if basic eligibility c riteria are met.  Qualified stu dy staff will ask 
questions related to the above de scribed inclusion/exclusion criteria.  The pre-
screen may be completed by [CONTACT_191475].  Some  subjects may 
require a more extensive examination to ensure that their autism meets the study’s inclusion criteria. An informed consent will then be obtained. Autism diagnosis 
will be confirmed clinical judgment corroborated by [CONTACT_191476] (ADOS)
29.  Those who have had an ADOS 
administered by [CONTACT_191477] [ADDRESS_227617] at enrollment 
(DSM-V checklist of symptoms). A  Leiter-3 assessment will also be performed as 
a measure of nonverbal IQ
31.  
 
A complete, baseline history, phys ical and neurological exam wi ll be performed. 
OACIS-S27,28, SRS26, ABC25 and Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale30 will also be 
performed to quantify disease seve rity. Also, clinical laboratory tests (CBC and 
platelets, complete metabolic p rofile, including liver and rena l function tests and 
thyroid stimulating hormone), bloo d for research laboratory tests (Nrf2, heat 
shock proteins, measures of oxidative stress and mTOR) and a ur ine sample for 
urinalysis will be obtained. The maximum amount of blood to be drawn at any 
stage during this study will not exceed 2 ml/kg body weight; we will also not 
exceed the minimal risk limitation of 3 ml/kg in an 8 week peri od. 
 
If the blood tests done at the t ime of screeni ng visit (liver f unction tests, renal 
function tests and thyroid function tests) are within study’s a cceptable limits 
(AST/ALT < 2x upper limit of normal , serum creatinine < 1.2 mg/ dl, TSH within 
normal limits), we will either mail the study drug to study par ticipants or ask their 
parents/guardians to pi[INVESTIGATOR_191422]. The subject will be enrolled after he 
and/or his legal guardian agree t o a comprehensive informed con sent.  
 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 18 of 50   At this visit, the study participant/s will already have been r andomly assigned to 
either the sulforaphane or placebo group in the ratio of 1:1 by  [CONTACT_191478]. As mentioned above, a fter the safety labs come ba ck normal, we will 
mail the study participants (or a sk their parents to pi[INVESTIGATOR_7049]) a n 8 week supply of 
study medication (sulforaphane or placebo) that will last until  the 7 week visit, 
plus a one week buffer. We will provide detailed instructions t o 
subjects/parents/guardians on how  to take the medication and in clude these 
instructions along with the med ication package, and they will b e made aware (and 
given written instructions) on how to recognize any side effect s associated with 
the medication. They will be asked to call the study staff in case they have any 
questions or concerns.  
 
2. 7 week visit (double blind Phase 1):  Enrolled subjects will then be asked to 
come for their 7 week (follow-up) study visit, where OACIS-I, S RS, ABC and 
Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale  will be administered. A comple te physical 
examination will be performed and vital signs obtained. This vi sit will take ~ 1.[ADDRESS_227618] experienced. Also, clinical  laboratory tests (CBC and platelets, complete 
metabolic profile (including liv er function tests, renal functi on tests, thyroid 
function tests) and research la boratory tests blood - (Nrf2, heat shock proteins, 
measures of oxidative stress a nd mTOR) and urine (isoprostanes)  will be 
obtained. Maximum amount of blood drawn at any stage during thi s study will not 
exceed 2 ml/kg body weight; we will also not exceed the minimal  risk limitation 
of 3 ml/kg in an 8 week period. 
 
At this visit, we will give the  study participants a further 7 week supply of study 
medication (sulforaphane or pla cebo) that will last until the n ext visit (15 week 
visit). Study particip ants will be asked to f inish the medication from the previous 
lot before starting the latter batch. They will be asked to con tinue to take the study 
medication unless instructed otherwise. We will provide detaile d instructions for 
subjects/parents/guardians on how  to take the study medication along with the 
medication package, and they will be made aware (and given writ ten instructions) 
on how to recognize any side effects associated with the study medication. They 
will be asked to call the study s taff in case they have any que stions or concerns.  
 
If the lab results are found to be  abnormal (AST/ALT > 2x upper  limit of normal, 
serum creatinine > 1.2 mg/dl, TSH  outside normal limits), we will ask the study 
participants to discontinue st udy medication for [ADDRESS_227619] returned to 
within study’s acceptable lim its (AST/ALT < 2x upper limit of n orm al, serum 
creatinine < 1.2 mg/d l, TSH within normal limits), and as advis ed by [CONTACT_191479], we will then ask them to resume the study 
medication.  
 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 19 of 50   After 2 weeks, if the lab tests are still abnormal (AST/ALT > 2x upper limit of 
normal; serum creatinine > 1.2 m g/dl; TSH outside normal limits ), then the study 
participants will discontinue s tudy medication permanently (although we will ask 
them continue to be followed up in the study). 
 
3. 15 week visit (end of double blind Phase 1) : Enrolled subjects will then be 
asked to come for their 15 week ( follow-up) study visit, where OACIS-I, SRS, 
ABC and Vineland Adaptive Behavi or Scale will be administered. A complete 
physical examination will be performed and vital signs obtained . This visit will 
take ~ 1.[ADDRESS_227620] experienced. Also, c linical laboratory tests (CBC and platelets, 
complete metabolic profile (in cluding liver function tests, ren al function tests, 
thyroid function tests), and research laboratory tests blood-  (Nrf2, heat shock 
proteins, measures of oxidative stress and mTOR) and urine samp le for 
isoprostanes will be obtaine d. Maximum amount of blood drawn at  any stage 
during this study will not exceed 2 ml/kg body weight; we will also not exceed 
the minimal risk limitation of 3 ml/kg in an 8 week period. 
 
At this visit, we will give the  study participants a further 8 week supply of study 
medication (sulforaphane) that  will last until the next (22 wee k) visit plus a one-
week buffer. We will provide detailed instructions for subjects /parents/guardians 
on how to take the study medication along with the medication p ackage, and they 
will be made aware (and given w ritten instructions) on how to r ecognize any side 
effects associated with the study medication. They will be asked to call the study 
staff in case they have an y questions or concerns.  
 
If at this visit lab results are found to be abnormal (AST/ALT > 2x upper limit of 
normal, serum creatinine > 1.2 mg/dl, TSH outside normal limits ), we will ask the 
study participants to discontinue  study medication for [ADDRESS_227621] 
returned to within s tudy’s acceptable limits (AST/ALT < 2x uppe r limit of 
normal, serum creatinine < 1.2 mg/dl, TSH within normal limits) , and as advised 
by [CONTACT_191480], we will then ask the m to resume the 
study medication.  
 
After 2 weeks, if the lab tests are still abnormal (AST/ALT > 2x upper limit of 
normal; serum creatinine > 1.2 m g/dl; TSH outside normal limits ), then the study 
participants will discontinue s tudy medication permanently (tho ugh we will ask 
them continue to be followed-up in the study).  
4. 22 week visit (open label Phase 2): Enrolled subjects will then be asked to come 
for their 22 week (follow-up) st udy visit, where OACIS-I, SRS, ABC and 
Vineland Adaptive Beh
avior Scale  will be administered. A comple te physical 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 20 of 50   examination will be performed and vital signs obtained. This vi sit will take ~ 1.[ADDRESS_227622] 
experienced. Also, clinical laboratory tests (CBC and platelets , complete 
metabolic profile (including liv er function tests, renal functi on tests, thyroid 
function tests), and research lab oratory tests blood-  (Nrf2, heat shock proteins, 
measures of oxidative stress a nd mTOR) and urine sample for iso prostanes will be 
obtained. Maximum amount of blood drawn at any stage during thi s study will not 
exceed 2 ml/kg body weight; we will also not exceed the minimal  risk limitation 
of 3 ml/kg in an 8 week period.  
 At this visit, we will give the  study participants a further 7 week supply of study 
medication (sulforaphane) that  will last until the next (30 wee k) visit. We will 
provide detailed instru ctions for subjects/parents/guardians on how to take the 
study medication along with the m edication package, and they wi ll be made 
aware (and given written instr uctions) on how to recognize any side effects 
associated with the study medication. They will be asked to cal l the study staff in 
case they have any quest ions or concerns.  
 If at this visit lab results are found to be abnormal (AST/ALT > 2x upper limit of 
normal, serum creatinine > 1.2 mg/dl, TSH outside normal limits ), we will ask the 
study participants to discontinue  study medication for [ADDRESS_227623] 
returned to within s tudy’s acceptable limits (AST/ALT < 2x uppe r limit of 
normal, serum creatinine < 1.2 mg/dl, TSH within normal limits) , and as advised 
by [CONTACT_191480], we will then ask the m to resume the 
study medication.   After 2 weeks, if the lab tests are still abnormal (AST/ALT > 2x upper limit of 
normal; serum creatinine > 1.2 m g/dl; TSH outside normal limits ), then the study 
participants will discontinue s tudy medication permanently (tho ugh we will ask 
them continue to be followed-up in the study). 
 
5. 30 week visit (open label Phase 2): Enrolled subjects will then be asked to come 
for their 30 week (follow-up) st udy visit, where OACIS-I, SRS, ABC and 
Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale  will be administered. A comple te physical 
examination will be performed and vital signs obtained. This vi sit will take ~ 1.[ADDRESS_227624] 
experienced. Also, laboratory tests (CBC and platelets, complet e metabolic 
profile, including liver function tests, renal function tests, thyroid function tests), 
and research laboratory tests  blood - (Nrf2, heat shock protein s, measures of 
oxidative stress and mTOR) and urine sample for isoprostanes wi ll be obtained. 
Maximum
 amount of blood drawn at a ny stage during this study wi ll not exceed 2 
ml/kg body weight; we will also not exceed the minimal risk lim itation of 3 ml/kg 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 21 of 50   in an 8 week period. At this visit, we will not give the study participants any 
further study medication. 
 
6. 36 week final follow-up visit (Phase 3): This will be the final study visit. 
OACIS-I, SRS, ABC and Vineland Ad aptive Behavior Scale will be 
administered. A complete physi cal examination will be performed  and vital signs 
obtained. This visit will take ~ 1.[ADDRESS_227625]  experienced. Also, 
research laboratory tests fo r blood - (Nrf2, heat shock proteins, measures of 
oxidative stress and mTOR) and urine sample for isoprostanes wi ll be obtained.  
 
Following is a description of the telephone surveys: 
 
1. Phone survey 1: This phone call will take place between visits 1 and 2 at approximately 3 weeks from the study drug start date. This will  help us ensure 
that the study participants does not experience any unwanted side effects from taking the study drug. This survey will take around 15 minutes to complete. 
During this phone call we will ask them questions about their child’s health since starting the study. We will ask them questions about any side e ffects that your 
child may have experienced sin ce starting the study drug.  
 
2. Phone survey 2: This phone call will take place between visits 3 and 4 at 
approximately 18 weeks from the i nitial study drug start date. This will help us 
ensure that the study participants does not experience any unwa nted side effects 
from taking the study drug. This survey will take around 15 min utes to complete. 
During this phone call we will ask them questions about their child’s health since 
starting the study. We will ask them questions about any side e ffects that your 
child may have experienced sin ce starting the study drug.  
  Laboratory evaluations: We will collect blood samples for safety evaluations as well as  for biomarker evaluations.  
 
1. Specimens to be collected, amount, schedule: 
a. Specimen to be collected: blood, urine 
b. Schedule: Blood and urine samples will be collected at screenin g visit, 7 
week visit, 15 week visit, 22 w eek visit, 30 week visit and 36 week visit 
c. Amount: Blood ~ 13 ml (so long as it is not exceeding 2ml/kg bo dy weight 
limit) each time (~4 ml for liver, thyroid and renal function t ests, ~1.5 ml 
for complete blood counts, ~7.5 ml f or biomarker measurement) 
   Urine ~ 5 ml 
2. Evaluations to be made: 
a. Safety evaluations: They will include liver function tests (SGO T/SGPT, 
Total bilirubin), renal function tests (serum electrolytes, serum creatinine), 
thyroid function tests (TSH). 
b. Biomarker measurement: Followin g biomarkers will be evaluated: 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 22 of 50   1. Determination of Nrf2 Levels . The transcription factor Nrf2 (Nuclear 
factor-erythroid factor 2) regul ates a significant fraction of the 
genome (perhaps 4-5%) that codes mostly for cytoprotective gene 
products14,36,37. It orchestrates protective responses to a diversity of 
endogenous and exogenous stresses. N rf2 levels are substantiall y 
depressed in ASD to 45% of t ypi[INVESTIGATOR_191423]2.  
Determination of PBMC Nrf2 level s and the effects of sulforapha ne 
treatment will be one of the primary biomarkers to be examined.  
Effects of sulforaphane treat ment on the expression and activit ies of 
Nrf2-dependent enzymes such as nicotinamide nucleotide quinone 
oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) and heme  oxygenase 1 (HO-1) will be als o 
examined in PBMC of autistic children.    
2. Oxidative Stress Biomarkers .  Most of the methods for these analyses 
are described in Rose (2014)38. These biomarker endpoints will be 
examined in PBMC, plasma, and urine, as appropriate. Biomarkers  
we will measure include: (a) le vels of oxidized and reduced 
glutathione, and their ratios , (b) reactive oxygen species and their 
generation as determined by [CONTACT_191481], (c) plasma and urine 
F2 isoprostanes which are considered the most sensitive indicat ors of 
redox dysfunction39, (d) plasma levels of 3-chlorotyrosine (measure 
of reactive nitrogen species and m yeloperoxidase activity) and of 3-
nitrotyrosine (measures of chronic immune activation and oxidat ive 
protein damage)40, and (e)  urinary levels of 8-
hydroxydeoxyguanosine.   
3. Heat Shock Response Biomarkers.  The heat shock response is 
complex and evolutionarily conser ved. Much evidence points to t he 
neuroprotective role of heat shock proteins (HSPs), and the enh anced 
susceptibility of cells to dama ge when HSPs are depressed. HSPs  are 
involved in sensing and repair ing DNA damage, and function as 
chaperones for a number of misfolded proteins41.  Since fever can 
dramatically but temporarily ameliorate abnormal symptoms in a substantial fraction of autistic patients
8, and fever is associated with 
activation of heat shock proteins42, we will examine expression of 
heat shock proteins, focusing on heat shock factor 1 (HSF-1), H SP70 
and HSP90, which are also upr egulated by [CONTACT_191460]3,43.  
4. Mitochondrial Function Biomarkers.  In the light of persuasive 
evidence for extensive mitoc hondrial dysfunction in autism2,44, we 
will survey mitochondrial oxygen consumption and evidence for increased glycolysis (pyruvate  and lactate levels and ratios in 
plasma). Determinations will also include measurements of mitochondrial NADH oxidase and pyruvate dehydrogenase activities, production of hydrogen peroxide, and mitochondrial DNA over-replication (compared to nuclear DNA).   
5. mTOR signaling pathway. Synaptic dysfunction caused by [CONTACT_191482] t o be a key pathogenic mechanism for 
ASD
45. The PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling pathway plays central roles 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 23 of 50   in synaptic protein synthesis46, and its dysregulation results in many 
behavioral abnormalities, and may contribute to the pathogenesi s of 
ASD4. Specifically, the phosphatase and tensin homolog on 
chromosome 10 (PTEN), the ne gative repressor of the 
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, may be a s ignificant regul ator of this 
pathway in mediating the ASD phenotype. Deletion of PTEN results 
in autism-like behavioral defic its, hyperactivity of PI3K/AKT/m TOR 
pathway and alterations in synaptic scaffolding proteins47. We will 
therefore also examine biomar kers of this pathway in PBMCs, 
including gene expression of P TEN, AKT, and mTOR by [CONTACT_191483], and phosphorylated AKT and mTOR by [CONTACT_27187].  
6. Immune Function and Inflammatory Biomarkers.  A number of 
studies have reported increases  in cytokine expression, immune-
related genes, and other biom arkers of inflammation and 
neuroinflammation in individuals with ASD5,34,48. Inflammation at 
birth may have long term detrimental effects on Nrf2 and with chronic neuroinflammation, N rf2 is downregulated in some 
neurodegenerative diseases
49. Sulforaphane can attenuate 
inflammation in a model of spi[INVESTIGATOR_191424]-κB (NF-κB) path way, and the enzymatic activity o f the 
proinflammatory cytokine macropha ge inhibitory f actor (MIF)50.  
Therefore, in addition to Nrf2 lev els, plasma cytokine levels a nd 
cytokine gene expression, iNOS and COX-2 will be monitored in PBMC as well during the pi[INVESTIGATOR_191425]- up during the main study.  
 
 
Following table depi[INVESTIGATOR_191426]: 
 
Visit Informed 
consent, 
eligibility 
criteria 
(ADOS,    
Leiter-3) Adverse 
event 
reporting Medical 
history, 
vitals, 
physical 
exam Autism 
symptom 
severity   
(OACIS-S, 
OACIS-I, 
ABC, SRS, 
Vineland 
Adaptive 
Behavior 
Scale)Blood draw 
(LFTs, 
RFTs, TSH, 
CBC, HSP, 
mTor, 
Nerf), urine 
sample for 
isoprostanes Study drug 
dispending Visit 
duration 
Double blind phase (50% participants receive sulforaphane and 5 0% receive placebo) 
Screening/ 
baseline visit X   X X X 8 weeks ~ 2.5 hours 
3 week phone 
survey  X      ~ 15 
minutes 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 24 of 50   7 week visit   X X X X 7 weeks ~ 1.5 hours 
15 week visit   X X X X 8 weeks ~ 1.5 hours 
Open label phase (all participants receive sulforaphane) 
18 week 
phone survey  X      ~ 15 
minutes 
22 week visit   X X X X  7 weeks ~ 1.5 hours 
30 week visit   X X X X   ~ 1.5 hours 
36 week visit   X X X X    ~ 45 
minutes 
 
 
11) Data and Specimen Banking* 
We plan to store leftover blood a nd urine samples in -[ADDRESS_227626] udy ID and identifiable informa tion will only be 
accessible by [CONTACT_191484]. At the end of 3 years the sa mples will be forever 
anonymized, and the link between study ID and identifiable info rmation will be 
destroyed. We will make application to the IRB for any further studies to be conducted, 
by [CONTACT_191485], using these specimens.  
12) Data Management* 
 Statistical Analysis:  The OACIS-I, SRS and ABC data will be analyzed in a mixed model ANOVA with fixed effects for visit, treatment group, and their interaction and 
random participant-specific inte rcepts.  The effect of sulforap hane on mean change in 
OACIS-I, SRS and ABC total score s from baseline will be estimat ed using linear 
contrasts.  Estimates will be unbiased if any loss to follow-up is missing at random, conditional on the observed data and our model assumptions.  Si gnificantly greater 
improvement from baseline in m ean scores among participants ran domized to 
sulforaphane based on a two-tailed test at alpha = 0.[ADDRESS_227627] 
responded to the study drug will be performed by [CONTACT_3493]’s Exact  test. This analysis will 
be done by [CONTACT_191486] -I, SRS and ABC data. Particip ants will be considered 
as responders to study drug if the y experience either of the fo llowing: they are much/very 
much improved (a score of 2 or less) on any subdomain of OACIS- I scale, their total 
ABC scores at [ADDRESS_227628] 25% from baseline s core, and their total 
SRS scores at [ADDRESS_227629] 25% from their base line score.  
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 25 of 50    
Biomarkers (testing mechanism of action of SFN) will be tested both as outcome 
variables in mixed model analys es and as predictors of differences in behavioral 
symptoms using the models described above for behavioral sympto ms.  Markers that both 
respond to sulforaphane treatment  and predict differences in behavioral symptoms will be 
interpreted as possible mediator s of any benefit from sulforaphane treatment.  Safety of 
sulforaphane treatment will be a ssessed based on absolute rates  of liver, thyroid and renal 
toxicity among participants treat ed with sulforaphane and based on comparison of the 
proportion of participants with s uch toxicities between the two  treatment groups. 
 Power Calculations: We plan to enroll a total of 50 pa rticipants in the study, rand omized 
1:[ADDRESS_227630] 80% power to de tect significance in the 
following outcome measures if the following sample sizes are co nsidered: OACIS-I 
average Score:  With a total of 40 patients (20 on placebo and 20 on sulforaph ane) 
entering this two-treatment pa rallel-design study, the probabil ity is [ADDRESS_227631] deviation of the a verage OACIS-I score is 
4.9. OACIS-I response rate on aberrant behaviors: With a total of 44 patients (22 on placebo and 22 on sulforaphane) ente ring this two-treatment par allel-design study, there 
will be an 88% chance of detecti ng a significant difference at a two sided 0.05 
significance level.  This assumes that the response rate at 15 weeks of placebo is 9% and 
the response rate of sulforapha ne is 54% on aberrant behavior subscale of OACIS-I. 
OACIS-I response rate on social communication:  With a total of 44 patients (22 on 
placebo and 22 on sulforaphane) ente ring this two-treatment par allel-design study,  there 
will be 82% chance of de tecting a significan t difference at a t wo sided 0.05 significance 
level.  This assumes that the r esponse rate of placebo is 7% an d the response rate at 15 
weeks of sulforaphane is 46% on t he social communication subscale of OACIS-I. 
Change in total ABC score from baseline:  With a total of 44 patients (22 on placebo 
and 22 on sulforaphane) entering thi s two-treatment parallel-design study, the probability 
is [ADDRESS_227632] deviation of the c hange in ABC score is 22.1. Change in total SRS score from 
baseline:  With a total of 48 patients (22 on placebo and 22 on sulforaph ane) entering this 
two-treatment parallel-desi gn study, the probability is [ADDRESS_227633] deviat ion of the change in SRS 
score is 22.0. Thus our proposed s ample size of 50 participants, randomized 1:[ADDRESS_227634] 80% power to 
detect one or more toxicities e xpected to occur in at least 5.3 % of sulforaphane-treated 
participants.  The study is not  powered to compare rates of saf ety outcome between 
sulforaphane and placebo treatment groups for a relevant non-inferiority threshold.   
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 26 of 50    
Study identifiers:  We will make all efforts to preserve the privacy of the study 
participants. All data collect ed in the study will be identified by a random code and 
participant initials. We will us e the following format to label  the study participants: SF-
15-001, SF-15-002 along with particip ant initials (eg. JD). No personally identifying 
information, such as complete name, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_191427], date of birth etc. 
will be used on study documents.   Good Clinical Practices compliance  will be maintained at all times during the study. All 
study staff will be trained in maintaining the study documentat ion according to the GCP 
guidelines. In addition, any electr onic database solution we will use will be GCP 
guidelines compliant. University of  [LOCATION_005] Medical Schoo l has contracted the 
RedCap clinical trials software  database solution. REDCap (Rese arch Electronic Data 
Capture) is a secure web-based application built around HIPAA guidelines to support data capture for research studi es. It allows users to build and manage online surveys and 
databases or a combination of  both quickly. REDCap features automated export 
procedures for seamless data downloads to Excel, PDF, and commo n statistical packages 
(SPSS, SAS, Stata, R). Also inc luded are a built-in project cal endar, a scheduling 
module, ad hoc reporting tools, and advanced features, such as branching logic, file 
uploading, and calculated fields. T he REDCap Software sits on a dedicated server behind 
a firewall to eliminate all none ssential access credentials. Th e data itself is isolated on a 
separate server that sits behind an additional firewall layer f or added security. Interaction 
between REDCap and the clien t is encrypted via SSL. 
 In addition we will have an independ ent clinical trials monitor  conduct regular visits to 
monitor the study for GCP complia nce. This study monitor will h ave authority to stop a 
research study in progress, rem ove individuals from study, and take any steps to protect 
the safety and well-being of subjects until the IRB can assess.  Please refer to the 
document titled “H00007832_ Resear ch Monitor v2 111815” for fur ther details about the 
roles and responsibilities of the Research Monitor.   In addition to the GCP visits, an i ndependent data safety monitoring board (DSMB) of [ADDRESS_227635] of one pediatrician ( from the department of Pediat rics at UMass Medical 
School), one child psychiatrist ( from the department of Psychia try at UMass Medical 
School) and one biostatistician ( from the department of Quantit ative Sciences at UMass 
Medical School). This DSMB will meet twice a year and review all safety information 
collected in the past 6 months (se e “13: Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the 
Safety of Subjects” below).   Confidentiality : Strict confidentiality will be m aintained at all times. As me ntioned 
above, all subjects and clinical information associated with ea ch subject will be assigned 
an identification number and will  only be referred to by [INVESTIGATOR_24565] n umber and subject initials. 
This number will be t
he only identifying information on test sc ore sheets, data entry 
forms, and in the data files. Some data will require minimum protected health information (i.e. date of birth) recorded on the assessment sheets in order to be properly 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_227636] information (mailing address, phone numbers, email address etc.) demographics (race, ethnicity, parental educat ional background) but this inf ormation will be kept 
separate from the other study f iles and documents. Documents co ntaining this identifying 
information will be kept in a locked cabinet in a secure study location. Only study staff 
directly involved in interaction with the study participants and the study Principal 
Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_191428].  The Principal Investigator, 
or designee, will maintain a personal participant identificatio n list (participant numbers 
with the corresponding names) to e nable records to be identifie d. Other study staff (such 
as those working with biomarkers) whose role will not involve i nteracting with study 
participants will not have access to this identifiable informat ion. Representatives of 
[LOCATION_003]MRMC who may be entrusted w ith the responsibility of conduct ing site visits may 
be able to get access to the study records for review.    In terms of subject privacy prot ection, the researchers are awa re of the implementation of 
the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)  and its impact on 
clinical research and electronic  data collection activities.  The database developed under 
this protocol will conform to national standards and procedures  for the electronic storage 
and transmission of information to insure privacy and security of health information.  This includes conformance to r ules for transactions and code se ts, the standards for 
privacy of individually identif iable health information and sec urity standards. 
 Any blood samples sent to the la boratories at Johns Hopkins for  analysis of heat shock 
proteins and mitochondrial study and measures of oxidative stre ss will not contain any 
direct identifiers and samples will be labeled with the subject ’s unique ID. Samples may 
be stored for future use with explicit consent of the subject a nd parents or guardians. 
Without such consent, samples will be destroyed following the s tudy.  
 Data capture, verification, and disposition : Data will be primarily captured on paper 
records. Majority of the study instruments (such as Aberrant Behavior Checklist, Social Responsiveness Scale, Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule, V ineland, Leiter scale) 
are provided as paper booklets and they will be used as the pri mary data capture devices. 
Additional information, such as  physical examination findings, medical history records 
etc. will also be captured in pa per records. After the study is complete, we will keep the 
study records for future regulat ory purposes for a period of 7 years, at which time all 
study records will be destroyed. However the documents containi ng identifiable 
information will not be stored after the study ends; they will be destroyed after study is 
completed.   
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 28 of 50   In addition, we will use a secure computer database to transfer  the paper data records to 
an electronic format. Universit y of [LOCATION_005] Medical Schoo l has contracted the 
RedCap clinical trials software  database solution. REDCap (Rese arch Electronic Data 
Capture) is a secure web-based application built around HIPAA guidelines to support 
data capture for research studi es. It allows users to build and manage online surveys and 
databases or a combination of  both quickly. REDCap features automated export 
procedures for seamless data downloads to Excel, PDF, and commo n statistical packages 
(SPSS, SAS, Stata, R). Also inc luded are a built-in project cal endar, a scheduling 
module, ad hoc reporting tools, and advanced features, such as branching logic, file 
uploading, and calculated fields. T he REDCap Software sits on a dedicated server behind 
a firewall to eliminate all none ssential access credentials. Th e data itself is isolated on a 
separate server that sits behind an additional firewall layer f or added security. Interaction 
between REDCap and the client is e ncrypted via SSL. To ensure a ccuracy of transfer of 
data from paper to electronic format and to minimize data entry  errors, all data that will 
entered to RedCap will be double entered by [CONTACT_191487]. After 
the study is complete and all da ta has been collected and entered into the database, the 
database will be locked out  from any further editing.  
 Storage of laboratory samples:  The following storage spec ifications will be met: 
a. For safety evaluations: The blood tubes/vacutainers will be lab eled with study 
participant’s unique ID number  and shipped right away to the UMass Clinical 
Research Center’s lab for analysis.  
b. For biomarker evaluations: The vacutainer will be labeled with the ID number, and the blood processed within 2 hou rs of collection for isolation of monocytes. 
The monocytes so isolated will be labeled with the unique study  ID number and 
frozen in an appropriate culture  media at -80C for a period not  exceeding 3 
months in the -80 freezer at UMa ss Memorial’s Clinical Research  Center. These 
samples will then be shipped t o Johns Hopkins University (Lewis  B. and Dorothy 
Cullman Cancer Chemoprotection Center, and Department of Pharma cology and 
Molecular Sciences, The Johns H opkins University School of Medi cine, 
Baltimore, MD [ZIP_CODE]) for analysis of biomarkers (details below) . The tube 
containing urine will be labele d with the ID number and stored at -80C until 
shipment.  
 
Shippi[INVESTIGATOR_191429] d laboratories performing evaluations:  
a. For safety evaluations: The samples will be tested at Universit y of [LOCATION_005] 
Memorial Medical Center Clinical  Trials Unit Clinical Research Laboratory 
(located at Clinical Trials Unit , UMass Memorial Ambulatory Car e Center, [ADDRESS_227637] N, Worcester, MA [ZIP_CODE]). 
b. For biomarker evaluation: Thes e evaluations will be conducted a t Lewis B. and 
Dorothy Cullman Cancer Chemoprotection Center, and Department o f 
Pharmacology and Molecular Science s, The Johns Hopkins Universi ty School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD [ZIP_CODE]. 
c. Transportation of samples: The  blood and urine samples for biom arker evaluation 
will be transported frozen. To ensur e that proper temperature is maintained during 
transport they will be shipped in special Styrofoam containers in dry ice. The 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 29 of 50   person arranging specimen packing and shipment will be trained in shippi[INVESTIGATOR_191430].  
 
13) Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects * 
 
Risk management and emergency response:  Risks to subjects will be minimized by 
[CONTACT_191488]-up and considerati on of all reported symptoms and concerns of parents, 
guardians and caregivers. Regular examinations and laboratory t esting of blood counts 
and serum chemistries, including liver function tests, renal function tests, and thyroid 
function tests will be performed at the screening visit, [ADDRESS_227638]. 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_191431] 24/7 for any conc erns of adverse events 
during the study. Risks of phlebotomy will be reduced by [CONTACT_191489], use of 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_191432]. Protection of subj ects will include confidential t reatment of all health related 
information, and all research data w ill be coded, the reference  codes to be maintained 
under lock and key by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_1238] s tudy coordinator at all times . 
 
If lab signs of toxicity are  found (AST/ALT > 2x upper limit of  normal; serum creatinine 
> 1.2 mg/dl; TSH outside normal lim its), the patient will disco ntinue study medication 
for 2 weeks before resuming the  study medication, once lab valu es return to within 
study’s acceptable limits. At th e end of [ADDRESS_227639] udy’s acceptable limits (AST/A LT > 2x upper limit of 
normal; serum creatinine > 1.2 m g/dl; TSH outside normal limits ), subjects will 
discontinue permanently the study medication (though they will still continue to be 
followed-up in the study). Lab tes ts are required at screening,  7-week, 15-week, 22 week, 
30 week and closeout visits:  Hematology and complete metabolic  profile (including 
liver, kidney, thyroid function te sts); urinalysis for protein and hemoglobin. Possible 
clinical side effects of sulfo raphane will be monitored, including: GI disturbances 
(flatulence, soft stool, and lar ge bowel movement), and frequen t urination63. Staff 
members will be available 24/7 for  emergencies. Maximum amount of blood drawn at 
any stage during this study will not exceed 2 ml/kg body weight ; also we will not exceed 
the minimal risk requirement s of 3ml/kg in a n [ADDRESS_227640] (DSMB) will be 
notified. The child will be eva luated by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Zimmerman or his d esignee, pediatrician or 
family doctor, and treated and f ollowed up appropriately for th e duration of the study. We 
will ask the parents to return with the child for repeat safety  lab studies and to return 
unused study drug.  In the event of significant sh ifts in behavior, based on the family’s experience and 
judgment, the child will be e xamined by [CONTACT_5989](s) or the child’s pediatrician, 
the study drug will be temporarily discontinued for 2 weeks and DSMB notified. If the behavior(s) subside, the medication will be resumed on the prev ious schedule. Since 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_227641] to the medications 
they are taking, we will rely primarily on the caregivers’ expe rience in assessing whether 
the behavior(s) in question are  out of the norm for their child . However, we will be 
cautious in evaluating the chil d for possible medical reasons f or the change in behavior 
(e.g., gastrointestinal discomfort , disordered sleep). If adver se behaviors do not subside 
after [ADDRESS_227642] udy physicians and the parents agre e. Otherwise, medication 
will not be restarted and we will ask that the family return th e remaining study drug 
supply.    
 We will constitute study drug pause and study drug stop rules b ased on objectively 
measurable criteria. These  criteria appear below: 
 Subject Drug Pause Criteria: Subjects will be asked to stop taking study medication for 
2 weeks if:  
1. At 7 week visit, subjects reported any serious side effects and  subsequent laboratory 
tests are outside of study’s acceptable limits - liver function  tests (AST/ALT > 2x 
upper limit of normal); renal f unction tests (serum creatinine > 1.2 mg/dl); thyroid 
function tests (TSH outside normal limits). 
2. At 15 week visit, subjects reporte d any serious side effects an d subsequent laboratory 
tests are outside of study’s acceptable limits - liver function  tests (AST/ALT > 2x 
upper limit of normal); renal f unction tests (serum creatinine > 1.2 mg/dl); thyroid 
function tests (TSH outside normal limits). 
3. At any time during the study, subj ects reported any serious sid e effects and 
subsequent laboratory tests are outside of study’s acceptable l imits - liver function 
tests (AST/ALT > 2x upper limit  of normal); renal function test s (serum creatinine > 
1.2 mg/dl); thyroid function tests  (TSH outside normal limits).  
4. There is a potential interac tion of study medication with anoth er medication a subject 
is taking. We will ask the subject to temporarily stop taking s tudy medication if the 
other drug is a short term medi cation (e.g., a course of antibi otics, or prednisone).  
5. Intercurrent illness (e.g., infection, asthma, accident or seri ous injury), requiring 
medical attention (e.g., emergency r oom visit or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_191433]). All such 
incidents will be reviewed wit h study physicians and the DSMB as they arise, and we 
will consult with the child’s physician regarding the advisabil ity of pausing the study 
drug and continuing follow up of the child’s illness. 
6. In the event of significant sh ifts in behavior, based on the family’s experience and 
judgment, the child will be e xamined by [CONTACT_5989](s) or the child’s 
pediatrician, the study drug will be temporarily discontinued f or 2 weeks and DSMB 
notified. If the behavior(s) subside, the medication will be re sumed on the previous 
schedule. Since children with ASD  often have cyclic behavior ch anges without 
respect to 
the medications they are taking, we will rely primar ily on the caregivers’ 
experience in assessing whether the behavior(s) in question are out of the norm for 
their child. However, we will be  cautious in eval uating the chi ld for possible medical 
reasons for the change in beha vior (e.g., gastrointestinal discomfort, disordered 
sleep). If adverse behaviors  do not subside after 2 weeks and n o medical cause for the 
behaviors is found, the study medi cation may be restarted if th e DSMB, study 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_227643] Drug Stop Criteria: At the end of 2 weeks, we will do lab tests again. At that 
time, subjects will discontinue t he study medication permanentl y if: 
1. Subsequent laboratory tests re peated after 2 weeks are outside of study’s acceptable 
limits - liver function tests ( AST/ALT > 2x upper limit of normal); renal function 
(serum creatinine > 1.2 mg/dl) ; thyroid function (TSH outside n ormal limits). 
2. At any point of the study, extreme exacerbation of behavioral s ymptoms is noted, as 
above and these behaviors do not sub side after 2 weeks of study  drug stoppage and no 
medical cause for the change in behavior is apparent (e.g., gas trointestinal discomfort, 
disordered sleep). 
3. If any child in the study has a seizure while taking the medication, the study drug will be discontinued and study physicia ns and Data Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) 
will be notified. The child will be  evaluated by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Zimmerman or his designee, 
pediatrician or family docto r, and treated and followed up appr opriately for the 
duration of the study. We will ask the parents to return with t he child for repeat safety 
lab studies and to return unused study drug. 
4. At any time, if there is an int eraction of study medication with another long term 
medication a subject is taking: In a case in which the other dr ug is the one which a 
subject is likely to require for a long period of time, subject s will discontinue study 
medication permanently if there is  a possibility of adverse eff ects as a result of an 
interaction with tha t drug (for example, appearance of extrapyramidal signs in a 
subject taking r isperidone).  
 Data Safety Monitoring Board:  An independent data safet y management board of [ADDRESS_227644] of one pediatrician ( from the department of Pediat rics at UMass Medical 
School), one child psychiatrist ( from the department of Psychia try at UMass Medical 
School) and one bio-statistician (from the department of Quantitative Sciences at UMass Medical School). This DSMB will meet twice a year and review all safety information 
collected in the past 6 months.  
 
14) Withdrawal of Subjects* 
 
See study drug pause and stop criteria above.  
15) Risks to Subjects* 
 Sulforaphane Safety:  
Cruciferous vegetables, includi ng broccoli sprout s, are generally regarded as safe and are 
regular dietary components in ma ny regions of the world. Previo us estimates of the daily 
dietary intake of cruciferous ve getables vary regionally, avera ging 40 g/day in 
Singapore
64, 11 g/day in the [LOCATION_002]65, 16 g/day in Canada66, 30 g/day in the [LOCATION_006]67, 
and 112 g/day in Japan68. There have been numerous adult human and animal studies 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 32 of 50   assessing the safety of sulforaphane. These studies are summari zed in the safety and 
efficacy section of the Investigator Brochure. 
 Singh et al recently conducted a double blind, placebo controll ed, randomized, Phase II 
study of sulforaphane in 40 male a dolescents and adults with mo derate to severe autism
24. 
The participants were dosed according to body weight: 50 µmol ( 1 capsule) of 
sulforaphane for <100 lb, 100 µmo l (2 capsules) for 101-199 lb, and 150 µmol (3 
capsules) for >[ADDRESS_227645] edly, the sulforaphane 
group gained significantly more weight over the18-week period, compared to placebo. 
Thirty-six adverse events were noted during the trial. Vomiting , increased aggressions, 
abdominal pain, increased flatule nce, irritabil ity, constipatio n, diarrhea, fever, headache 
and exacerbation of seasonal allergies were  reported in 12-19 percent of part icipants on 
sulforaphane; their incidence was the same in the placebo group s (P > 0.10).  Two 
participants had single unpr ovoked seizures: one after 3 weeks on sulforaphane, with an 
undisclosed history of recent seiz ures; the other [ADDRESS_227646] (more than 1 year) hist ory of well-controlled seizur es on treatment with anti-
epi[INVESTIGATOR_006]. Alt hough patients with ASD are predisposed to seizures69,70, the 
possibility of seizures as a po ssible adverse effect of sulfora phane in ASD cannot be 
ruled out.  
 
Although there have not been any studies designed explicitly to  test the safety of 
sulforaphane in children, the ove rall weight of evidence as per  our previous clinical trial 
of sulforaphane in adolescents w ith autism and as demonstrated by [CONTACT_191490] s ummarized in the Investigator B rochure strongly suggests 
that sulforaphane treatment is likely to be safe and without an y serious adverse effects. 
Although we do not anticipate that children will show signs of toxicity to sulforaphane, it 
is for this reason that we have designed this clin ical trial to carefully evaluate children for 
possible toxicity over 30 weeks of treatment.  Foreseeable risks:  No severe adverse events hav e been observed in any trial with 
sulforaphane. In the case of ASD , however, we will be vigilant for any possible 
behavioral regression that coul d signify an unwanted interactio n with concurrent 
medications or cause undue distre ss for the participant or guardian. Given the delicate 
balance between real events of t his sort and those that could b e due to a “reverse placebo 
effect” in the case of parent al anxiety about new treatment, home reports of exacerbation 
will be confirmed by [CONTACT_151919] w. If parental support for c ontinuation is lacking and/or 
clinical review indicates a su spected undesired effect, censors hip is the ethical policy 
even if definite proof of mech anism is lacking or it is possibl e that a worsened behavioral 
outcome would be transient.  A previous randomized, double-blinded phase I study of repeated  administration (3 doses 
per day for 8 days) of sulforapha ne-containing Broccoli Sprout Extract in healthy 
volunteers found no problems with safety and tolerance
71. Another cross-over clinical 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 33 of 50   trial designed to look into bioava ilability of sulforaphane rep orted no serious adverse 
effects58. Another animal study has shown t hat sulforaphane raised liver  enzymes but 
only on very high dose of >500 µmol/day, which is much higher t han our proposed 
dose72. We will be vigilant in treatin g subjects with autism, for beh avioral regression that 
could signify an interaction wit h concurrent medications or oth er adverse effect. 
 
In our recently completed, randomized, double blind, placebo co ntrolled clinical trial of 
sulforaphane on 40 male adolescents and adults with autism, the  study drug was 
remarkably well tolerated and ver y few adverse effects were not ed24. Vomiting, increased 
aggressions, abdominal pain, incr eased flatulence, irritability , constipation, diarrhea, 
fever, headache and exacerbation of  seasonal allergies were rep orted in 12-19 percent of 
participants on sulforaphane; their incidence was the same in t he placebo group (P > 
0.10).  Two participants in our s tudy had single unprovoked sei zures: one after 3 weeks 
on sulforaphane, with an undisclo sed history of recent seizures ; the other [ADDRESS_227647]  (more than 1 year) history o f well-controlled seizures 
with anti-epi[INVESTIGATOR_006]. A lthough patients with autism are pr edisposed to seizures, we 
cannot rule out the possibility of seizures as a possible adverse effect of sulforaphane in ASD. In consideration of this, w e will not enroll any participa nt who has an active history 
of seizure within 1 year of participation.   Based on previously published dat a and data from our clinical t rial, possible clinical side 
effects of sulforaphane incl ude: seizures, insomnia, vomiting, abdominal pain, flatulence, 
constipation, diarrhea, large bow el movement, soft stools, weig ht gain, exacerbation of 
seasonal allergies a nd increased urination
63. Caregivers will be advised to notify study 
staff should these side effects  be experienced.  Staff members will be available 24/[ADDRESS_227648] is taking and will take precautions to monitor and/or discontinue the study medica tion if there is any sign of 
interaction, such as th e appearance of exatrapyramidal signs in  a subject taking 
risperidone. Additionally, we are not aware of any risks associ ated with stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_191434].   Physical risks to subjects from  phlebotomies include pain and discomfort, and bruising. 
Subjects and particularly child ren and mentally impaired subjec ts may experience pain 
and anxiety and become upset wit h phlebotomy.  Physical risks w ill be minimized by 
[CONTACT_191491]. 
Subjects will be asked to pres ent for phlebotomy in an adequate ly hydrated state, so that 
it will be easier to identify and successfully puncture veins.  All subjects will be offered the use of a local anesthetic ( EMLA cream) prior to the blood d raw, in order to minimize 
discomfort.  Emotional risks will be minimized by [CONTACT_191492], and 
ensuring that they have traini ng in appropriate  behavioral tech niques. Maximum amount 
of blood drawn at any stage will not exceed 2 ml/kg body weight ; also we will not exceed 
the minimal risk requirement s of 3ml/kg in a n 8 week period. 
 
There is a small risk to priv acy in answering questions.  All t he information will be kept 
strictly confidential and eve ry known effort will be utilized to maintain confidentiality. 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_227649] protected 
digital media.  
There is a small risk of emotiona l discomfort, distress and/or fatigue from completing the 
surveys and completing the assessment tasks. We will make all e fforts to ensure that 
participants do not have to wait an inordinate amount of time w hile at the study site for 
completing the requisite surveys and assessments.  
 There is also a small risk of transient local reactions to EMLA  cream such as paleness, 
erythema and edema.   Parents and/or guardians will be responsible for ensuring the t imely and complete 
adherence to daily medication dosage. They will be asked to kee p a log of the time of day 
and the number of capsules take n. They also will monitor for an d report any adverse 
events, undesirable psycho-behavi oral reactions throughout the duration of the study or 
until censorship, should that occur. Parents/guardians will be trained to ensure that the 
study medication is kept in the o riginal, properly labeled, chi ld-proof containers in a 
place that is secure from access by [CONTACT_191493], school mates, oth er children, mentally 
impaired adults, or pets.  Any spi[INVESTIGATOR_191435] . Parents/guardians will 
be reminded by [CONTACT_1381]-leas t 24 hours beforehand of their appointments. Those who 
miss an appointment will be cont acted by [CONTACT_191494].  
 
16) Potential Benefits to Subjects* 
 
Potential benefits of sulforapha ne may include demonstrable fun ctional improvements in 
social responsiveness in subjec ts with autism. Treatment with s ulforaphane may also 
increase mitochondrial function a nd decrease oxida tive stress, both of which have been 
subjects of research in autism.  
 
Current treatment standards for children with ASD include vario us therapy programs, 
including ongoing speech and la nguage, occupational, physical a nd behavioral therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. 
Many are also in special school pr ograms with Individual Educational Plans. We 
anticipate that some of the children will be tak ing prescriptio ns of antipsychotic, 
antidepressant, antianxiety or stimulant medications. Approxima tely 10% will have a 
history of epi[INVESTIGATOR_191436].  We will  carefully evaluate each 
medication a subject is taking f or potential interactions with sulforaphane. Subjects will 
continue to participate in the ir usual therapy programs.   
 Novelty: This trial of sulforaphane in ch ildren with autism provides a n ovel approach 
with a strong theoretical basis in clinical observations of the  effects of fever in autism. 
Preliminary evidence from in vitro models supports the hypothesi zed cellular effects of 
sulforaphane on heat shock protei ns Nrf2, mitochondrial functio ns, and the mTOR 
pathway.  
 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 35 of 50   There are increasing reports of successful “ off target” therapi [INVESTIGATOR_191437] 73,74. The capacity of the general cell ular stress response pathways  to 
reestablish metabolic homeostasis allows treatment that is independent of -- and without 
knowledge of -- the primary genetic  lesion. This has particular relevance for the treatment 
of ASD since it is characteri zed by [CONTACT_191495] i nteractive metabolic 
pathways.   
 Relevance to autism: Medical treatments that affect c ore features of ASD at the cell ular 
level are needed. The approach to treatment presented here, bas ed on clinical 
observations of improvements in patients with ASD during fever,  and the known 
stimulation of the cellular stress proteome by [CONTACT_191496] , represents a relevant 
and rational approach to ther apy. The findings of this study may provide the basis for 
further clinical trials and labor atory investigation at the cel lular level in autism.  
 
17) Vulnerable Populations* 
Since our study involves children, we have reviewed the “CHECKL IST: Criteria for 
Research Involving Children”. 
18) Multi-Site Research* 
This is not a multi-site study in the sense that all patient en rollment will be conducted at 
UMass. We are however collaborating with the Cullman Chemoprote ction Laboratory at 
Johns Hopkins University and will perform the biomarker assessments for our study. The 
role of Johns Hopkins is limited to biomarker assessment only and storage of any leftover 
samples. Johns Hopkins will obtain its own IRB approval in orde r to conduct the 
biomarker analysis. We will hold regular phone conferences with  Johns Hopkins 
investigators (once in 3 months) and again at any time if there  are any changes to the 
biomarkers portion of the study pl an and to discuss interim study results (if any 
available). 
19) Community-Based Participatory Research* 
NA 
20) Sharing of Results with Subjects*  
Since several of the safety lab t est results (such as complete blood counts/liver/thyroid/ 
renal function tests) could poten tially be clinic ally relevant to study participants or their 
primary care providers, upon reque st (and especially if the tes t results are 
abnormal/outside of reference range) we will provide a copy of these test results to study 
participants’ hea lth care providers. 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 36 of 50    
21) Setting 
 
The study will be conducted at UMass Medical School and UMass M emorial Medical 
Center. The Clinical Research C enter and Child and Adolescent N euroDevelopment 
Initiative (CANDI) at Shriver C enter will be the main locations  for conducting of study 
visits and procedures.  Study visits may occasionally a lso be conducted in Benedict 
building Pediatric clinic offices  if so preferred and convenien t to the subjects. Clinical 
offices and laboratories are lo cated in close proximity where A DOS, screening, 
examinations and phlebotomies will take place in this clinical trial. We will provide maps 
and arrange to meet families on th e first visit to show them ar ound the facility. There are 
quiet rooms available for rest ing and calming participants. The  clinical laboratory that 
will run the routine lab studies is located in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_191438]. Two laboratories are availa ble to us for centrifuging spec imens and processing 
PBMCs from blood, and storing blood and urine specimens at -20° C and -80°C until 
shipment on dry ice to Johns Hopkins (Cullman Chemoprotection L ab).  
 UMass Research Pharmacy with expe rtise in clinical that will st ore and dispense 
sulforaphane and placebos, random ize participants and dispense the materials with proper 
labeling. Adequate office, clinic and lab spaces are available for this study through the 
department of pediatrics, along w ith various services and space s in the UMMC. Adequate 
computer facilities, messagi ng and copying services are readily  available.  
 The Cullman Chemoprotection Labor atory at Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD is a well-established and fully equipped investig ational pharmacology 
laboratory. It is well staffed and equipped for all of the prop osed research laboratory 
studies we have proposed, both in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_191439]. This 
laboratory will produce the broccoli seed powder, the source of  sulforaphane, under 
approved protocols and certificat ion of purity prior to transfe r to UMass for this study. In 
other parts of the lab, clinical  samples will be received, in c lose contact [CONTACT_191497], storage and shipment of samples.  
 
22) Resources Available 
The following is the study organization chart describing variou s staff involved with study 
procedures and their roles.  
a. Study Organization Chart 
Site 1: University of [LOCATION_005] M edical School, Worcester, MA  
Department: Pediatrics (Division of Pediatric Neurology) 
1. Principal Investigator 
2. PostDoc Associate 
3. Primary Care Physician 
4. Clinical Research Assistant (CRA) 
 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 37 of 50   Department:  Child and Adolescent NeuroDev elopment Initiative (CANDI) 
1. Psychologist 
 
Department:  Quantitative He alth Sciences 
1. Biostatistician 
 
 Site 2: Johns Hopkins Univers ity School of Medicine 
Department: Pharmacology (Lewis B. and Dorothy Cullman Cancer 
Chemoprotection Center) 1. Johns Hopkins Principal Investigator 
2. Johns Hopkins Co-investigator 
3. Johns Hopkins Co-investigator 
 
Quality Associates Inc.  
1. External Good Clinical P ractices (GCP) monitor 
 
b. Study Personnel Description: 
1. Andrew Zimmerman, MD.: [CONTACT_191515] is the Principal Investiga tor and a 
Professor of Pediatrics and Neurology at UMass Me dical School. He is pediatric 
neurologist who has focused his  research for over [ADDRESS_227650] and will be 
responsible for its o verall administratio n and direction. He wi ll supervise 
recruitment, enrollmen t, study implementat ion, monitoring of side effects, data 
management and ensure that the r esearch is conducted in line wi th the ethical 
provisions of the University of M assachusetts Medical School (A ims 1-3). He will 
oversee and assure accurate data  collection and analysis. He wi ll present data at a 
national meeting, and p repare manuscripts f or publication in peer-reviewed 
journals.  
2. PostDoc Associate/Research Coordi nator:. He will a ssist the PI [INVESTIGATOR_191440] t he study. He is experienced in regulatory affairs 
and ethical considerations and will have a major role in obtaining IRB approval for this study and regular reporting to the IRB. He will oversee the day to day operation of the study, includi ng recruitment, scree ning procedures, sche duling, coordinating 
physical examinations, outcome measures and administration of m edication. He 
will coordinate efforts of the Primary Care Physician (TBN) for  the recruiting, 
screening, physical examination and phlebotomies  of subjects at each study visit. 
He will work with our collaborat ors at Johns Hopkins to supply the Research 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_227651] (DSMB). He 
will also be a liaison to Dr. M aranda, Biostatistician, for dat a management and 
analysis. 
 
3. Primary Care MD: The primary ca re MD will assist the PI [INVESTIGATOR_191441], including revi ew of medical histories 
during recruitment a nd screening, examinati ons of participants at each visit, and 
reporting of all pote ntial side effects of  treatment. He or she  will review 
participants’ pre- and postnatal histories and development, record and rate effects of 
fever on behavior, current and past medications and allergies; record clinical data; 
perform phlebotomies and respond t o parents’ calls or emails wi th respect to 
medical questions or concerns related to the study. This indivi dual will 
communicate with participants’ pe diatricians rega rding questions about and 
concerns during the study, e.g., intercurren t illnesses, and will report any concerns 
to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_43323]. 
 
4. Psychologist: A psychologist worki ng at the Center for Autism a nd 
Neurodevelopmental Disorders (CANDO) clinic will assist with pe rforming ADOS, 
Vineland and Leiter-3 assessments.   
5. Biostatistician: A biostatistician from Quantitative Health Sci ences, will be the 
primary statisticia n on the team.  This person will have access  to specialized 
statistical software , readily available t o her for the conduct of this project’s 
statistical analyses. These in clude SAS, SPSS, StatsDirect and STATA. For this 
project, he/she will assist in the planni ng for the clinical tr ial design, dat a handling 
and storage, and eva luation of outcomes. 
 
6. Clinical Research Assistant: This  individual will assist in rec ruitment and 
scheduling of appointments for screening, reporting and recordi ng data from 
baseline assessments and outcome m 
easures. He or she will work with other 
members of the team to communicat e effectively with families in  a timely manner, 
in order to assure both  safety and complianc e with the drug reg imen and collection 
of data. The CRA will report any concerns of families to the PI , Research 
Coordinator and Primary Care MD . He or she will communicate wit h our 
collaborators at Johns Hopkins regarding drug shipments and coo rdinate with the 
Research Pharmacy, and arrange shipments of specimens to the la boratory in 
Baltimore.  
7. Johns Hopkins Princip al Investigator and Co-investigator: These  persons will assist 
prepare and supply capsules of broccoli seed powder containing standardized quantities of glucoraphanin and s imilar placebo capsules contai ning 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 39 of 50   microcrystalline cellulose. The y will also determine the glucor aphanin content. 
They will be responsib le for assurance of purity of the medicat ion. 
 
8. Johns Hopkins Co-investigator: This person will make determinat ions of biomarker 
levels of oxidative st ress, antioxidant cap acity, and accumulat ion of reactive oxygen 
species, inflammatory bioma rkers and heat shock proteins. 
 
9. Good Clinical Practice s Monitor: This person will conduct yearl y site visits to 
ensure that the study is being c onducted in comp liance with Good Clinical Practices 
and will conduct yearly site visi ts and audits to ensure GCP co mpliance.  
 
Our plan for ensuring the standardization of p rocedures among staff: We will have 
training sessions for all study staff to ensure internal consis tency and repli cability for 
OACIS scale. We will hold weekly meetings to review study progr ess, possible 
concerns of families and staff, review of study requirements, a nd compliance with the 
study plan. We will exchange de- identified data on a regular ba sis using encrypted 
email with the group at Johns Hop kins. Regular phone contacts and teleconferencing 
will take place, at least biweekly.  
 All Johns Hopkins investigators are under the ju risdiction of JHU.  
 
23) Prior Approvals 
In addition to obtaining the UMass IRB approval, we will also o btain approval from 
[LOCATION_003]MRMC Human Research Protec tion Office.  An Investigational N ew Drug (IND) 
approval from the Food and Drug Administration has been obtained. UMass Biosafety Committee has provided approval to perform the study. An IRB approval will also be 
obtained from Johns Hopkins University for the purposes of perf orming biomarker 
analysis at Johns Hopkins.  
 
24) Recruitment Methods 
 
Participants will be enrolled f rom [LOCATION_005] and nearby [CONTACT_191498]. The 
University of [LOCATION_005] (UMas s) Memorial Medical Center, Wo rcester is centrally 
located and has an excellent infra structure for clinical trials  as well as expertise in ASD 
with the Center for Autism and Neu rodevelopmental Disorders (CA NDO) Clinic. In our 
previous trial (at the  Lurie Center, Massac husetts General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_191442], MA), we were readily a ble to enroll [ADDRESS_227652] meets the inte nt of the program as a clinical  trial in ASD that is novel 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 40 of 50   and holds promise for a nontoxic approach to therapy of known b iochemical and 
metabolic abnormalities in ASD.   
 
Patients will also be recruited fro m the CANDO clinic at UMass Memorial Medical 
Center, developmental pediatri cs, pediatric neurology, child ps ychiatry, genetics and 
general pediatrics clinics at UMa ss Memorial Medical Center, as  well as related clinics in 
the area. Patients suitable f or the study will be identified by  [CONTACT_191499] (not 
study staff members). We will obt ain permission from the treati ng physician to contact 
[CONTACT_156999]. The treating physician will be invited to notif y their patients of this 
research study by [CONTACT_191500]. Any 
recruitment letters will include a signed letter from their tre ating physician. The majority 
of patients at the CANDO Clinic have idiopathic ASD, whereas others have known genetic, pre- and postnatal cause s of ASD. There are also sizab le patient populations with 
ASD in the Reliant Health System and private practices nearby, as well as in community 
schools and treatment centers.  Community based recruitment will also be done, and may include advertisements, 
electronic newsletters, and flyer s to primary and subspecialty pediatric clinics within the 
participating institutions, lo cal autism societies and support groups. Appropriate listservs 
and email outlets may be utilized.  Advantages of UMass include its central location in 
New England and ready access with minimal traffic congestion, as well as a full-service academic medical center and pediatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307].   As noted above, participants wil l be recruited from central Mas sachusetts and New 
England.  UMass Memorial Medical Center is ideally located and suited for this clinical trial of sulforaphane in childre n with ASD. It is centrally loc ated in New England and is a 
full service academic medical center and children’s hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], a s well as a Clinical 
Research Center. A strong presen ce in the field of ASD has deve loped at UMass in recent 
years with the founding of the C ANDO Clinic, expansion of pediatric neurology and 
developmental pediatrics.  Participants will be screened by r eview of verbal histories and  records on request as they 
are made available from their r eferral sources, following paren tal consent. 
 Participants will be compensate d for their participation in the  study. We will provide 
them with a gift card worth $15 for each completed study visit.  We will also provide 
them with parking vouchers when fam ilies park their vehicle in the UMass Medical 
Center parking lot. Children wil l be given a small soft toy to keep.  
 
Flyers describing the nature of s ulforaphane and how it might h elp ASD will be used for 
study advertisement. These advertisements will make it clear th at it is a research study 
and not a “free treatment program” for ASD, in order to remove any coercive or undue 
inducements for study participation. These flyers will be distr ibuted to various autism 
advocacy centers for display purposes, and may also be distribu ted by [CONTACT_191501].  
 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 41 of 50   The recruitment process is similar for both the pi[INVESTIGATOR_191443]. 
 Screening Procedures:  
Prior to coming for the formal screening visit, all subjects wi ll undergo a pre-screen 
assessment to determine if basic eligibility criteria are met a nd the study procedures will 
be explained in detail. Qualified study staff will ask question s related to the above 
described inclusion/exclusion cr iteria. The pre-screen may be c ompleted by [CONTACT_191502].  If a partic ipant is found to be ineligible f or the study, prescreening form 
will be destroyed.   At the screening visit, after the consent has been signed by [CONTACT_3654]/guardians and assent 
signed (if applicable), a compl ete, baseline medical history, p hysical and neurological 
exam will be performed. During that visit, ADOS-G, SRS, OACIS-Severity scale and ABC-W scales will be performed to confirm eligibility and to qu antify disease severity. 
Also, following laboratory blood tests (complete blood count, c omprehensive metabolic 
profile: liver function rests, ren al function tests, thyroid fu nction test (TSH)) will be 
performed.  Maximum amount of bl ood drawn at any stage during this study will not 
exceed 2 ml/kg body weight; we will also not exceed the minimal  risk limitation of 3 
ml/kg in an 8 week period.  
25) Local Number of Subjects 
 
We will enroll [ADDRESS_227653] 50 participants. 
 
 
26) Confidentiality  
 
Strict confidentiality will be m aintained at all times. As ment ioned above, all subjects and 
clinical information associate d with each subject will be assig ned an identification 
number and will only be referred to by [CONTACT_191503]. This number will 
be the only identifying information on test score sheets, data entry forms, and in the data 
files. Some data will require mi nimum protected health information (i.e. date of birth) 
recorded on the assessm ent sheets in order to be properly score d. In this case, we will 
follow HIPAA limited data set guidelines.  Source documents wil l be maintained by [CONTACT_191504] a centralized, double-locked office access ible only by [CONTACT_191505].  Only in itials and study number 
identify any specimens sent to l aboratories outside of UMass. 
 We will collect some identifiable information, such as name, ad dress, date of birth, 
contact [CONTACT_3031] (mailing address, phone numbers, email address etc.) demographics (race, ethnicity, parental educat ional background) but this inf ormation will be kept 
separate from the other study f iles and documents. Documents co ntaining this identifying 
information will be kept in a locked cabinet in a secure study location. Only study staff 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_227654] (participant numbers 
with the corresponding names) to e nable records to be identifie d. Other study staff (such 
as those working with biomarkers) whose role will not involve i nteracting with study 
participants will not have access to this identifiable informat ion. Representatives of 
[LOCATION_003]MRMC who may be entrusted w ith the responsibility of conduct ing site visits may 
be able to get access to the study records for review.   
 In terms of subject privacy prot ection, the researchers are awa re of the implementation of 
the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)  and its impact on 
clinical research and electronic  data collection activities.  The database developed under 
this protocol will conform to national standards and procedures  for the electronic storage 
and transmission of information to insure privacy and security of health information.  This includes conformance to r ules for transactions and code se ts, the standards for 
privacy of individually identif iable health information and sec urity standards. 
 Any blood samples sent to the la boratories at Johns Hopkins for  analysis of heat shock 
proteins and mitochondrial study and measures of oxidative stre ss will not contain any 
direct identifiers and samples will be labeled with the subject ’s unique ID. Samples may 
be stored for future use with explicit consent of the subject a nd parents or guardians. 
Without such consent, samples will be destroyed following the s tudy.  
 Data will be primarily capture d on paper records. Majority of t he study instruments (such 
as Aberrant Behavior Checklist, S ocial Responsiveness Scale, Au tism Diagnostic 
Observation Schedule, Vineland, L eiter scale) are provided as paper booklets and they 
will be used as the primary data capture devices. Additional information, such as physical examination findings, medical history records etc. will also be  captured in paper records. 
After the study is complete, we will keep the study records for  future regulatory purposes 
for a period of 7 years, at whic h time all study records will b e destroyed. However the 
documents containing identifiable information will not be store d after the study ends; 
they will be destroyed after study is completed.   In addition, we will use a secure computer database to transfer  the paper data records to 
an electronic format. Universit y of [LOCATION_005] Medical Schoo l has contracted the 
RedCap clinical trials software  database solution. REDCap (Rese arch Electronic Data 
Capture) is a secure web-based application built around HIPAA guidelines to support data capture for research studi es. It allows users to build and manage online surveys and 
databases or a combination of  both quickly. REDCap features automated export 
procedures for seamless data downloads to Excel, PDF, and commo n statistical packages 
(SPSS, SAS, Stata, R). Also inc luded are a built-in project cal endar, a scheduling 
module, ad hoc reporting tools, and advanced features, such as branching logic, file 
uploading, and calculated fields. T he REDCap Software sits on a dedicated server behind 
a firewall to elim
inate all none ssential access credentials. Th e data itself is isolated on a 
separate server that sits behind an additional firewall layer f or added security. Interaction 
between REDCap and the client is e ncrypted via SSL. To ensure a ccuracy of transfer of 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 43 of 50   data from paper to electronic format and to minimize data entry  errors, all data that will 
entered to RedCap will be double entered by [CONTACT_191487]. After 
the study is complete and all da ta has been collected and entered into the database, the 
database will be locked out  from any further editing.  
 
 
27) Provisions to Protect the Privac y Interests of Subjects (HIPAA)  
 
In terms of subject privacy prot ection, we are aware of the imp lementation of the Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and its im pact on clinical research 
and electronic data collection a ctivities.  The database develo ped under this protocol will 
conform to national standards a nd procedures for the electronic storage and transmission 
of information to insure privacy  and security of health informa tion.  This includes 
conformance to rules for transactions and code sets, the standa rds for privacy of 
individually identifiable hea lth information and security stand ards. 
 We will make all efforts to preserve the privacy of the study participants. All data collected in the study will be i dentified by a random code and participant initials. We will 
use the following format to label the study participants: SF-15 -001, SF-15-002 along with 
participant initials (eg. JD). N o personally identifying inform ation, such as complete 
name, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_191427], date of birth etc. will b e used on study documents.  
 Any blood samples sent to the la boratories at Johns Hopkins for  analysis of heat shock 
proteins and mitochondrial study and measures of oxidative stre ss will not contain any 
direct identifiers and samples will be labeled with the subject ’s unique ID. Samples may 
be stored for future use with explicit cons ent of the subject and parents or guardians. 
Without such consent, samples will be destroyed following the study.  
 28) Compensation for Rese arch-Related Injury 
No funds have been set aside for a ny compensation for research related injury. 
 
29) Economic Burden to Subjects  
Study participants will not have a ny costs associated with participating in the study – 
costs for all study related procedures and lab tests will be bo rne by [CONTACT_17791]. 
Participants will be compensate d for their participation in the  study. We will provide 
them with a gift card worth $15 for each completed study visit.  We will also provide 
them with parking vouchers when fam ilies park their vehicle in the UMass Medical 
Center parking lot. Children wil l be given a small soft toy to keep.  
  
30) Consent Process 
 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 44 of 50   A written consent will be obtaine d. We will follow the “SOP: In formed Consent Process 
for Research (HRP-802)” for c onsenting purposes.The consent wil l be obtained at the 
Clinical Research Center at the UMass Memorial Medical Center. We will allow 
participants/their parents or l egal guardians a sufficient time interval (more than at-least 
24 hours) to make up their mind befo re signing the consent form . After the telephone pre-
screening with parents/guardians, we will mail a copy of the co nsent and assent form as 
well as study information flyers to their address and encourage  them to thoroughly read 
the consent forms and call if  they have questions. All potentia l participants f or this study 
will be provided a consent form  describing this study and suffi cient information for 
subjects and/or their parent or guardian to make an informed de cision about their 
participation in this study. 
At the screening visit, the study investigator(s) will again di scuss with each subject and 
his or her parents or guardian t he nature of the study, its requirements, and its restrictions. 
At that time if they are interes ted in participa ting in the stu dy, a written and witnessed 
informed consent will be obtai ned prior to the performance of any protocol-specific 
procedures. If however they nee d more time to make up their mind, they will be allowed 
to do so and we will reschedule the study visit to a date when they are ready to participate 
in the study and sign the consent form. Whenever possible, cons ent from both parents 
will be obtained.  Since all subjects in this st udy are children, permission will be obtained from their parent 
or legal guardian and will be documented in writing using the approved Consent Form. 
We will try to obtain the assent of  subjects for participation in the research. This assent 
will be done on the approved assent f orm. If some participants are medically incapable of 
giving assent (those who are sev erely autistic and incapable of understanding the nature 
of the study) we may not obtain assent from these children. The  Principal Investigator 
(who is a pediatric neurologist  experienced in evaluating and t reating children with ASD) 
will determine whether a patient  is medically incapable of givi ng assent. In these and all 
cases, consent will be obtained from parents or legal guardians .  
The formal consent, or assent, a s applicable, using the IRB-app roved forms will be 
obtained before that subject is submitted to any study procedure. The form(s) must be signed by [CONTACT_3184]/or paren t/guardian for the child and the investigator-designated 
research professional witnessing t he signatures. Every effort w ill be made to assure the 
safety of the subjects. A qualif ied person, such as a licensed physician on the study staff 
will obtain the consent/assent. A  research coordinator will not  obtain consent/assent from 
the study participants.   
Since majority of instruments (such as the ADOS, Leiter-3) used  in the study are in 
English language and validated in English language, we will onl y enroll English speaking 
participants in the study.  
31) Process to Document Consent in Writing 
We will be following “SOP: Writte n Documentation of Consent (HR P-803).”  
 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 45 of 50   32) Drugs or Devices 
 
Prior to dispensing the study dr ug to the participants, the dru g will be stored in 
temperature controlled conditions ( -20C) at the UMass Memorial Investigational 
Pharmacy. During the study visits, we will store the study drug  in a locked -20 freezer at 
the Clinical Trials Unit (to which only the study staff will ha ve access to) and directly 
dispense the medication to patien ts’ parents (exc ept at the fir st visit where we will wait 
for the safety labs results and then either mail the drug to pa rticipants or ask their parents 
to pi[INVESTIGATOR_191420]). The parents will be instructed to keep the medi cation stored in their freezer 
for the duration of the study.  
 
The firm/entity that will be hire d to ensure GCP compliance wil l also monitor 
compliance with the FDA requirements.  We filed an IND application to the FDA to obtain permission for  conducting this clinical 
trial and the FDA has appr oved the IND (IND number 127062). The  IND is held by [CONTACT_83058] ([CONTACT_191516]) . We will comply with the Sponso r-investigator 
requirements for IND studies (21 CFR 54, 210, 211, 312).  
 
                          
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 46 of 50   BIBLIOGRAPHY 
1. James SJ, Rose S, Melnyk S, e t al. Cellular and mitochondria l glutathione redox 
imbalance in lymphoblastoid cells  derived from children with au tism. FASEB J 
2009;23:2374-83. 
2. Napoli E, Wong S, Hertz-Pi[INVESTIGATOR_191444] I, Giulivi C. Deficits in Bioenergetics and 
Impaired Immune Response in Granu locytes From Children With Aut ism. Pediatrics 
2014 (epub prior to print). 3. Brose RD, Shin G, McGuinness MC , et al. Activation of the st ress proteome as a 
mechanism for small molecule t herapeutics. Hum Mol Genet 2012;2 1:4237-52. 
4. Chen J, Alberts I, Li X. Dys regulation of the IGF-I/PI3K/AKT /mTOR signaling 
pathway in autism spectrum disord ers. Int J Dev Neurosci 2014;35:35-41. 
5. Vargas DL, Nascimbene C, Krishnan C, Zimmerman AW, Pardo CA.  Neuroglial 
activation and neuroinflammation i n the brain of patients with autism. Ann Neurol 
2005;57:67-81. 6. Weissman JR, Kelley RI, Bau man ML, et al. Mitochondrial dise ase in autism 
spectrum disorder patients: a cohort analysis. PLoS One 2008;3: e3815. 
7. Weng SJ, Wiggins JL, Peltier S J, et al. Alterations of resting state functional 
connectivity in the default network in adolescents with autism spectrum disorders. Brain 
Res 2010;1313:202-14. 8. Curran LK, Newschaffer CJ, Lee LC, Crawford SO, Johnston MV,  Zimmerman 
AW. Behaviors associated with fev er in children with autism spectrum disorders. 
Pediatrics 2007;120:e1386-92. 
9. Mehler MF, Purpura DP. Autism, fever, epi[INVESTIGATOR_191445]. 
Brain Res Rev 2009;59:388-92. 
10. Horowitz M, Robinson SD. Heat  shock proteins and the heat s hock response 
during hyperthermia and its m odulation by [CONTACT_191506]. Prog Brain 
Res 2007;162:433-46. 11. Wiggins JL, Peltier SJ, Ashi noff S, et al. Using a self-org anizing map algorithm 
to detect age-related changes in functional c onnectivity during  rest in autism spectrum 
disorders. Brain Res 2011;1380:187-97. 12. Schachtele SJ, Hu S, Lokensg ard JR. Modulation of experimen tal herpes 
encephalitis-associated neuroto xicity through sulforaphane treatment. PLoS One 
2012;7:e36216. 13. Keefer JR, Schneidereith TA , Mays A, Purvis SH, Dover GJ, S mith KD. Role of 
cyclic nucleotides in fetal hem oglobin induction in cultured CD 34+ cells. Exp Hematol 
2006;34:1151-61. 14. Kensler TW, Egner PA, Agyeman A S, et al. Keap1-nrf2 signali ng: a target for 
cancer prevention by [CONTACT_191460]. Top Curr Chem 2013;329:163-7 7. 
15. Brandenburg LO, Kipp M, Lucius R, Pufe T, Wruck CJ. Sulfora phane suppresses 
LPS-induced inflammation in primary rat microglia. Inflamm Res 2010;59:443-50. 16. Gan L, Johnson JA. Oxidative damage and the Nrf2-ARE pathwa y in 
neurodegenerative diseases. B iochim Biophys Acta 2014;1842:1208 -18. 
17. Wei H, Kemp S, McGuinness MC, Moser AB, Smith KD. Pharmacol ogical 
induction of peroxisomes in peroxi some biogenesis disorders. An n Neurol 2000;47:286-
96. 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 47 of 50   18. McGuinness MC, Zhang HP, Smith KD. Evaluation of pharmacological induction 
of fatty acid beta-oxidation i n X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy. Mol Genet Metab 
2001;74:256-63. 19. Liang WC, Yuo CY, Chang JG, et al. The effect of hydroxyure a in spi[INVESTIGATOR_191446]. J Neurol Sci 2008;268:87-9 4. 
20. Zhao J, Moore AN, Clifton GL, Dash PK. Sulforaphane enhances aquaporin-4 expression and decreases cerebral edema following traumatic bra in injury. J Neurosci Res 
2005;82:499-506. 21. Clarke JD, Hsu A, Williams DE, et al. Metabolism and Tissue  Distribution of 
Sulforaphane in Nrf2 Knockout and Wild-Type Mice. Pharm Res 201 1. 
22. Tang G, Gudsnuk K, Kuo SH, et al . Loss of mTOR-Dependent Ma croautophagy 
Causes Autistic-like Synaptic  Pruning Deficits. Neuron 2014;83:1131-43. 
23. Suppi[INVESTIGATOR_191447] K, Park CS, Shen Y , Zhu X, Lacorazza HD. Sulforaph ane induces cell 
cycle arrest and apoptosis in acu te lymphoblastic leukemia cell s. PLoS One 
2012;7:e51251. 24. Singh K, Connors SL, Macklin EA, et al. Sulforaphane treatm ent of autism 
spectrum disorder (ASD). Pro c Natl Acad Sci 2014;111:[ZIP_CODE]-5. 
25. Marshburn EC, Aman MG. Factor v alidity and norms for the ab errant behavior 
checklist in a community sample  of children with mental retarda tion. J Autism Dev 
Disord 1992;22:357-73. 26. Constantino JN, Davis SA, T odd RD, et al. Validation of a b rief quantitative 
measure of autistic traits: co mparison of the social responsive ness scale with the autism 
diagnostic interview-revise d. J Autism Dev Disord 2003;33:427-33. 
27. Choque Olsson N, Bolte S. Brief Report: "Quick and (not so) Dirty" Assessment of Change in Autism: Cross-Cultural Reliability of the Developm ental Disabilities CGAS 
and the OSU Autism CGI. J Autism Dev Disord 2013. 28. The OSU Research Unit on Pediatric Psychopharmacology. OSU Autism Rating 
Scale. Columbus, OH: The OSU Research Unit on Pediatric Psychop harmacology; 2005. 
29. Gotham K, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_1321] A, Lord C. Standardizing ADOS scores for a measure of 
severity in autism spectrum disorders. J Autism Dev Disord 2009;39:693-705. 30. Freeman BJ, Ritvo ER, Yokota A, Childs J, Pollard J. WISC-R and Vineland Adaptive Behavior Scale scores in autistic children. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 
1988;27:428-9. 31. Kuschner ES, Bennetto L, Yost K. Patterns of nonverbal cognitive functioning in 
young children with autism spectrum disorders. J Autism Dev Disord 2007;37:795-807. 
32. Frustaci A, Neri M, Cesario A , et al. Oxidative stress-rela ted biomarkers in 
autism: systematic review and meta-analyses. Free Radic Biol Me d 2012;52:2128-41. 
33. Goldani AA, Downs SR, Widjaja  F, Lawton B, Hendren RL. Biom arkers in 
autism. Front Psychiatry 2014;5:100. 34. Rossignol DA, Frye RE. Evidence linking oxidative stress, m itochondrial 
dysfunction, and inflammation in the brain of individuals with autism. Front Physiol 
2014;5:150. 35. Frye RE, Rossignol DA. Treatments for biomedical abnormalit ies associated with 
autism spectrum disorder. Front Pediatr 2014;2:66. 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page [ADDRESS_227655]. Annu Rev Pharmacol Tox icol 2007;47:89-
116. 
37. Hayes JD, Dinkova-Kostova AT. The Nrf2 regulatory network provides an interface between redox and intermediary metabolism. Trends Bio chem Sci 2014;39:199-
218. 38. Rose S, Frye RE, Slattery J, et al. Oxidative stress induce s mitochondrial 
dysfunction in a subset of autis m lymphoblastoid cell lines in a well-matched case control 
cohort. PLoS One 2014;9:e85436. 39. Gorrindo P, Lane CJ, Lee EB, McLaughlin B, Levitt P. Enrich ment of elevated 
plasma F2t-isoprostane levels in individuals with autism who ar e stratified by [CONTACT_191507]. PLoS One 2013;8:e68444. 40. Frye RE, Delatorre R, Taylor H, et al. Redox metabolism abn ormalities in autistic 
children associated with mitochondr ial disease. Transl Psychiat ry 2013;3:e273. 
41. Akerfelt M, Morimoto RI, Sis tonen L. Heat shock factors: in tegrators of cell 
stress, development and lifespa n. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2010;11:545-55. 
42. Singh IS, Hasday JD. Fever, hyperthermia and the heat shock response. Int J Hyperthermia 2013;29:423-35. 43. Gan N, Wu YC, Brunet M, et al . Sulforaphane activates heat shock response and 
enhances proteasome activit y through up-regulation of Hsp27. J Biol Chem 
2010;285:[ZIP_CODE]-36. 44. Giulivi C, Zhang YF, Omanska -Klusek A, et al. Mitochondrial  dysfunction in 
autism. JAMA 2010;304:2389-96. 45. Ebert DH, Greenberg ME. Activity-dependent neuronal signall ing and autism 
spectrum disorder. Nature 2013;493:327-37. 46. Hoeffer CA, Klann E. mTOR signaling: at the crossroads of p lasticity, memory 
and disease. Trends Neurosci 2010;33:67-75. 47. Lugo JN, Smith GD, Arbuckle EP, et al. Deletion of PTEN pro duces autism-like 
behavioral deficits and alterati ons in synaptic proteins. Front  Mol Neurosci 2014;7:27. 
48. Masi A, Quintana DS, Glozier N, Lloyd AR, Hickie IB, Guaste lla AJ. Cytokine 
aberrations in autism spectrum disorder: a systematic review an d meta-analysis. Mol 
Psychiatry 2014. 49. Sandberg M, Patil J, D'Angelo B, Weber SG, Mallard C. NRF2- regulation in 
brain health and disease: implica tion of cerebral inflammation. Neuropharmacology 
2014;79:298-306. 50. Benedict AL, Mountney A, Hur tado A, et al. Neuroprotective effects of 
sulforaphane after contusive spi[INVESTIGATOR_1828]. J Neurotrauma 2012;29:2576-86. 
51. Fahey JW, Zalcmann AT, Talalay P. The chemical diversity an d distribution of 
glucosinolates and isothiocyanates among plants. Phytochemistry  2001;56:5-51. 
52. Shikita M, Fahey JW, Golden TR , Holtzclaw WD, Talalay P. An  unusual case of 
'uncompetitive activation' by [CONTACT_191508]: purification and k inetic properties of a 
myrosinase from Raphanus sativus seedlings. The Biochemical journal 1999;341 ( Pt 3):725-32. 53. Wade KL, Ito Y, Ramarathnam A,  Holtzclaw WD, Fahey JW. Puri fication of 
active myrosinase from plants by [CONTACT_191509]-phase counter-curr ent chromatography. 
Phytochemical analysi s : PCA 2015;26:47-53. 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 49 of 50   54. Ye L, Dinkova-Kostova AT, Wad e KL, Zhang Y, Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_191448], Talalay P. 
Quantitative determination of dith iocarbamates in human plasma,  serum, erythrocytes 
and urine: pharmacokinetics of broc coli sprout isothiocyanates in humans. Clinica 
chimica acta; international jo urnal of clinical chemistry 2002; 316:43-53. 
55. Dinkova-Kostova AT, Fahey JW, Wade KL, et al. Induction of the phase 2 
response in mouse and human skin by [CONTACT_191460]-containing bro ccoli sprout extracts. 
Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_191449] 2007;16:847-51. 
56. Dinkova-Kostova AT, Talalay P . Direct and indirect antioxid ant properties of 
inducers of cytoprotective prot eins. Mol Nutr Food Res 2008;[ADDRESS_227656] 1:S128-38. 
57. Baird L, Swift S, Lleres D, D inkova-Kostova AT. Monitoring Keap1-Nrf2 
interactions in single live  cells. Biotechnol Adv 2014;32:1133- 44. 
58. Egner PA, Chen JG, Wang JB, e t al. Bioavailability of Sulforaphane from two 
broccoli sprout beverages: resul ts of a short-term, cross-over clinical trial in Qidong, 
China. Cancer Prev Res (Phila) 2011;4:384-95. 59. Kensler TW, Ng D, Carmella SG, et al. Modulation of the met abolism of airborne 
pollutants by [CONTACT_191510]-ric h and sulforaphane-rich broccoli  sprout beverages in 
Qidong, China. Carcinogen esis 2012;33:101-7. 
60. Fahey JW, Wehage SL, Holtzcl aw WD, et al. Protection of hum ans by [CONTACT_191511]: efficiency of conversion of glucosinolates to i sothiocyanates by [CONTACT_191512]. Cancer Prev Res (Phila) 2012;5:603 -11. 
61. Egner PA, Wang J, Zhu YR, et al. Prevention of Liver Cancer  in Qidong, China: 
Lessons from Aflatoxin Biomarke r Studies. Progress in Chemistry  2013;25:1454-61. 
62. Egner PA, Chen JG, Zarth AT , et al. Rapid and Sustainable D etoxication of 
Airborne Pollutants by [CONTACT_191513] S prout Beverage: Results of a R andomized Clinical Trial 
in China. Cancer Prev Res (Phila) 2014. 63. Riedl MA, Saxon A, Diaz-Sanchez D. Oral sulforaphane increases Phase II 
antioxidant enzymes in the human upper airway. Clin Immunol 200 9;130:244-51. 
64. Seow A, Shi CY, Chung FL, et al. Urinary total isothiocyanate (ITC) in a population-based sample of middl e-aged and older Chinese in Sin gapore: relationship 
with dietary total ITC and glutat hione S-transferase M1/T1/P1 g enotypes. Cancer 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_1948] 1998;7:775-81. 65. Nugon-Baudon L, S. R. Glucosinol ates and glucosinolate deri vates: Implications 
for protection against chemical  carcinogenesis. Nutr Res Rev 19 94;7:205-31. 
66. Milford GFJ, Evans EJ. Factor s causing variation in glucosinolates in oilseed 
rape. Outlook Agric 1991;20:31-7. 67. Mullin WJ, Sahasrabudhe HR. An estimate of the average dail y intake of 
glucosinolate. Nutr Rep Int 1978;18. 68. Wattenberg LW, Hanley AB, Barany, G., Sparnins VL, Lam LKT,  Fenwick GR. 
Inhibition of carcinogenesis by [CONTACT_191514]. In: Ha yashi Y, ed. Diet, 
nutrition and cancer. Tokyo: Japa n Science Society Press; 1986: 193-203. 
69. Deykin EY, MacMahon B. The inc idence of seizures among chil dr
 en with autistic 
symptoms. Am J Psychiatry 1979;136:1310-2. 70. Danielsson S, Gillberg IC, Billstedt E, Gillberg C, Olsson I. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_191450]: a prospectiv e population-based follow-up study of 120 individuals 
diagnosed in childhood. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_8330] 2005;46:918-23. 
Sulforaphane Treatment of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorde r (ASD).  
Investigator Study Plan v4 (11/28/2016)  
 
 Page 50 of 50   71. Shapi[INVESTIGATOR_191448], Fahey JW, Dinkova-Kostova AT, et al. Safety, to lerance, and 
metabolism of broccoli sprout gluc osinolates and isothiocyanates: a clinical phase I 
study. Nutr Cancer 2006;55:53-62. 
72. Barcelo S, Gardiner JM, Gesch er A, Chipman JK. CYP2E1-media ted mechanism 
of anti-genotoxicity of the bro ccoli constituent sulforaphane. Carcinogenesis 
1996;17:277-82. 73. Stetler RA, Gan Y, Zhang W, et al. Heat shock proteins: cel lular and molecular 
mechanisms in the central nervous  system. Prog Neurobiol 2010;92:184-211. 
74. Dietz HC. New therapeutic approaches to mendelian disorders . N Engl J Med 
2010;363:852-63. 
 