PROTOCOL TITLE: Gabapentin for pain control after osmotic dilator insertion and prior 
to D&E procedure: a randomized controlled trial  
Page 1 of 15  Revis ed: February 9, 2016   
1) Protocol Title  
Title:  Gabapentin for pain control after osmotic dilator insertion and 
prior to D&E procedure: a randomized controlled trial  
Protocol Version Date: 01/11/2018  
2) Objectives  
Pain management in the context of abortion is a topic that is both challenging and 
neces sary to research. The Society of Family Planning (SFP 2014) lists it as a top 
research priority. Most research to date has focused on pain during the abortion 
procedure. One area that remains under investigated is women’s pain experience during 
the time os motic dilators are in the cervix prior to the dilation and evacuation procedure. 
As a result, management of pain during this time period varies greatly and is largely 
based on anecdotal experience. Adjunctive pain management with non -narcotic 
medications s uch as gabapentin may have a place during this time. Gabapentin is unique 
in that it is both well tolerated with minimal contraindications and low cost with 600 mg 
doses as low as $0.24. Additionally, widespread dissemination of cell phones and text 
messag ing now gives us the opportunity to communicate with women about their dilator -
related pain experience in real -time, potentially improving data quality.  
We have planned a randomized, controlled trial of repeated doses of gabapentin 
compared to placebo for pain management during the time after dilator insertion and 
prior to D&E the subsequent day. Participants will receive gabapentin 600 mg or placebo 
prior to dilator insertion. Pain scores will be measured via numeric rating scale (NRS) at 
baseline and [ADDRESS_130277], and analgesic use assessment will occur upon presentation to 
the pre -operative are for D&E. We hypothesize that women who receive gabapentin 
beginning at the time of dilator placement for a D&E procedure will report a sma ller 
increase in pain from baseline at 8 hours after dilator placement compared to women 
receiving placebo.  
 
3) Background  
Osmotic dilators are an essential component of cervical preparation prior to dilation and 
evacuation (D&E) procedures. To date, research  involving osmotic dilators has typi[INVESTIGATOR_116714] D&E completion, either alone or in conjunction 
with pharmacologic agents such as misoprostol or mifepristone. Those studies that 
evaluate pain with dilator insertion and dur ing the interval between insertion and the 
D&E procedure do so as a secondary outcome. [1 -4] It is clear that insertion of dilators is 
more painful than using a medication and there are varied accounts of how this pain 
changes over time. [2, 3, 5] One rece nt study evaluating use of intrauterine lidocaine for 
pain relief during dilator placement found that visual analog scale (VAS) pain scores 
overall were actually higher during the time after dilator insertion and before D&E than 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Gabapentin for pain control after osmotic dilator insertion and prior 
to D&E procedure: a randomized controlled trial  
Page 2 of 15  Revis ed: February 9, 2016  during the insertion proces s. [1] As there have been no studies to directly evaluate 
women’s pain during the interval between dilator insertion and D&E, this area remains an 
under evaluated aspect of women’s abortion experience.  
 
Multimodal pain management has become an area of inte rest across many procedural 
fields. Though no data exists regarding current pain management strategies for pain after 
dilator insertion, anecdotal experience includes recommending over -the-counter 
analgesics (e.g., acetaminophen and ibuprofen) or oral narc otics. Adjunctive analgesic 
medications have been explored within Obstetrics and Gynecology for pain management, 
primarily in the context of Cesarean delivery and abdominal hysterectomy. Gabapentin is 
one such agent which has both analgesic and antiepi[INVESTIGATOR_116715]. [6] Use of this agent, as compared to similar drugs such as pregabalin, 
is appealing due to its low cost. When considering commonly studied perioperative 
dosing, gabapentin can be purchased for as low as $0.24 per 6 00 mg dose whereas 
pregabalin is $14 per 150 mg dose. [7 -12] Studies regarding preoperative use of 
gabapentin in abdominal hysterectomy have demonstrated decreased post -operative 
narcotic use, decreased nausea and vomiting, and increased patient satisfacti on. [8, 13 -
17] Reports regarding side effects such as sedation are varied. [8, 13 -17] Data regarding 
preoperative gabapentin use and post -operative Cesarean delivery pain is more limited 
and less consistent. [7, 9, 18, 19] The heterogeneity of gabapentin d osing and overall pain 
regimen along with study design limitations make these data challenging to generalize to 
abortion procedures  
 
Ultimately, studies regarding gabapentin for pain relief in abdominal hysterectomy and 
Cesarean delivery do not serve as go od proxies for using gabapentin during abortion care. 
The pain experience of laparotomy, which is confounded by [CONTACT_116731], is different than that of dilator insertion and subsequent D&E. 
Recent projects by [CONTACT_5569] p lanning fellows are evaluating the use of gabapentin for 
medical and surgical abortion in the first trimester. We propose a study to evaluate the 
effect of gabapentin on the pain experienced between dilator insertion and D&E. I believe 
this treatment will be beneficial to patients and my findings could be used to create a pain 
regimen that could encompass both cervical preparation and D&E.  Since women will be 
outside of the healthcare setting for most of their dilator experience, I plan to use short 
messag ing service (SMS; text message) to allow women to communicate pain evaluation 
and analgesic use in real time.  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Gabapentin for pain control after osmotic dilator insertion and prior 
to D&E procedure: a randomized controlled trial  
Page 3 of 15  Revis ed: February 9, 2016  4) Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Patients undergoing preoperative evaluation for abortion at the UCDMC family planning 
clinic will be the populat ion for subject recruitment.  
Women presenting for dilator insertion on the day prior to their scheduled D&E 
procedure with gestational age [ADDRESS_130278] a text messaging enabled phone and be willing to 
send and receive text messages about their experience during the  study time period.  
Exclusion criteria include current gabapentin or pregabalin use, allergy to gabapentin . 
Ibuprofen, acetaminophen or codeine , self -reported renal disease, and self -reported active 
narcotic use.  Patients who are currently incarcerated wi ll also be excluded. Adults who 
are unable to consent are not traditionally encountered due to the nature of abortion care 
(with abortion as a voluntary procedure), however they will also be excluded in the 
unlikely event this situation arises.  
Eligible w omen will be approached by [CONTACT_116732]/or research staff 
about the study. Women will be counseled that study participation will not impact their 
clinical care. Those who are interested will be given adequate time to review the study 
consent form and to address any questions with a study investigator. Written consent will 
be obtained only after consent for clinical care is completed. There will be no advertising 
or external recruitment for this study.  
5) Study Timelines  
Participant’s involve ment in the study will extend from recruitment during preoperative 
visit in clinic, through their overnight experience with cervical dilators in place, and end 
after their final interview in the preoperative area in the main operating room prior to 
their a bortion procedure.  
Based on our current volume, we estimate that we will complete enro llment of 12 1 
women in 12 months (goal of February 201 7 – January 201 8). Between August 2015 and 
June 2016, the clinical Family Planning fellow completed 228 D&E from 15 weeks 0 
days to 23 weeks 6 days gestational age (on date of procedure) at the UC Davis Medical 
Center . Completion of the primary analysis will occur by [CONTACT_11711]  2018.   
6) Study Endpoints  
The primary study endpoint is  enrollment of [ADDRESS_130279] monthly to monitor for adverse events that would indicate 
safety issues  and thus a safety -related endpoint . Adverse events will  include both 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Gabapentin for pain control after osmotic dilator insertion and prior 
to D&E procedure: a randomized controlled trial  
Page 4 of 15  Revis ed: February 9, [ADDRESS_130280] at 
home.  
7) Procedures Involved  
 
Recruitment will occur in the Division of Family Planning pre -operative clinic held once 
to twice weekly in the Lawrence J. Ellison Ambula tory Care Center of the UC Davis 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology. This clinic is specifically for patients seeking 
abortion procedures. Family Planning physicians and/or research assistants will obtain 
informed consent from eligible women that opt to participate  (all family planning 
attendings and fellows will be traine d as study personnel) . An institutional HIPAA 
Authorization form will also be obtained to allow access to participant’s medical record 
for inform ation related to the study. Study information  will include demographic traits 
and information from dilator placement.  
 
The current standard of care at our institution is for women to present for pre -operative 
evaluation and osmotic dilator placement on the day prior to scheduled D&E. Cervi cal 
anesthesia with Xylocaine 1% [ADDRESS_130281] based on gestational age . Xylocaine is the cervical anesthetic standardly used at our 
institution as well as in other reported pain studies. [ 20-23] Although bupi[INVESTIGATOR_72159] a 
longer duration of action than xylocaine (2 -4 hours and 1 -2 hours, respectively), the 
increased duration does not cover the entire  osmotic dilator experie nce. [24 ] 
Additionally, bupi[INVESTIGATOR_116716] -related abortion 
literature or clinical practice, limiting generalizability. Only Dilapan -S® hygroscopic 
cervical dilators are used in our practice. Misoprostol is not used in conjunction with 
dilators. Mifepristone is only used in the context of suboptimal dilator placement or 
gestational age of 22 weeks or more. After dilator placement, women standardly receive 
prescriptions for acetaminophen 300 mg/codeine 30 mg and ibuprofen  800 mg which can 
be used as needed for pain management during the time between dilator placement and 
D&E. At UC Davis Medical Center (UCDMC), D&E procedures are completed in the 
main operating rooms on the day following dilator placement with the aid of d eep 
sedation.  There will be no deviation from the above standard practice for 
participants in this study.   
 
Study methodology for this randomized double -blind placebo -controlled trial will 
proceed as follows:  
 
1. Eligible women at 15 weeks 0 days – 23 weeks 5  days gestational age at time of 
preoperative appointment will be approached regarding the study prior to dilator 
placement. Consent will be obtained.  
2. Relevant baseline demographics (age, race, ethnicity, education level, gravidity, 
detailed parity, reported history of anxiety, depression, drug abuse, chronic pain, 
recent narcotic pain medication use, and reason for pregnancy termination) will be 
collected.  These are standard questions asked of all patients during their preoperative 
abortion evaluatio n. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Gabapentin for pain control after osmotic dilator insertion and prior 
to D&E procedure: a randomized controlled trial  
Page 5 of 15  Revis ed: February 9, 2016  3. Participant will be asked to provide pain level on 11 -point (0 -10) NRS immediately 
before study drug ingestion as the baseline pain score. Baseline symptoms (sedation 
and dizziness) will also be recorded.  
4. Women will ingest the assigned gabapentin 600 m g or placebo  
a. Stratified block randomization will occur to achieve even distribution of 
women based on vaginal parity (no prior vaginal delivery versus one or more 
prior vaginal deliveries). This strategy will ensure similar numbers of women 
with vaginal pa rity between gabapentin and placebo groups as this may be an 
important factor influencing pain with dilators in general.  
b. A UC Davis Investigational Drug Services (IDS) pharmacist will use 
computer -generated randomization to place active or placebo treatme nt in two 
groups of sequentially numbered vials (to account for block randomization 
based on parity)  
5. The physician will proceed with dilator insertion via our existing standardized 
method (including standard cervical anesthesia with 1% xylocaine [ADDRESS_130282] 
number of dilators based on gestational age). Number of dilators and any 
pharmacologic means of cervical preparation are already reported in a standardized 
template and will be available for chart review.  
6. Post-dilator pain will be assessed via NRS a t five minutes after dilator insertion. 
Additional symptoms (sedation and dizziness) will be recorded.  
7. Women will be discharged home with:  
a. One additional study medication (Gabapentin 600 mg or placebo) to take at 
home [ADDRESS_130283] prescriptions for acetaminophen 300 mg/codeine [ADDRESS_130284] text messages,  a reminder to take the home dose of 
their assigned study medication at 8 hours after dilator insertion (exact time 
will be written out)  and a reminder to bring the empty study medication bottle 
with them when they present for their procedure the next day .  
d. Recommendation that they have a ride to and from abortion procedure the 
subsequent day.  
8. Participants will be sent a baseline text message  from the study phone prior to leaving 
the clinic. Partic ipants will be encouraged  to enable  privacy features on their personal 
phone . Examples of security features will be reviewed and included in the consent .  
9. Participants will be contact[CONTACT_116733] 2, 4, and [ADDRESS_130285] protected study cell phone. 
Android application “SMS scheduler” will be used to send standardized text 
messages to t he participant at pre -programed time intervals from time of 
dilator insertion.  
b. Text message content:  
i. Current NRS pain score  
ii. Inventory of analgesic use since last contact  
[CONTACT_39836]. Presence of symptoms (sedation and dizziness)  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Gabapentin for pain control after osmotic dilator insertion and prior 
to D&E procedure: a randomized controlled trial  
Page 6 of 15  Revis ed: February 9, 2016  iv. Reminder to take the assigned study med ication (at 8 hours only)  
10. Upon admission to the pre -operative ward prior to D&E, we will document the time 
and assess the current NRS pain score, additional analgesic use since [ADDRESS_130286], and presence of symptoms (sedation and dizziness)  
 
Blinding  
Participants and providers will be blinded to study drug allocation as all study drug will 
be prepared by [CONTACT_116734].  
 
Privacy protection  
Participant privacy is another ethical concern in this study. Part icipants may have people 
with access to their cell phones who do not know about the pregnancy or abortion. 
Compromising a woman’s privacy about this matter could put her at risk depending on 
her life situation. To prevent this, I plan to use generic langua ge that does not identify the 
context of the woman’s care. Women will be counseled regarding their ability to rescind 
their participation at any point.  Below is the  verbatim  content of each text message that 
will be sent to participants. These text messages will be sent in order, with a programmed 
one-minute interval between each question:  
1. “What is your current pain level on a scale of 0 -10? (Zero is no pain and ten is the 
worst pain imaginable)”  
2. “How many pi[INVESTIGATOR_116717]?”  
3. “How many pi[INVESTIGATOR_116718]?”  
4. “Do you feel more dizzy than usual?”  
5. “Do you feel more tired than usual?”  
 
Participants will be told about the number, timing, and generic content of text messages. 
Women will be told that the text messages will contain questions regarding their pain , 
medication use, and other symptoms.  This generic statement adequately represen ts the 
specific text message content as depi[INVESTIGATOR_116719]. Participants will not receive the 
verbatim text in advance. The primary reason for measuring pain via real time text 
message in this study, as opposed to home pain diary via VAS, is the benefit of 
spontaneous response which is more likely to reflect a participant’s true state. By 
[CONTACT_116735], participants may consciously or unconsciously 
formulate a planned response, thereby [CONTACT_116736] i n 
this study.  
 
Study drug  
Gabapentin (Neurontin®) was initially approved by [CONTACT_941] U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) for use as an antiepi[INVESTIGATOR_23935]. [25] The FDA expanded its use to 
include postherpetic neuralgia in 2002, as research revealed gabapentin t o be an effective 
treatment for neuropathic pain. [25] Off-label use has expanded to include perioperative 
and cancer pain. [25]  
 
Gabapentin is structurally similar to the gamma -aminobutyric acid (GABA) 
neurotransmitter. [26] The mechanism of action for both antiepi[INVESTIGATOR_116720]: Gabapentin for pain control after osmotic dilator insertion and prior 
to D&E procedure: a randomized controlled trial  
Page 7 of 15  Revis ed: February 9, 2016  remains unknown. [26] Initiating gabapentin treatment for long term use typi[INVESTIGATOR_116721] a dose of 300 mg every eight hours. [25] Dosing for perioperative use is typi[INVESTIGATOR_116722]. [25] The 
bioavailability of gabapentin actually decreases as the dose increases. For example, a 
dose of gabapentin 600 mg has 60% bioavailability, while increasing to 900 mg decreases 
to 47%. [26] For t he purposes of this study, gabapentin 600 mg will balance concerns 
about lower analgesic efficacy at 300 mg doses with increased side effects without 
improved pain management at higher doses. [25] Using gabapentin [ADDRESS_130287] in gabapentin for perioperative pain management is increasing in part due to its 
favorable safety profile. There are few contraindications to gabapentin use. It is excreted 
by [CONTACT_116737]. [26] The absence of hepatic 
metabolism enables use in patients with hepatic disease or on medications that influence 
hepatic enzymes. [26] Renal insufficiency can increase the clearance time of gabapentin 
so dosage adjustment or avoidance of gabapentin is needed depending on the severity of 
renal disease. [26] Gabapentin is well tolerated in the pediatric population as w ell. [26] 
Most common side effects include dizziness and somnolence with less common reporting 
coordination or balance issues, peripheral edema, or gastrointestinal symptoms. [26] 
These reports are among chronic users of gabapentin. Studies investigating p erioperative 
use focus more on immediate side effects experienced by [CONTACT_116738]ïve patients such 
as dizziness and somnolence. [26] 
 
Study drugs will be obtained from the UC Davis Investigational Drug Services (IDS). 
The IDS is a division of UC Davis Pha rmacy Services that can procure gabapentin and 
over-encapsulate it to match an identical placebo. The IDS controls participant 
randomization, maintains randomization log, and provides additional support for study 
drug administration along with accountabili ty and adherence with state drug dispensing 
regulations. The IDS has already reviewed this research study and has formulated a plan 
for study execution with investigators. Peter Trovitch, PharmD (Senior IDS Pharmacist) 
has shadowed the Principal Investigat or in the preoperative clinic to formulate a concrete 
plan for IDS drug preparation and medication accountability.  
 
Participant Compensation:  
Participants will be compensated $30 for initial study drug ingestion and completing 
baseline data collection. They will be provided based on fully answering all five text 
messages at each scheduled encounter. Compensation will include an additional $10 for 
completion of 2 hour and 4 hour text messages, and $[ADDRESS_130288]. 
Participants will receive a final $30 for completion of the assessment when presenting for 
D&E. Compensation will occur via gift cards provided to participants when presenting 
for their procedure the subsequent day. Maximum compensation per participant will be 
$100, with pa rtial compensation possible based on participation level. Participants will be 
provided with the compensation levels.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Gabapentin for pain control after osmotic dilator insertion and prior 
to D&E procedure: a randomized controlled trial  
Page 8 of 15  Revis ed: February 9, 2016  8) Data  and/or Specimen  Management and Confidentiality  
 
Sample size calculation  
For the purpose of calculating sample size, there is no exis ting data that truly mirrors the 
objective of this study (context of pain, use of NRS, and use of change in pain score from 
baseline). The closest approximation is the mean immediate post -dilator insertion pain 
score of 5.2 (SD 1.2) via NRS from Borgatta, et al (2012). However, when using this data 
point and a commonly cited clinically significant decrease in NRS pain score of 2 points, 
computation with SAS 9.1 (factoring in power at 80% ( α=0.05), normal distribution) 
yielded a small sample size of only 12  women per group . [27-33] Based on the block 
randomization there are four groups for a total of 48 women. To account for up to 20% of 
subjects not responding to text messaging for the primary outcome the sample size 
estimate will increase to [ADDRESS_130289] tests will 
be used to compare demographics and dichotomous variables as appropriate. I plan to 
describe the pain course for the total study cohort using  means and medians as 
appropriate.  
 
Data Management  
Participants will be assigned a unique study number for use on source documents and 
participant study charts. These documents will be kept in a locked file cabinet accessible 
only to study staff. Data from participant’s study charts and text message contact [CONTACT_116739] a secure database. No identifying information will be entered into the study 
database. Only password -protected, institutionally secured UC Davis computers will be 
used for data e ntry and analysis. Data will be reviewed by [CONTACT_458] [INVESTIGATOR_116723].  The research database will be 
banked indefinitely for the purpose of future research questions and will contain only de -
identified information as above.   
 
A cell phone will be purchased for the purposes of this study. This phone line will be 
dedicated to the study and will be password protected. It will stay with the principal 
investigator [INVESTIGATOR_116724] -up is 
occurring. Outside of this time, the secured cell phone will be kept in a locked file cabinet 
with restricted access. Since the phone will not be attended at all times, participants will 
be given the standard UC Davis conta ct information for all clinical and study -related 
questions  at any time . Our division has a dedicated phone line for family planning 
research patients that is covered by [CONTACT_116740] (who have close 
access to an assigned family plannin g physician) and forwarded to the on call family 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Gabapentin for pain control after osmotic dilator insertion and prior 
to D&E procedure: a randomized controlled trial  
Page 9 of 15  Revis ed: February 9, 2016  planning attending or fellow at night. All family planning attendings and fellows will be 
trained as study personnel. The cell phone’s remote data erase function and location 
service will both be activated t o protect study data in the event that the phone is lost or 
stolen.  
 
Prior to first contact, the research assistant will program the participant into the phone 
contact [CONTACT_116741]. The Android SMS 
Scheduler appli cation will record all scheduled and sent text messages. The application’s 
template function will be used to ensure all outgoing text messages are uniform. 
Incoming text messages are returned to the cell phone’s default text message application. 
The study cell phone will only be connected to the password protected, secure 
institutional wireless internet connection. The study cell phone’s mobile data will be 
turned off at all times to improve security. Text message responses will be input into the 
study data base on a weekly basis and the participant’s contact [CONTACT_116742].  
 
9) Data Banking  
 
The entire research study database, which will contain only de -identified data, 
will be banked indefinitely for the purpos es of futur e research analysis.  
 
10) Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of S ubjects  
• Safety data will be collected throughout the study – participants will be asked 
about potential medication side effects.  
• Adverse event (AE): adverse experience such as symptom, physical exam 
finding, or worsening of a preexisting condition that has a temporal 
association with research participation. Causal relationship with study 
treatment is not necessary to designate an AE.  
• Given the contact [CONTACT_116743], significant 
breech in participant privacy will also be classified as an adverse experience . 
At enrollment, participants will be counseled to ensure they are making a fully 
informed decision to participate knowing that there will be tex t message 
contact [CONTACT_116744]. They will be counseled regarding ways to withdrawal if 
safety becomes a concern. If this occurs, study staff will list safety -related 
withdrawal as an AE and review as below.   
• Serious adverse event (SAE): adverse event that req uires hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], 
causes significant disability, is life threatening or results in death.  
• AEs will be logged and reviewed by [CONTACT_116745]  
• Any SAE will be reported to the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_116725]. The 
participant will be managed medically as indicated. All source data will be 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Gabapentin for pain control after osmotic dilator insertion and prior 
to D&E procedure: a randomized controlled trial  
Page 10 of 15  Revis ed: February 9, 2016  reviewed. Physician investigators will assess for causality or relatedness of the 
adverse experience to the study.  
• In accordance with UC Davis institutional review board (IRB) reportin g 
policy, AEs will be reported at annual IRB renewal submission. SAEs that are 
unanticipated and thought to be related to the study (thereby [CONTACT_116746]) will be reported to the 
IRB by [CONTACT_116747].  
• The study will be reviewed semimonthly at the Family Plan ning division 
research meeting, which includes all research staff. Any concerns regarding 
individual or trends in AEs will prompt fu rther review of the study and 
consideration of study termination.  
• Study allocation will remain concealed except in a scenario in which revealing 
allocation is clinically important for the participant’s management  
11) Withdrawal of Subjects  
Based on the safety of existing research on both gabapentin for peri -procedure pain 
and an existing abortion -related study using text messaging of subjects, we do not 
anticipate frequent circumstances for participant withdrawal.  There are both 
investigator and particip ant-initiated modes for subject withdrawal. Participants will 
be withdrawn from the study pending investigator review of AE that warrants 
removal or any SAE (see Section 10). Participants will be counseled at enrollment 
about how to withdrawal themselves f rom the study for any reason. If a participant 
is withdrawn from the study, no further data will be collected.  We will inquire 
about the reason for withdrawal so we can monitor for AE/SAE.     
 
12) Risks to Subjects  
There are two primary categories of risk  in this study : 
1. Study medication risk (Gabapentin):  
As noted in Section 7, Gabapentin is a safe, well tolerated medication that is an 
established agent of interest for peri -procedure analgesia. Contraindications and 
medication interactions are few. This study will be monitoring for the more common 
side effects that can happen (though not frequently in prior studies) , including 
increased self -reported sedation and dizziness from baseline. [25]  
The FDA label for gabapentin lists adverse events reported by s tudies investigating 
the drug for management of either epi[INVESTIGATOR_116726]. Both FDA 
approved indications for gabapentin use a wide range of drug dosing and a 
significantly longer duration compared to this study. Studies investigating 
gabape ntin for peri -procedure analgesia are powered to detect their primary outcome 
of pain reduction. Those studies reporting side effects ask about sedation and 
dizziness most commonly . [34] Gynecologic studies, typi[INVESTIGATOR_116727], report no statistically significant increase in sedation or 
dizziness compared to placebo . [13-14] Both studies started with initial doses of 
gabapentin 1200 mg, which is twice the dosing  of this study .[13-14] Dierking et al 
continued gabapentin dosing  for a total of 3000 mg over 24 hours (year). While 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Gabapentin for pain control after osmotic dilator insertion and prior 
to D&E procedure: a randomized controlled trial  
Page 11 of 15  Revis ed: February 9, [ADDRESS_130290] trimester aspi[INVESTIGATOR_116728]. [25]  Out of caution, participants will be required to have a ride home from 
the clinic as criteria for study eligibility so they aren’t driving after study me dication 
dosing.  Frequency of reported side effects will be closely monitored, as well as any 
AE or SAEs, per Section 11.    
 
2. Privacy risk : 
As noted in Section 7, participant privacy is a consideration as participants will be 
contact[CONTACT_116748]. To protect participants’ privacy, only the above text content will 
be sent, which is generic in nature and does not identify pregnancy or abortion. 
Participants will be given a form  listing the times when the text messages will be 
sent to them so they can keep the phone with them. Participants will be advised to 
also password protect their own phone and change settings so text message content 
is not displayed on their phone without u nlocking it.  Participants will also be given 
the [ADDRESS_130291] information for family planning research coordinators/physicians 
that can remove them from the study and discontinue any future text message 
contact [CONTACT_116749].  
 
The study cell phone will only be used in the small research office/preoperative 
clinic area and will be in a locked cabinet when not in the hands of research staff. As 
noted, it will not be connected to the mobile data network and will only be used over 
the secure, password protec ted UC Davis wireless internet. Data will be erased from 
the phone on a weekly basis after import into the secure database. The phone’s 
remote erase and location functions will be enabled for another layer of security.  
Family planning physicians at the University of Hawaii who are completing  a similar 
study (randomized controlled trial of Pregabalin versus placebo for pain with 
medication abortion, communicating with participants at home via text message  
through the SMS Scheduler Android App ) have provid ed insight into  use of the text 
messaging app/ privacy protection and have reported no privacy -related adverse 
events.  
 
The form given to participants that includes text message times will identify the UC 
Davis Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, as w ell as Family Planning 
physicians, in the contact [CONTACT_116750]. This 
does not pose additional risk to our participants as all patients in our pre-operative 
abortion clinic are given a folder containing copi[INVESTIGATOR_116729] s igned abortion 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Gabapentin for pain control after osmotic dilator insertion and prior 
to D&E procedure: a randomized controlled trial  
Page 12 of 15  Revis ed: February 9, [ADDRESS_130292] -dilator and pre/post abortion care instructions, along with abortion 
support references.  
 
13) Potential Benefits to Subjects  
There are no direct benefits to participants.  
 
14) Community -Based Participatory Research  
Not applicable  
 
15) Sharing of Results with Subjects  
Results will not be shared with participants or other providers.  
 
16) Prior Approvals  
A concept paper detailing the background, hypotheses, design and methods of this  study 
has been approved by [CONTACT_116751] (Society of Family Planning ). A full 
proposal has been submitted and is under review. The study will not be initiated until 
funder approval of the proposal is obtained.  
 
17) Provisions to Protect the Privacy Interests of Subjects  
See section [ADDRESS_130293] that patient’s care will no t be 
influenced by [CONTACT_116752]. The baseline history questions, 
such as reason for abortion, substance abuse, mental health, and medical/obstetric history 
are asked of all of our pre -operative abortion patients. Obtaining a nswers to these 
questions ensures that we not only provide medically safe abortion procedur es but that 
we can provide additional support (such as counseling  resources , social work  referrals ) to 
patients that endorse active issues. We ask all patients about  the reason for their abortion 
so we can ensure they are making an autonomous decision to terminate the pregnancy 
and are not being coerced. Additionally, we can provide support as above depending on 
the situation around the abortion (such as fetal anomaly , etcetera). As family planning 
specialists, our physicians are  well trained to provide sensitive care to women seeking 
abortion every day  and are thus  adept to asking these standard history questions.  
 
The research staff will have access to the participa nt’s medical records for study purposes 
only. Participants will be notified of this and research staff will review and  sign a n 
institutional HIPAA release to grant  this access.  
 
18) Compensation for Research -Related Injury  
The University of [LOCATION_004], Davis Health System will provide care needed to treat 
injuries directly resulting from taking part in this research.  Insurance or third party 
payers may be billed, if appropriate, for the costs of the care subjects received.  Subjects 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Gabapentin for pain control after osmotic dilator insertion and prior 
to D&E procedure: a randomized controlled trial  
Page 13 of 15  Revis ed: February 9, 2016  may be responsible for som e of the costs.  The University of [LOCATION_004], Davis does not 
plan to compensate subjects for injuries.  
 
19) Economic Burden to Subjects  
 
The only potential economic cost to participants would occur if their cell phone plan 
required additional payment for text messaging respon ses. The compensation structure 
for the study should cover these costs if they do occur.  
 
20) Drugs or Devices  
 
The UC Davis Investigational Drug Service has been notified regarding this research 
study. Meetings between the principal inve stigator and IDS staff have occurred to 
formulate a plan for study drug formulation (over -encapsulated Gabapentin 600 mg with 
an identical placebo) along with drug storage, labeling, randomization, and overall 
administration oversight. Regular drug reconci liation checks will occur by [CONTACT_3476] .  As 
noted, Peter Trovitch, PharmD (Senior IDS Pharmacist) has shadowed the Principal 
Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_116730]. St udy drugs will be administered only by [CONTACT_116753] (all family planning attendings and fellows will be trained on the 
study) in accordance with IDS instructions. The study drug will only be administered to 
enrolled study participants. Partic ipants will administer the second dose of study drug at 
home and will have clear instructions on both the drug label (through IDS) and research 
participant form.  
 
☒ I confirm that all investigational drugs will be received by [CONTACT_116754] (IDS).   The IDS will store, handle, and administer those drugs so 
that they will be used only on subjects and be used only by [CONTACT_28587].  
 
☒ I confirm that all investigational devices will be labelled in accordance with 
FDA regulations and stored and dispensed in such a manner that they will be 
used only on subjects and be used only by [CONTACT_10733].  
  
PROTOCOL TITLE: Gabapentin for pain control after osmotic dilator insertion and prior 
to D&E procedure: a randomized controlled trial  
Page 14 of 15  Revis ed: February 9, 2016   
References  
1. Mercier RJ, Liberty A. Intrauterine lidocaine for pain control during laminaria insertion: 
a randomized controlled trial. Contraception 2014. 90(6): 594 -600. 
2. Sagiv R, et al. Laminaria vs. vaginal misoprostol for cervical preparation before second -
trimester surgical abortio n: a randomized clinical trial. Contraception, 2015. 91(5): 406 -
11. 
3. Borgatta L, et al. Mifepristone vs. osmotic dilator insertion for cervical preparation prior 
to surgical abortion at 14 -16 weeks: a randomized trial. Contraception 2012. 86(5): 567 -
71. 
4. Drey EA, et al. Buccal misoprostol plus laminaria for cervical preparation before dilation 
and evacuation at 21 -23 weeks of gestation: a randomized controlled trial. Contraception 
2014. 89(4): 307 -13. 
5. Prairie BA, et al. Mifepristone versus laminaria:  a randomized controlled trial of cervical 
ripening in midtrimester termination. Contraception 2007. 76(5): 383 -8. 
6. Rose MA, Kam PC. Gabapentin: pharmacology and its use in pain management . 
Anaesthesia 2002. 57(5): 451 -62. 
7. Moore A, et al. Gabapentin i mproves postcesarean delivery pain management: a 
randomized, placebo -controlled trial. Anesth Analg, 2011. 112(1): 167 -73. 
8. Ajori L, et al. Effects of gabapentin on postoperative pain, nausea and vomiting after 
abdominal hysterectomy: a double blind randomized clinical trial. Arch Gynecol Obstet, 
2012. 285(3): 677 -82. 
9. Monks DT, et al. A Perioperative Course of Gabapentin Does Not Produce a Clinically 
Meaningful Improvement in Analgesia after Cesarean Delivery: A Randomized 
Controlled Trial. Anesthe siology, 2015. 123(2): 320 -6. 
10. Lam DM, et al. Efficacy of Pregabalin in Acute Postoperative Pain Under Different 
Surgical Categories: A Meta -Analysis. Medicine (Baltimore) 2015. 94(46): e1944.  
11. GoodRx, Inc. Gabapentin: Generic Neurontin, https://www. goodrx.com/gabapentin;  2016 
[accessed 09/17/2016].  
12. GoodRx, Inc. Lyrica (Pregabalin), https://www.goodrx.com/lyrica; 2016 [accessed 
09/17/2016].  
13. Turan A, et al. The analgesic effects of gabapentin after total abdominal hysterectomy. 
Anesth Analg, 20 04. 98(5): 1370 -3. 
14. Dierking G, et al. Effects of gabapentin on postoperative morphine consumption and pain 
after abdominal hysterectomy: a randomized, double -blind trial. Acta Anaesthesiol 
Scand, 2004. 48(3): 322 -7. 
15. Sen H, et al. A comparison of ga bapentin and ketamine in acute and chronic pain after 
hysterectomy. Anesth Analg, 2009. 109(5): 1645 -50. 
16. Karbic VO, et al. Gabapentin -induced changes of plasma cortisol level and immune 
status in hysterectomized women. Int Immunopharmacol, 2014. 23(2):  530-6. 
17. Alayed N, et al. Preemptive use of gabapentin in abdominal hysterectomy: a systematic 
review and meta -analysis. Obstet Gynecol, 2014. 123(6): 1221 -9. 
18. Short J, et al. A single preoperative dose of gabapentin does not improve postcesarean 
delivery pain management: a randomized, double -blind, placebo -controlled dose -finding 
trial. Anesth Analg, 2012. 115(6): [ADDRESS_130294] Rev, 2015(3): Cd010450.  
20.   Allen RH, et al. Pain management of first -trimester surgical abortion: effects of selection 
of local anesthesia with and without lorazepam or intravenous sedation. Contraception, 
2006. 74(5): 407 -13. 
PROTOCOL TITLE: Gabapentin for pain control after osmotic dilator insertion and prior 
to D&E procedure: a randomized controlled trial  
Page 15 of 15  Revis ed: February 9, [ADDRESS_130295] -trimester surgical 
abortion: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet Gynecol, 2009. 113(2 Pt 1): [ADDRESS_130296] -
trimester surgical abortion: a randomized contr olled trial. Obstet Gynecol, 2009. 114(6): 
[ADDRESS_130297] -trimester surgical abortion: a systematic review of 
randomized controlled trials. Contraception, 2010. 81(5): 372 -88. 
24. Cousins MJ. Neural blockade in clinical  anesthesia and management of pain.  4 ed. 2008, 
Philadelphia: Lippi[INVESTIGATOR_4431] & Wilkins.  
25. Axen I, et al. The use of weekly text messaging over 6 months was a feasible method for 
monitoring the clinical course of low back pain in patients seeking chi ropractic care. J 
Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541], 2012. 65(4): 454 -61. 
26. FDA approved new drug bulletin: Gabapentin (neurontin ). RN, 1994. 57(7): 39 -40. 
27. Kelly AM. Does the clinically significant difference in visual analog scale pain scores 
vary with gender, age, or  cause of pain? Acad Emerg Med, 1998. 5(11): 1086 -90. 
28. Todd KH, et al. Clinical significance of reported changes in pain severity. Ann Emerg 
Med, 1996. 27(4): 485 -9. 
29. Farrar JT, et al. Clinical importance of changes in chronic pain intensity measured  on an 
11-point numerical pain rating scale. Pain, 2001. 94(2): 149 -58. 
30. Kelly AM. The minimum clinically significant difference in visual analogue scale pain 
score does not differ with severity of pain. Emerg Med J, 2001. 18(3): 205 -7. 
31. Gallagher EJ , Liebman M, Bijur PE. Prospective validation of clinically important 
changes in pain severity measured on a visual analog scale. Ann Emerg Med, 2001. 
38(6): 633 -8. 
32. Bijur PE, Silver W, Gallagher EJ. Reliability of the visual analog scale for measurement 
of acute pain. Acad Emerg Med, 2001. 8(12): 1153 -7. 
33. Gallagher EJ, et al. Reliability and validity of a visual analog scale for acute abdominal 
pain in the ED. Am J Emerg Med, 2002. 20(4): 287 -90. 
34.  Yan, P.Z., et al., Beyond neuropathic pain: gabapentin use in cancer pain and 
perioperative pain.  Clin J Pain, 2014. 30(7): p. 613 -29. 
 