Version: 1 1 
Date: 10/26/2021 
Title: Impact of e -cigarette characteristics on reinforcement and tobacco use patterns among current 
smokers  
NCT Number: 03844672  
 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_612118] e -cigarette use has increased dramatically in recent years . Because e -cigarettes deliver 
fewer toxicants than combustible cigarettes , they likely offer improved health outcomes for current smokers who 
switch completely. However, many smokers who try using e -cigarettes do not switch completely, abandoning  e-
cigarettes altogether or continuing to use both products. Thus, it is important to understand the factors that lead 
to these variable tobacco use patterns. One of the primary determinants of e -cigarette uptake and changes in 
smoking behavior is the reinforcement value delivered by e -cigarette products. Product characteristics that 
impact nicotine delivery and sensorimotor characteristics are most likely to impact relative reinforcement  value . 
Two of the primary product -level determinants of nicotine delivery and sensorimotor characteristics are  the 
nicotine concen tration of e -liquid and the power of the e -cigarette device. The proposed research project  will 
investigate the impact of these characteristics on relative reinforcement value and tobacco use patterns. Current 
smokers  (n=180) will receive an e -cigarette and e -liquid to take home and use over a three -week period. In a 
double -blind 2 x2 design, participants will be randomly assigned to receive a low ( 3 mg) or high ( 12 mg) nicotine 
concentration, and either a low ( 20 W) or high ( 40 W) e -cigarette power setting. Participants will return to the lab 
each week to complete laboratory assessments of relative reinforcement value and provide breath and urine 
samples for biomarker assessments of smoke and nicotine exposure. Participants will also complete daily 
electronic  diaries assessing tobacco use. Thus, the proposed design includes both lab -based and ecological 
assessments of reinforcement and tobacco use. The results from this project will provide critical information 
about the relations hip between different e -cigarette products and tobacco use patterns, as well as inform the 
Food and Drug Administration about how to regulate tobacco products with the goal of improving public health. 
The K12  candidate, [CONTACT_612158], aims to develop an independent research portfolio that seeks to understand 
how 1) contextual, individual, and product characteristics contribute to the use of tobacco products, and 2) we 
can leverage this information to improve  public health through tobacco regulation, polic y, and public health 
interventions.  The proposed research project described here, along with clear training objectives, will provide 
the skills necessary to achieve that  goal. Training objectives include gaining expertise in non-cigarette tobacco 
products, tobacco control research, applied research methodologies, and grant -writing. A strong team of mentors 
have been assembled with expertise in each of these areas. MUSC provides a stellar training environment to 
allow K -awardees to transition to independent  research funding. The training described here is a clear 
progression from [CONTACT_84135]’s prior work, provides necessary skills for obtaining research independence, and will 
launch [CONTACT_84135]’s research independence in substantial, measurable ways .  
 
Keywords: Tobacco addiction, Electronic cigarettes, Reinforcement value    
Version: 1 1 
Date: 10/26/2021 
Specific Aims  
E-cigarette use in the [LOCATION_002] has ri sen dramatically (2). Because e -cigarettes deliver a  heated aerosol 
rather than combusted tobacco, they offer the potential for lower  toxicant exposure than combustible cigarettes  
(3-6), and likely carry reduced health burden for smokers who switch completely from cigarettes to e -cigarettes  (3, 
6, 7). Thus, any public health benefit of e-cigarettes , if there is one, will depend on if and how smokers use e -
cigarettes. However, many smokers who try e -cigarettes discontinue  use after a short trial period , or continue 
use of both e-cigarettes and cigarettes (i.e., dual use ) (8-10). It is therefore important to understand the factors that 
impact uptake of e -cigarettes and changes in smoking behavior following uptake. The e-cigarette  marketplace 
is ever -expanding and there is high variability in both devices and e-liquids  (11). Yet the impact of  product 
characteristics on uptake is poorly understoo d. Indeed, a recent report from the National Academy of 
Sciences , Engineering, and Medicine  listed the impact of e -cigarette product characteristics on behavior 
as a top research priority  (12). The present application  focuses on specific product characteristics that impact 
the most important determinant of use: relative reinforcement value .  
Reinforcement  value is the perceived magnitude of a reward . For e-cigarettes,  this value is  likely  a function 
of both nicotine delivery and sensorimotor  cues. Nicotine is the primary pharmacological reinforcer for tobacco 
use (13). Nicotine delivery for e-cigarettes is impacted by  [CONTACT_612136] . First, e-cigarettes 
contain liquid that can be purchased with a wide range of nicotine concentrations . Second , devices vary in how 
much power is delivered  to the heating element . These two characteristics, nicotine concentration and device 
power, work together to impact the nicotine deliver y of the aerosol that is delivered to the user . Survey  evidence 
suggests a negative correlation between the power of a device and the chosen nicotine concentration (14, 15), 
likely because users modify their choic e of concentration and power such that optimal levels of nicotine are 
delivered . Aside from nicotine delivery, b oth the nicotine concentration and the power of the device are important 
determinants of the s ensorimotor  cues associated with e-cigarette use , such as the “throat hit” a smoker feels 
when taking a puff, and the temperature and volume of the delivered aerosol . Despi[INVESTIGATOR_612119] , no study has experimentally investigated the interaction between these two characteristics on 
reinforcement value and tobacco use. The purpose of this application is to use both lab -based and 
naturalistic methods to understand how nicotine concentration and device power  interact to  impact 
relative reinforcement value and tobacco use patterns . 
Within a 2 x2 between -subjects design  that manipulates nicotine concentration ( 3 vs. 12 mg/ml) and device 
power ( 20W vs. 40W), daily smokers with limited e -cigarette experience (n=180) will receive  e-cigarette s to use 
ad libitum over a three -week period. Methods include both naturalistic/ecological assessments  (daily diaries , an 
e-cigarette device that captures topography ) and experimental sessions to examine reinforcement (preference 
and purchase tasks) . Biomarkers will corroborate self -reported indices of use. Because the public health impact 
of e-cigarette use is ultimately dependent on changes in cigarette smoking behavior, our primary focus is on 
changes in smoking and the reinforcement value of cigarettes . We do however test for differences in uptake and 
reinforcement value of e-cigarettes .  
Specific Aim 1: To understand the impact of nicotine concentration and device power  on cigarette smoking  
(cigarettes smoked per day ; CPD ) and smoke exposure  (expi[INVESTIGATOR_33543] ; CO ). Hyp1: There 
will be an interaction such that a higher (vs. lower) nicotine concentration will produce greater reductions in  CPD 
and CO  when device power is low , and a lower nicotine concentration will produce greater reductions in  CPD 
and CO when device power is high . Hyp2: Parallel  analyses will  test the main and interactive effects of nicotine 
concentration and device power  on e-cigarette use ( hypothesizing more puffs per day) . 
Specific Aim 2:  To understand the impact of nicotine concentration and device power  on relative reinforcement 
value  (choices to smoke versus use an e -cigarette in a lab -based preference task, demand for each product on 
a hypothetical purchase task) . Hyp3: There will be a  similar interaction such that a higher nicotine concentration 
will result in fewer  choices to smoke  a low power device , and a lower nicotine concentrat ion will result in fewer 
choices to smoke i n a high-power device . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version: 1 1 
Date: 10/26/[ADDRESS_811580] on Public Health : 
E-cigarette s are now used by 5.5% of adults , and 8.9% of young adults  (16). The most common  reason for 
trying e -cigarettes  among  adults  is to reduce o r quit cigarette smoking (17, 18). The level of toxicant exposure from 
e-cigarettes is still not entirely understood, but most public health experts agree that e-cigarettes deliver fewer 
toxicants tha n combustible cigarettes  (3-7, 12). Thus, for smokers who try  e-cigarettes, the health impact of use is 
dependent on whether they  reduce or discontinue  using cigarettes.  For some users, e -cigarettes may facilitate 
a reduction or cessation in cigarette smoking (19-21). However, most smokers who try e -cigarettes either abandon 
them  completely after a short period  or, more predominantly,  engage in dual use (8, 10, 22). We recognize the 
polariz ing debate over  e-cigarettes, with some emphasi zing potential dangers (23-26), and others emphasizing 
potential benefits (27, 28). We do not take a stance either way. R ather we argue that the  impact (either benefits or 
harms) of e -cigarettes is strongly dependent on their uptake and ability to curb cigarette use . It is therefore 
important to understand the factors that lead to these different use patterns.  
One obvious influence on e -cigarette adoption is the wide variability  of both devices  and e -liquid s on the 
market. All e-cigarettes contain a lithium battery, a reservoir that contains e -liquid, and an atomizer that heats 
the e -liquid to create an aerosol that is delivered to the user. Beyond this basic structure, e-cigarettes vary on a 
wide range of dimensions including : concent ration of nicotine in the e -liquid, flavoring, appearance, power, and 
ability for customization  (11). For current smokers who try e -cigarettes, these  product  characteristics affect  their 
uptake by [CONTACT_612137] e -cigarettes in comparison to cigarettes . Reinforcement 
value  is well established as one of the primary determinants of tobacco use  (29, 30). 
A2. Product -level Determinants of E-cigarette R elative Reinforcement Value: 
Figure [ADDRESS_811581] in comparison 
with the magnitude of competing rewards . Relative 
reinforcement value is sometimes quantified  as the amount 
we would pay (i.e., value) for a given reinforcer when other 
reinforcers are also available. Estimates  of this value are 
established measures of drug abuse l iability, and have been 
utilized for  making drug-related policy and regulatory decisions  (31-34). For drug  reinforcers, reinforcement value 
has been shown to be strongly related to drug dose (35, 36). For established users, reinforcement value can be 
maintained by [CONTACT_612138][INVESTIGATOR_612120] , with these 
cues maintaining value even in the absence of drug delivery (37). Thus, for established cigarette smokers who try 
a novel tobacco product , the two most important influences of reinforcement value are likely to be 1) nicotine 
delivery,  and 2) sensorimotor cues  (Figure 1) .  
Decades of research show that nicotine is the  primary pharmacological reinforcer associated with tobacco 
use (13). Nicotine dose is related to reinforcement value . In pre -clinical self -administration studies, higher doses 
of nicotine maintain higher rates of responding (38), and in human smokers, a reduction in the nicotine content of 
cigarettes reduces the reinforcement value of smoking (36). We know less about how nicotine delivery  relates to 
reinforcement value  for e -cigarettes , but e-cigarettes can deliver as much or more nicotine as traditional 
cigarettes (39), and higher e-cigarette nicotine delivery has been shown to result in greater reductions in craving 
to smoke  (40), greater reductions in withdrawal (40), and to impact uptake and smoking cessation  (41). In addition 
to providing effective nicotine delivery, e -cigarettes also offer potential to replace sensorimotor cues associated 
with smoking, which contrasts with many other non -cigarette tobacco products (and nicotine replacement 
products) . Smokers have a long history in which sensorimotor cues (hand to mouth behavioral substitution, throat 
burn, warmth) are paired with smoking, and these  cues can maintain behavior even when nicotine is absent (42, 
43). The “throat hit” associated with puffing a cigarette is related to nicotine delivery (44), and has long been 
considered to be important for the reinforcing effects of smoking  (45, 46), and e -cigarette users consider it to  be 
critical as well (47-49). E-cigarettes also deliver a visible aerosol that is similar in appearance to cigarette smoke. 
E-cigarette users consider the temperature and volume of the aerosol to be an important sensorimotor 
characteristic  (50, 51). Thus,  both nicotine delivery and sensorimotor cues will determine relative 
reinforcement , and ultimately use of these product s. Both nicotine delivery and sensorimotor cues are 
impacted by [CONTACT_612139] -level characteristics , most critically 1) the concentration of nicotine  in the 
e-liquid  and 2) how much power  is delivered to the heating element  (Figure 1) .  

Version: 1 1 
Date: 10/26/2021 
The concentration of nicotine in e -liquid  (hereafter called concentration) varies from 0-50 mg/ml. 
Concentration is one of the primary determinants of nicotine delivery  (52-55), and increase s the “throat hit” 
associated with using  an e-cigarette (56). Likely as a result of its impact on nicotine delivery and sensory cues, 
concentration is an important factor in reducing smoking withdrawal (40, 57), and has been shown to impact uptake 
and smoking reductions  (41). But nicotine concentration is not the only determinant of reinforcement. The power 
an e-cigarette device delivers to the heating element  is also an important determinant of both nicotine delivery 
and sensor imotor  cues  (51). Higher power increase s nicotine delivery  (58), throat hit  (15), aerosol  volume  (59), and 
aerosol temperature  (51). Some of the most advanced e -cigarettes  (i.e., 3rd generation devices)  allow the user to 
customize the power of the device , and  have a range of power settings that extend much higher than devices 
with a  lower, fixed power setting  (i.e., 1st or 2nd generation devices) . Later devices may better facilitate switching 
from cigarettes to e-cigarettes : users of high-powered 3rd generation device s are more likely to report abst inence 
from cigarettes (60), and to be former smokers (9). This study will test the singular and combined effects of 
concentration and power by [CONTACT_612140] a low vs. high concentration  and a low vs. high 
power  in a 2x2 design .  
Because nicotine delivery and sensor imotor  characteristics are  a joint function of e -liquid and device 
characteristics  (61), smokers may choose products that produce the optimal nicotine delivery and sensorimotor 
stimulation . Thus, we expect (hypothesize) an interaction between  concentration and power , and this becomes 
our core scientific premise . A higher -powered  device that can deliver greater nicotine per puff of aerosol is 
likely to be more reinforcing when it is  paired with a low nicotine concentration  because this combination 
produces the optimal  level of nicotine delivery . Low nicotine concentrations paired with low power may not deliver 
enough nicotine or provide enough sensorimotor stimulation to be reinforcing, while high nicotine concentrations 
paired with high power may provide aversive levels of nicotine or an aversive  throat hit. Consistent with this 
prediction, a small study of 20 e -cigarette users found that users of higher powered devices  used lower e -liquid 
nicotine concentrations than users of lower -powered devices, but obtained higher levels of plasma nicotine (62). 
Furthermore, a recent survey of 436 current e -cigarette users found a strong negative relationship between the 
power of device settings and user’s chosen e -liquid nicotine concentration  (r = - 0.44)  (14). In one experimental 
lab study, smokers reported that a lower  concentration was required to produce  the optimal  throat hit when using 
a higher  power setting  (15). However , we also know that e -cigarette users can compensate for changes in these 
characteristics  by [CONTACT_612141]  (59, 61). When device power or nicotine concentration are lower, 
e-cigarette users have been shown to take longer puffs, more puffs, and ultimately consume more e -liquid (59, 61) 
Thus, an alternative hypothesis is  that that these characteristics may be relatively unimportant , as long as users 
are able to modify their behavior in order to achieve the desired effect.  The interactive effects of concentration 
and power remain unclear , and serve as the central focus  of this application.  
A3. Sign ificance for Tobacco Regulation : 
This research has implications for tobacco regulation . The US F DA recently deemed e -cigarettes to be under 
their regulatory authority, thus allowing the FDA t o set product standards as needed for the protection of public 
health(63). The proposed research project will provide information about two critical e -cigarette characteristics, 
concentration and power, and how they impact use and ultimately health outcomes, forming the scientific basis 
for future tobacco regulation.  Indeed , a recent  report  from the National  Academy  of Sciences , Engineering , 
and Medicine  listed  “trials  comparing  e-cigarettes  with different  product  characteristics  on [use]  
outcomes  to inform  product  standards”  as a top priority  for research (12). 
A4. Impact of Individual Differences  on Product Preferences : 
We recognize that  individual characteristics are likely to influence the relative reinforcement value of two or 
more tobacco products (e.g., age, gender, race, dependence, socioeconomic status, motivation to quit). We plan 
to recruit participants that vary on these characteristics , and will have the opportunity to conduct exploratory tests 
of their impact . Any individual factors that are judged to be of importance based on these exploratory analyses 
will become a larger focus in the planned R01 submission in Year 2. Another critical individual -level factor is prior 
e-cigarette experience. Experienced e -cigarette users obtain greater nicotine delivery from the same device and 
e-liquid than e -cigarette naïve current smokers (64), primarily through longer puff duration (65), and this change 
takes place within the first week of use (66). In this study, we will limit the sample to cigarette smokers with limited 
e-cigarette experience, thereby [CONTACT_612142]. Nonetheless, we expect that there 
may be changes in nicotine delivery that result in changes in reinfor cement value and use across the three -week 
sampling period. We will include sampling week as a variable in all analyses (described below).  
A5. Other Device and Sensory Characteristics : 
We focus herein on those characteristics that are the largest de terminants of nicotine delivery  (device power 
& nicotine concentration). However,  other product characteristics are also important . First, e -liquid is available 
Version: 1 1 
Date: 10/26/2021 
in nearly 8000  flavorings  (67). Flavors have been reported as a common reason for using e -cigarettes  (68-70), 
especially among young adults and adolescents  (71). An experimental test of different flavors  would require many 
groups (flavors), which we do not believe is feasible or wise for a K application, especially given other ongoing 
studies with this focus (72-75). In the present study, we model the current marketplace by [CONTACT_612143] a choice of e -liquid flavors from which to choose (and can use this as a potential covariate if needed). 
Second, the base constituents in e -liquid , both propylene glycol (PG) and vegetable glycerin (VG), come in a  
range of PG/VG ratios. PG/VG ratio has been reported as an important determinant of the sensorimotor 
characteristics described above (76), although likely less so than concentration and power .  
B. Innovation  
The present study is innovative in at leas t four ways. First, prior e -cigarette research has primarily focused 
on the impact of e -cigarettes as a class of products on uptake and cigarette smoking, without attending to the 
impact of specific product features. These product features are critical factors about which we know very little . 
While a small subset of studies are underway to understand the impact of e -liquid nicotine concentration on 
reinforcement and use (78, 79), no studies assess the impact of device power or how device power interacts with 
nicotine concentration to affect reinforcement value and tobacco use patterns. Second , this will be one of the 
first studies to use an experimental design to test the impact of product characteristics. Many published or 
ongoing studies measure and report  the characteristics of e -cigarettes being used in the population (i.e., 
observational research)  (80-83), including the Population Assessment of Tobacco and Health  (PATH ). These 
studies are informative about the use of products with different characteristics. However, a strength of the present 
study is that it is naturalistic, but  randomized in nature, allowing us to draw stronger conclusions about the impact 
of these characteristics. Third , unlike PATH, we embed more frequent (i.e., granular) assessment of use 
outcomes . Participants complete electronic diaries that provide daily measures of smoking behavior, and the e -
cigarette device collects detailed and objective inform ation about e -cigarette use including puff duration and puff 
number . Fourth , the present study takes a more comprehensive approach to understanding influences on relative 
reinforcement than previous studies by [CONTACT_612144] -level factors to be included in exploratory 
moderation analyses.  
C. Approach  
C1. Design Overview  (Figure 2) : 
Adult smokers (21+ years) will be provided with an e -cigarette device and e -liquid (described below) to 
sample over a three -week period. Participants will be blind to nicotine concentration and device power, which 
will be varied in a [ADDRESS_811582] impacted likelihood of purchasing an e -cigarette, characteristics of the e -cigarette 
purchased, and tobacco use during follow up.  
C2. Other Design Considerations:  
First, we considered including adolescents, an important population in regards to e -cigarette use. However, 
the critical question for adolescents relates to whether e -cigarette use in naïve individuals causes downstream 
cigarette use, a very different rese arch question than the one proposed here. Second, we considered a test of 
second vs. third generation e -cigarette devices given that these classes of products are highly prominent on the 
marketplace, but were concerned that a design of this nature would co nfound device power with the ability to 
modify the device, as is the case for third (but not 2nd) generation devices, and would not allow us to isolate the 
impact of power. Finally, we recognize that in our design e -cigarettes are provided for free while participants 
continue to pay for their usual brand cigarettes. However, this inequity exists for al l groups such that if it inflates 
e-cigarette use, it is not confounded with product characteristics. Measures of demand are also included at the 
end of sampl ing to estimate e -cigarette use at a variety of prices.  
 
C3. Participants : 

Version: 1 1 
Date: 10/26/2021 
Daily cigarette smokers (n=200) will be recruited from the local community using standard media outlets. We 
will also submit a Research Data Request to obtain a recruitment report of MUSC patients who potentially meet 
eligibility criteria. The study team will not cold -contact [CONTACT_612145]. We will reach 
out to these potential participants via MyChart message, text message, phone call, or email no more th an three 
times via any one contact [INVESTIGATOR_12183].  Although we anticipate having [ADDRESS_811583] increased this sample size to 200 in anticipation of attrition.  We will recruit an equal number of young adult 
(21-30) and older adult smokers (> 30) to allow for exploratory analysis on the impact of age.  In/exclusion criteria 
are designed to enroll relatively healthy smokers who predominately use cigarettes and have limited experience 
with e -cigarettes. Inclusion criteria include a) adults who have been smoking at least five cigarettes daily for the 
past year ( baseline CO > 8 ppm), b) rate their interest in using e -cigarettes as >5 on a 0 -10 scale, c) have a 
smartphone that can receive text messages and has access to the internet or  has an e -mail account they check 
daily and d) must be age 21 or older . Exclusion criteria include  a) use of tobacco products other than cigarettes , 
including e -cigarettes,  on ten or more days in the past 30 days, b) current use of cessation medications, c) 
pregnant, trying to bec ome pregnant, or breastfeeding, d) recent history of cardiovascular distress in the last 
three months ( e.g., arrhythmia, heart attack, stroke, uncontrolled hypertension), e) history of a seizure disorder, 
f) household member currently enrolled in the study.  
C4. E-cigarettes and E-liquids :  
E-cigarette device will be chosen based on the following guiding principles: 1) can deliver power in the 
desired range ( 20W, 40W), 2) can be fixed at those settings by [CONTACT_394593], but not easily altered by 
[CONTACT_4317], and 3) is able to provide objective measurement of e -cigarette use. We are aware of at least one 
device that meets these criteria: Evolv DNA 75c Color with Tobac co Mini Tank. We will utilize  eScribe software, 
available specifically for researchers for the Evolv  device, which allows experimenters to fix the device settings 
such that they cannot be altered by [CONTACT_4317], and can blind the participants to the power  settings. This 
software can also retrieve information about the participant’s use of the product including the number of puffs, 
the puff duration, and the puff volume , which we view as a great strength . If this  device becomes unavailable, 
we will choose another e -cigarette device using the same principles, and expect that the proliferation of devices 
will add to our list of options from which to choose.  
Nicotine concentrations will be 3 vs. 12 mg/ml, chosen based on preliminary data from [CONTACT_84469]’s (co -
mentor) trials showing these are the most popular concentrations for devices with wattages in the range used 
here. The high nicotine concentration is in a range that has been shown to deliver cigarette -levels of nicotine in 
naïve users assigned to a low -powered device ( 12-36 mg/ ml) (55), and similar concentrations are  currently being 
used in other e -cigarette clinical trials (78, 79). However, the low concentration is in the range shown to be popular 
with higher -powered devices (3 -6 mg/ml) (84). The e -cigarette device and atomizer will be constant for all 
participants, but will be fixed at a low (20 W) or a high ( 40 W) power  using the eScribe software described above . 
The lower power setting was chosen to be in a similar range to popular low -power, second -generation devices 
(55). The high -power setting was chosen to be in a range of available settings for popular third-generation devices 
and based on preliminary data from [CONTACT_84469]’s lab showing it delivers cigarette -levels of nicotine at 3 mg/ml 
concentration with a typi[INVESTIGATOR_2855] e -cigarette puff duration (3.4 s, 0.1 mg nicotine / puff, unpublished data).   
We recognize that multiple device characteristics contribute to changes in power including battery voltage, 
coil resistance, and coil size (85). The device chosen here manipulates power via changes in the voltage of the 
battery, holding other features constant. This design has strong internal validity because only one aspect of the 
device is changi ng. Although voltage is  being manipulated here, we view the results as having implications for 
all of the determinants of power described above.   
E-liquid will be purchased from American E -liquid , which has been used in other research studies  (86) and is 
available in a wide range of concentrations and flavors. E-liquid flavors will be chosen based on the three  most 
popular flavors at the time of study onset.  
C5. Procedures : 
C5a. Screening, Baseline, and Randomization  (Visit  1): Potential participants will be phone screened for 
initial eligibility. Alternatively, participants may complete a Redcap survey to determine initial eligibility . 
Participants will see a script that briefly explains the study.  Those meeting criteria will either by [CONTACT_612146] -person visit. Consented p articipants will attend an in -person visit where 
they complete additional baseline measures and provide a urine sample for cotinine analysis . We will provide 
transportation via a taxi cab company for participants who are eligible, but do not have reliable transportation to 
in-person visits.  All participants will receive an e -cigarette  and e -liquid , varying in  2x2 manner on both nicotine 
concentration ( 3 vs. 12 mg/ml) and power ( 20W vs 40W) (n=45cell). Participants will be given instructions 
Version: 1 1 
Date: 10/26/[ADDRESS_811584] that they do not use any non -study  e-cigarette s during 
this time period  (to avoid use of products with different characteristics  than those assigned) . We are forced to 
rely on self -report of non -study e -cigarette use , but we do not expect it to be a pervasive problem given that 
current e -cigarette users are excluded , and because we provide product for free . Both p articipants  and 
research staff  will be blind to assigned nicotine concentration  and power settings . At each visit, participants will 
be provided with a one-week supply of e -liquid such that they could exclusively use the e-cigarette if they 
choose to do so . Participants will also complete a lab -based preference assessment (described below) . 
C5b. Sampling  (Visit s 2-4): We considered a longer sampling period but our experience in prior sampling 
studies is that 3 weeks is sufficient to acclimate  (77). Over the three -week sampling period, parti cipants will 
complete daily electronic diaries cataloging their cigarette and e -cigarette use. Each morning, participants will 
receive an e -mail or text message link to complete their diary . The diary will assess tobacco use the previous 
day including cigarette smoking, number of e -cigarette  puffs per day, quit attempts, and craving. This electronic 
daily diary is currently being used in [CONTACT_212893]’s R01 and [CONTACT_84135]’s pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] , with compliance > 90% . 
Participants will attend weekly in -person visits where they will complete assessments regarding tobacco use, 
craving, dependence, product perceptions , as well as provide expi[INVESTIGATOR_612121] . Urine samples 
for cotinine analysis wi ll be provided at randomization  and at the end of sampling . Research staff will conduct 
routine device maintenance at these visits. At the end of the sampling period  (Visit 4),  participants will  return 
their e -cigarette device  and e -liquid , and complete the preference assessment again .  
C5d. Follow -up (Visit  5): Participants will return to the lab one month following the end of the study to assess 
their cigarette smoking, e -cigarette use, e-cigarette purchases, and provide  expi[INVESTIGATOR_33543].  
C5e. Modified Procedures to be Implemented During COVID -19 Restrictions:  After passing initial screening, 
all participants wi ll be consented into the study through  our establis hed remote procedures , instead of having 
the option to complete the consent process in person. All in -person screening questionnaires that can be 
administered over the phone prior to the visit will be completed over the phone (demographics questionnaire, 
physiological & medical history, & tobacco use history). Participants who are ine ligible based on these 
questionnaires will be paid for the visit, but not required to come in to the lab to complete the remaining screening 
assessments. If the participant is still eligible after completing these questionnaires , we will then schedule them 
to come into the laboratory to complete the remainder of the  visit. For visits [ADDRESS_811585] (for CO collection and e -cigarette disbursal), 
at least six feet of distance will be maintained by [CONTACT_464327] a desk/table six feet away from the 
participant and then staff steppi[INVESTIGATOR_612122] . All surfaces will 
be sanitized prior to the visit and after the visit.  
C6. Compensation :  
Participants will receive $25 for Visits 1 and 4 (1 .5 hours), $15 for Visits 2 , 3, and 5  (45 minutes) , and a $ 75 
completion bonus if they complete all visits . Participants can earn additional payment  for daily diaries based on 
# completed  (up to $25/week) . Participants who attend all sessions and complete all diary entries could earn 
$245.  
C7. Measures  
Table 1. Study Measure s V1 (SCR/BSL)  V2 V3 V4 V5 (FU)  
Screening Assessments  
Demographics, Medical, Tobacco , Drug , & Alcohol Hx  X     
Measures of relative reinforcement and dependence  
Purchase Tasks  X   X X 
Preference Assessment  X   X  
Version: 1 1 
Date: 10/26/2021 
Dependence (FTND/WISDM/Penn State)  X   X X 
Measures of smoking behavior  
Daily Diaries  Start  ----- ----- End  
Detailed measures of e -cig use collected from device  Start  ----- ----- End  
Timeline follow back   X X X  
Follow -up tobacco use questionnaire      X 
Measures of nicotine delivery and sensorimotor cues  
Urinary cotinine (Nicotine Exposure)  X X  X  
Withdrawal / Craving (MNWS/QSU)  X X  X  
Sensorimotor items added to mCEQ  X X X X  
Other self -report questionnaires  
Product Satisfaction (mCEQ)  X X  X  
Perceived Health Risks  X X  X  
Adverse Event Assessment   X X X X 
Physiological Assessments  
Carbon Monoxide (Smoke Exposure)  X X X X X 
 
C7a. Screening Assessments : Preliminary eligibility will be determined on the phone before participants are 
either consented electronically or invited for an in -person visit to provide consent. Alternatively, participants 
may complete a Redcap survey to determine initial eligibility . Participants will see a script that briefly explains 
the study. Consented participants  will attend an in -person visit where they complete screening  questionnaires 
related to dem ographics, tobacco use history , and expi[INVESTIGATOR_33514].  During the COVID -19 restrictions, 
all consenting will  be done remotely .  
C7b. Measures of Relative Reinforcement and Dependence : Relative reinforcement will primarily be 
assessed using a lab -based preferenc e assessment , a well-validated measure of reinforcement value (88). First, 
participants will sample their usual brand cigarette to standa rdize time since last cigarette. Then participants will 
sample their assigned e-cigarette and e -liquid . Immediately after sampling each product , participants  will 
complete questionnaires about that product , including a modified version of the mCEQ  (89), a perceived health 
risk measure, and a purchase task . Then , participants will complete the preference assessment in which o ver a 
period of 30-minutes and 10 trials  (three-minute inter -trial interval) , participants choose between taking two puffs 
of the e -cigarette, two puffs of their usual (own) brand cigarette, or abstaining from both. This task measures the 
impact of concentration and power on changes in the relatively reinforcement value of smoking compared to 
using the e -cigarette. The primary outcome  is the number of choices to smoke  the usual brand cigarette , but 
secondary outcomes include the number of choices to use the e -cigarette and to abstain. We considered utilizing 
a cigarette other than the participant’s usual brand to control for novelty, but changes in relative reinforcement 
value of the participants’ usual brand cigarette  are most relevant from a public health perspective . Our lab space 
includes ventilated smoking rooms equ ipped with cameras and intercom , which allow us to guide participants 
through the task from a separate area . A secondary measur e of reinforcement value will be the p urchase tas ks—
hypothetical tasks in which participants  estimate the intensity with which they would use cigarettes and e -
cigarettes at a variety of prices  (90, 91). An individual’s sensitivity to the cost of a tobacco product is considered to 
be an estimate of that product’s reinforcement value (31). Dependence will be assessed at in -person visits using 
established measures of cigarette and e-cigarette dependence  (Fagerstrom Test for Nicotine Dependence  (92), 
Wisconsin Inventory of Smoking Dependence Motives  (93), Penn State E -cigarette/Cigarette Dependence Scale  
(94)). [CONTACT_84135] is utilizing both the preference task and the demand measures in her ongoing pi[INVESTIGATOR_612123]/VG ratio in e -liquids.  
C7c. Measures of tobacco use : Daily cigarette use will be captured u sing an electronic daily diary  in which 
participants report the n umber of cigarettes they smoked  (< 2 min/day) . We will collect expi[INVESTIGATOR_612124], which provides an objective measure of recent exposure to smoke, but is 
unaffected by e -cigarette aerosol. During weekly assessments, we will retrieve information about e -cigarette use 
from the device , using eScribe software described above. The software provide s the number of puffs taken each 
day and the average puff duration . Within weekly lab visits, participants will retrospectively report these outcomes  
via timeline followback.  
C7d. Measures of Nicotine Delivery : Participants will  provide urine samples for testing of cotinine  (primary 
metabolite of nicotine)  within our Departmental lab . We will not be able to  discriminate the source of nicotine  
Version: 1 1 
Date: 10/26/2021 
(cigarette vs. e -cigarette) , but will be able to test whether overall nicotine exposure has increased or decreased 
from baseline . We will also measure the quantity of nicotine liq uid that participants use by [CONTACT_612147] e -liquid 
bottles at distribution and at each visit , which combined with the concentration provides some information about 
nicotine intake  from the assigned e -cigarette . We will also assess subjective assessments of nicotine effects 
including withdrawal (MNWS (95)), and craving to smoke (QSU (96)).  
C7e. Measures of Sensorimotor Cues: Because e -cigarettes are relatively new products, there are no 
validated measures to assess reinforcement from sensorimotor cues. In consultation with [CONTACT_84469] (co -
mentor) we will includ e items that assess participant satisfaction with throat hit, aerosol volume, aerosol 
temperature, and flavor. These items will be added to a modified version of the mCEQ  (89), which will assess 
reward and satisfaction from both cigarettes and e -cigarettes.  
C8. Statistical Considerations :  
Power analysis was completed for the primary 
outcome of percentage reduction in average cigarettes 
per day smoked in the last week of sampling, and based 
on data from [CONTACT_212893]’s previous e-cigarette 
sampling trial during which participants received a low 
power (1st Gen) device with one of two nicotine 
concentrations (low or high) (84). We hypothesize that 
the impact of nicotine concentration on CPD reduction 
would be simila r here for the low power groups  and that 
the effect would reversed, but of similar size, in the high -power groups  (Figure 3a). The hypothesized interaction 
is shown during the last week of sampling for simplicity in Figure 3b, specifically that for the low power setting, a 
higher concentration will produce a larger decrease in cigarettes per day than the low concentration, but for the 
high-power setting, a higher concentration will produce a smaller decrease in cigarettes per day than the low 
concentration. We use the meth ods described by [CONTACT_30821](104) for estimating power for interaction effects. As he 
notes, the variance of an interaction effect is four times that of the corresponding main effect. Thus, even large 
effects require large sample sizes to yield adequate power. In this case, a sample size of 40 participants / group 
will provide  80% power to detect an interaction among the two factors with a 0.[ADDRESS_811586] deviation is 38% reduction in CPD , as was the case in [CONTACT_212893]’s trial (84). 
However, we inflate this sample size by 10%, accounting for attrition over time, and thus aim to recruit 45 
participants randomized per group  (total N=180).  
For aims [ADDRESS_811587] of concentration and power on each outcome across time using 
a generalized estimating equation that includes concentration, power, sampling week  (time) , and their 
interactions. Hypothesis 1 will focus on percentage reduction in CPD , Hypothesis 2 will focus on e-cigarette 
uptake (puff s per day ), and Hypothesis 3 will focus on complementary measures of preference/demand, all  of 
which are captured at Visit 4 . Outcomes that are skewed (e.g., demand parameters, urinary cotinine) will be log 
transformed. It is possible that reductions in CPD will be bimod al in the last week of sampling , reflecting a subset 
of participants who may quit smoking during the trial. In this case, we would conduct a Chi -square test on the 
proportion of participants who reduce their smoking by [CONTACT_2669] 50%. Exploratory analyses on age will be 
conducted by [CONTACT_612148] . [CONTACT_612159] (co -mentor) will be meeting with [CONTACT_84135] monthly  for 
training in these analyses, and will also be available to assist with the eventual power analysis for the R01 
submission based on these data.   
Protection of res 
1.  Risks to Human Subjects  
1.1 Human Subjects Involvement, Characteristics, and Design : 
Current s mokers (n= 180) will be randomly assigned to one of four research groups in a 2X2 between -subjects 
design. All participants will receive an e -cigarette and e -liquid to sample over a three -week period. The e -liquid 
will either have a low or a high nicotine concentration,  and the e -cigarette will either have a low or a high -power 
setting. Group assignment will be double -blind, and 15 participants will be randomized to each group.  
1.2 Study Procedures, Materials, and Potential Risks : 
Study Procedures : 
Participants will be screened over the phone to determine initial eligibility. Altneratively , participants may 
complete a redcap survey to determine initial eligibility. Participants will see a script that briefly explains the 
study. Once participants have been determined to be initially eligible, they will be invited to participate in the 
consen t process. The consent process will take place via one of the following modalities: 1) Remote electronic 
0102030405060
Low High% Reduction in CPD
Device PowerLow concentration
High concentration
Figure 3b: Impact on reduction in CPD0102030405060
Baseline Week 1 Week 2 Week 3% Reduction in CPDLow Power / Low Concentration
Low Power / High Concentration
High Power / Low Concentration
High Power / High Concentration
Figure 3a: Hypothetical Changes in CPD over sampling
Version: 1 1 
Date: 10/26/2021 
consent (e -consent) via REDCap facilitated with a discussion over the phone, 2) Remote consent via doxy.me, 
or 3) in -person consent (in -person visit at start of Visit 1). During the COVID -19 restrictions, all consenting will 
be done remotely (not in -person). We have built in the option for electronic consent to reduce the length of the 
first in -person visit and while still providing ample time for the consent process. Consented participants will be 
asked to attend an in -person screening session. Participant s will be asked to provide a carbon monoxide sample 
to confirm smoking status, and women will provide a urine sample for pregnancy testing. Participants will then 
complete a series of interview -administered and participant -administered questionnaires that assess brief 
medical history, tobacco use history including prior and current e -cigarette and cigarette use, current use of 
smoking cessation products, and demographics. After all questionnaires have been completed, study staff will 
determine participant e ligibility.  
Participants who are eligible will then provide a urine sample for cotinine analysis and complete additional 
baseline questionnaires including measures of nicotine dependence. Participants will be randomized to one of 
four groups as described above and wil l have the opportunity to sample their usual brand cigarette and their 
assigned e -cigarette and e -liquid for the first time. After sampling each product, participants will complete 
additional questionnaires and complete the preference assessment where they  choose between their cigarette 
and assigned e -cigarette. At the end of Visit 1, participants will receive a one week supply of e -liquid to take 
home with their assigned e -cigarette, will be enrolled in the daily electronic diary system, and will be provid ed 
with instructions for completing diaries.  
Participants will return to the lab for three additional weekly visits, and will receive a new supply of e -liquid 
for each week. At each visit, we will assess tobacco use during the prior week, participants will provide an expi[INVESTIGATOR_612125], adverse events will be assessed, and participants will complete questionnaires 
about their assigned e -cigarette and e -liquid. At the fourth and final weekly visit, participants will complete the 
sampling and preference assessment again, providing ano ther rurine sample for cotinine testing, and return any 
unused study product.  
Materials : 
Research material obtained from the participants include responses to questionnaires collected directly by 
[CONTACT_612149]. Data will be stored in a password protected 
redcap database and on password protected  network storage. Consent forms will be stored in a separate locked 
filing cabinet or electronically on Redcap  or a secure Box account . Physiological measures include: urine 
collected for pregnancy testing, as well as expi[INVESTIGATOR_33543]. Research data will be obtained 
specifically for research purposes. Every effort will be made to maintain subject confidentiality, in accordance 
with HIPAA.  For participants recruited from the MUSC EHR, the recruitment project will also be housed in 
REDCap and only CITI and IRB certified personnel will have access to the database. The research team will 
only have access to the REDCap recruitmen t project while actively enrolling participants for the study. The 
recruitment project will be stored separately from the other study REDCap projects.  
Potential Risks : 
The research protocol calls for smokers to use e -cigarettes in the lab and (if they desire) at home. E -cigarettes 
are no more harmful than conventional cigarettes, and various studies suggest that they may offer reduced harm.  
Questionnaires and interviews are all non -invasive and involve minimal risk to study participants.  
Potential risks are as follows:  
E-Cigarettes   
E-Cigarettes are not combusted, and therefore levels of carcinogens are markedly reduced, if not eliminated, 
comparable to trace levels seen in nicotine replacement products (97).  E-liquid will contain propylene glycol, 
which some suggest may be harmful.  Propylene glycol is an FDA approved food additive, but with uncertain 
effects upon inhalation.  
As for adverse events, the majority of e -cigarette studies are based within on -line surveys.  We report here 
on three  moderate to large such surveys .  In the first (98), three side effects were reported by >20% of 
respondents: headaches (21%), cough (27%), and increased phlegm (25%).  In the second (99), the most 
common negative effect of e -cigarette use was throat and mouth irritation, and fewer than 3% “reported a high 
level of side effects.”  Finally, the largest online survey to date (100) did not fully assess adverse events, but 
reported that 26% of e -cigarette users reported burning in throat. In a cross -over study of 40 smokers given e -
cigarette for four days (101), the four most common adverse events (within highest dosage group) were 
Version: 1 1 
Date: 10/26/2021 
mouth/throat irritation (38%), nausea (29%), vertigo (21%) and headache (22%).  All other adverse events were 
rare (<5%).   
In the recent RCT from New Zealand (102), there was a higher number and proportion of adverse events 
among active e -cigarette group, but the event rate did not significantly differ as compared to nicotine patches.  
In the RCT from Italy (103) there was no differential rate of adverse events among high, medium, or placebo e -
cigarette groups.  The five most common adverse events were dry cough, mouth irritation, shortness of breath, 
throat irritation, and headache, with no serious adverse events .  The study also reported no significant changes 
in body weight, resting heart rate, or blood pressure.  
There have been a small number of reports to the FDA of people using e -cigarettes and experiencing 
seizures, with most reports involving youth or young adult users . This is rare and will be monitored.   We have 
added an exclusionary criteria for history of seizure disorder . 
There have been a number of reports of respi[INVESTIGATOR_4375], and even some deaths from that respi[INVESTIGATOR_228851], among individuals using e -devices.  No specific substance or product has been linked to these cases. 
Many of but not all of the cases involved u sers vapi[INVESTIGATOR_158956], the active ingredient in marijuana.  Some of the 
instances are specific to nicotine alone.  We advise all participants not to add any substances to the devices we 
give them.  We advise against using any e -device or e -liquid that is obtaine d by [CONTACT_612150] 
(such as off the street or on the black market). While we believe that e -cigarettes are less harmful for adult 
smokers than regular cigarettes on a long -term basis, there may still be short term risks of using e -cigaret tes.  
We will continue to monitor your health in our study by [CONTACT_612151] a set of specific 
questions about any changes you have experienced since the last study contact.   
Concurrent use of e -cigarettes and smoking  
If smokers engage in dual use, the major concern will be too much nicotine intake .  Symptoms of nicotine 
intoxication include nausea, dizziness, headache, and stomachache (104). In [CONTACT_212893]’s  two prior studies, 
wherein participants who used nicotine gum/lozenge and smoked concurrently, there was no evidence of nicotine 
intoxication (105, 106), nor have we seen serious adverse events in our current e -cigarette studies.  We recently 
completed a literature review (107) that showed combined NRT, as well as concurrent use of NRT and smoking, 
were both safe.   
A recently completed short -term observational study included 20 smokers who w ere provided e -cigarettes 
for ad libitum use over a 2 -week period. Data below demonstrate that changes (increases) in e -cigarette use 
increased in direct proportion with changes (decreases) in cigarette smoked (1st and 2nd panel), resulting in no 
net change in nicotine (3rd panel).  Thus, smokers who engage in dual use are likely to NOT increase total 
nicotine intake, a finding replicated elsewhere (108).  These findings are very much consistent with [CONTACT_212893]’s  
prior work on smokeless tobacco, wherein smokers were provided with  snus to use ad libitum over two weeks, 
finding no net increase in nicotine intake.    
 
 
Undermining Cessation  
Another potential risk is that the sampling intervention will decrease rather than increase future cessation.  
We are aware of one recent longitudinal study (109) that showed numerically lower but still statistically similar rates 
of non -smoking among e -cigarette users vs. non -users, but this study did not assess for timing of e -cigarette 
use.  This is the only study to show this that we are aware of.  However, mos t of the available data available 
suggest that e -cigarettes either do not affect cessation or increase it (98, 100, 102, 103, 110 -112).  
Use of E -cigarettes among non -participants and non -smokers, including children  

Version: 1 1 
Date: 10/26/[ADDRESS_811588]. Carpenter’s recently completed snus 
trial in which he mailed tins of smokeless tobacco to smokers all over the country, such “diversion” was not a 
problem.  We will advise participants who receive e -cigarettes to keep them out of reach of children and pets.  
Confidentiality  
A final risk is breach of confidentiality.  
 
2. Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
2.1 Informed Consent : 
All research personnel have up to date CITI Certification for Protection of Human Subjects, and will keep this 
training current throughout the course of the study.  Study participants will be recruited through local media 
outlets (e.g., craigslist, flyers,  print ads, facebook).  Those who call expressing interest in study participation will 
be screened for an initial eligibility determination.  We will also submit a Research Data Request to obtain a 
recruitment report of MUSC patients who potentially meet el igibility criteria. The study team will not cold -contact 
[CONTACT_612152]. We will reach out to these potential participant s via MyChart 
message, text message, phone call, or email no more than three times via any one contact [INVESTIGATOR_12183].  Once initial 
elgibility has been determined, the consent process will be initiated. The consent process will take place via one 
of the following modalities: 1) Remote electronic consent (e -consent) via REDCap facilitated with a discussion 
over the phone, 2) Remote consent via doxy.me, or 3) in -person consent (in -person visit at start of Visit 1). We 
have built in the option for electronic consent t o reduce the length of the first in -person visit and while still 
providing ample time for the consent process.  All participants will be provided with a hard copy and/or electronic 
copy of the consent form . Participants will be given time to review the co nsent documents, as well as a detailed 
overview of the consent documents by [CONTACT_464]. After participants have read the documents and the 
documents have been described by [CONTACT_5984], participants will demonstrate that they understand key 
aspects of the study by [CONTACT_497409] (e.g., “Can you tell me 
what the risks of participation are?”). Participants will sign the consent form only after both the participant and 
the study staff member are confident that the participant understands their participation and the risks associated 
with participating. C onsent signatures may be collected on paper or electronically. When consent is collected 
electronically, our study team has a combination laptop/tablet that will be used for the eProcess. No information 
will be stored locally on the laptop/tablet; all information will be stored securely in REDCap /Box folder  if captured 
electronically. The HIPAA form can be signed on paper or electronically.  For the electronic process, all pages of 
the approved HIPAA documen t will be uploaded into REDCap for review by [CONTACT_2299]. Instead of signing 
on paper, a participant will enter his/her name, date, and sign electronically (with mouse or finger) in 
REDCap.  Each participant will still receive a paper copy of the "Notice of Privacy Practices" and each signed 
HIPAA can be downloaded from REDC ap as a PDF. These procedures will be done on our research team's 
combination laptop/tablet, but no data will be stored on the laptop/tablet; all data will be stored securely in 
Redcap /secure Box folder . Only those participants who provide consent will complete the additional screening 
questionnaires. Additional screening measures include additional questionnaires, an expi[INVESTIGATOR_612126], and (if female) a urine pregna ncy test. Participants who are deemed eligible  
at that point will then complete additional baseline questionnaires. On all correspondence with potential 
participants, we provide ou r toll-free number if any questions or problems arise. We will abide by [CONTACT_612153].  [CONTACT_84135]  will supervise all aspects of the recruiting process.      
2.[ADDRESS_811589] Risk : 
Use of E -cigarettes  
Participants will be screened for general medical precautions (pregnancy, cardiovascular disease), and all 
participants will be monitored for adverse events during the study period. We will clearly advise against use of 
e-cigarettes during pregnancy and br east-feeding and will verify non -pregnancy at study onset. Participants will 
be educated about potential risks of e -cigarette use, including concurrent use with cigarettes. Any adverse events 
will be reported to the IRB. The most likely adverse event (pote ntial for nicotine overdose) is anticipated to be 
rare (~5%) and mild (mouth/throat irritation, headache, nausea, headache), and will be handled quickly (i.e., 
advice to participant to reduce or stop e -cigarettes). Lab studies of toxin exposure (above) sug gest that e -
cigarettes confer no greater risk to health than do conventional cigarettes. It is unlikely that e -cigarette users will 
Version: 1 1 
Date: 10/26/[ADDRESS_811590] in the 3-week sampling period.  All participants will be provided with cessation 
information (referrals to Quitline) as part of this study.  [CONTACT_176064] has agreed to serve as the study medical 
advisor. Both [CONTACT_84135] and [CONTACT_212893] have worked with [CONTACT_36058] in the capacity before, and [CONTACT_36058] will 
be available as needed for consultation on study eligibility criteria or adverse events.  
Concurrent Use of E -cigarettes & Smoking  
Per above, the most common effects from too much nicotine are nausea, headache, and disturbed sleep. 
The sampling period is three weeks  in duration, and thus we do not expect sustained patterns of dual use.  We 
will track adverse events at every study contact, and will have a toll -free number available for participants to call 
if they experience an adverse event (AE).  All study contacts will remind participants of this number. Participants 
will be encouraged to contact [CONTACT_612154] s erious events. If they wish, they may contact 
[CONTACT_612155]. We will withdraw participants who have a 
serious AE, become pregnant or begin breast -feeding. For other AEs, if the study medical advisor ([CONTACT_612160]) , the participant’s physician or the participant wishes it, the participant will be withdrawn from the study.  
Undermining Cessation  
We emphasize that this is not a cessation trial, though we will collect various cessation outcomes.  
Nonetheless, it is possible that use of e -cigarettes will undermine quitting (though this would be contrary to 
existing literature).  At the end of the study, participants will be advised to stop using all tobacco products, 
including e -cigarettes.  
Diversion of e -cigarettes  
We will strongly advise participants that they are not to share the study product with others, and that they 
should store the product in a secure area that is out of reach of children and pets. We cannot directly assess 
any diversion/uptake from the perspe ctive of adolescents, since that would require separate consent, and is a 
separate research question.   
Confidentiality  
We will use the participant’s name [CONTACT_612157] a locked file, to be kept centrally at our study office , or electronically in Redcap .  Copi[INVESTIGATOR_212867] , or on recap when collected electronically . When 
consent is collected electronically, our study team has a combination laptop/tablet that will be used for the 
eProcess. No information will be stored locally on the laptop/tablet; a ll information will be stored securely in 
REDCap if captured electronically. The HIPAA form can be signed on paper or electronically.  For the electronic 
process, all pages of the approved HIPAA document will be uploaded into REDCap, using a SCTR -developed 
template and procedures, for review by [CONTACT_2299]. Instead of signing on paper, a participant will enter his/her 
name, date, and sign electronically (with mouse or finger) in REDCap.  Each participant will still receive a paper 
copy of the "Notice of P rivacy Practices" and each signed HIPAA can be downloaded from REDCap as a PDF. 
These procedures will be done on our research team's combination laptop/tablet, but no data will be stored on 
the laptop/tablet; all data will be stored securely in REDCap.  
The research materials will become part of the modern record keepi[INVESTIGATOR_184195], 
which will minimize risks to the privacy of participants. All interviews, records, charts, rating scales, and other 
patient information will be ke pt in locked files at the Cancer Control Program, with limited access to the study 
personnel. All database files will include password protection to further ensure confidentiality.  
3. Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to the Participants and Others   
This study is not likely to offer any direct benefit to the participants in the study.  
4.   Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained  
In an ever -changing marketplace of tobacco -produces and nicotine -delivery devices, e -cigarettes are 
arguably the most popular new products available to smokers.  The most important question about e -cigarettes 
is whether it will have a positive or negative impact on public health. The impact on public health is largely 
dependent on whether e -cigarettes reduce combustible cigarette use. This study will provide inform ation about 
whether one e -liquid characteristic will impact reinforcement value of e -cigarette s among current combustible 
cigarette users.  
Version: 1 1 
Date: 10/26/[ADDRESS_811591]. Carpenter’s previous e -cigarette sampling 
trial during which participants received a low power (1st Gen) device with one of two nicotine concentrations (low 
or high) (84). We hypothesize that the impact of nicotine concentration on CPD reduction would be simila r here 
for the low power groups  and that the effect would reversed, but of similar size, in the high -power groups . In this 
case, a sample size of 40 participants / group will provide  80% power to detect an interaction among the two 
factors with a 0.[ADDRESS_811592] deviation is 38% reduction in CPD , 
as was the case in [CONTACT_212893]’s trial (84). However, we inflate this sample size by 10%, accounting for attrition 
over time, and thus aim to recruit 45 participants randomized per group  (total N=180).  
For aims [ADDRESS_811593] of concentration and power on each outcome across time using 
a generalized estimating equation that includes concentration, power, sampling week (time), and their 
interactions. Hypothesis 1 will focus on percentage reduction in CPD, Hypothesis 2 will focus on e -cigarette 
uptake (puffs per day), and  Hypothesis 3 will focus on complementary measures of preference/demand, all of 
which are captured at Visit 4. Outcomes that are skewed (e.g., demand parameters, urinary cotinine) will be log 
transformed. It is possible that reductions in CPD will be bimod al in the last week of sampling , reflecting a subset 
of participants who may quit smoking during the trial. In this case, we would conduct a Chi -square test on the 
proportion of participants who reduce their smoking by [CONTACT_2669] 50%. Exploratory analyses on age will be 
conducted by [CONTACT_612148] . As described in the Career Development Plan, [CONTACT_612161] (co -
mentor) will be meeting with [CONTACT_84135] monthly for training in these analyses, and will also be available to assist 
with any unexpected i ssues. Gender will be examined separately as a direct or moderating influence on all 
outcomes.  
 
 
REFERENCES CITED  
1. International. PM. Heat -Not-Burn. Available from: https://www.pmi.com/glossary -
section/glossary/heated -tobacco -products . 
2. Jamal A, Gentzke A, Hu SS, Cullen KA, Apelberg BJ, Homa DM, King BA. Tobacco Use Among Middle 
and High School Students - [LOCATION_002], 2011 -2016. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2017;66(23):597 -603. 
doi: 10.[ZIP_CODE]/mmwr.mm6623a1. PubMed PMID: 28617771.  
3. Hecht SS, Carmella SG, Kotandeniya D, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_235732], Chen M, Ransom BW, Vogel RI, Thompson E, 
Murphy SE, Hatsukami DK. Evaluation of toxicant and carcinogen metabolites in the urine of e -cigarette users 
versus cigarette smokers. Nicotine Tob Res. 2015;17 (6):704 -9. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntu218. PubMed PMID: 
25335945; PMCID: PMC4481723.  
4. Goniewicz ML, Knysak J, Gawron M, Kosmider L, Sobczak A, Kurek J, Prokopowicz A, Jablonska -
Czapla M, Rosik -Dulewska C, Havel C, Jacob P, 3rd, Benowitz N. Levels of selected carcinogens and 
toxicants in vapour from electronic cigarettes. Tob Control. 201 4;23(2):133 -9. doi: 10.1136/tobaccocontrol -
2012 -050859. PubMed PMID: 23467656; PMCID: PMC4154473.  
5. Czogala J, Goniewicz ML, Fidelus B, Zielinska -Danch W, Travers MJ, Sobczak A. Secondhand 
exposure to vapors from electronic cigarettes. Nicotine Tob Res. 2014;16(6):655 -62. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntt203. 
PubMed PMID: 24336346; PMCID: PMC4565991.  
6. Hajek P, Etter JF, Benowitz N, Eissenberg T, McRobbie H. Electronic cigarettes: review of use, content, 
safety, effects on smokers and potential for harm and benefit. Addiction. 2014;109(11):1801 -10. doi: 
10.1111/add.[ZIP_CODE]. PubMed PMID: 25078252; PMCID:  PMC4487785.  
7. Schick SF, Blount BC, Jacob PR, Saliba NA, Bernert JT, El Hellani A, Jatlow P, Pappas RS, Wang L, 
Foulds J, Ghosh A, Hecht SS, Gomez JC, Martin JR, Mesaros C, Srivastava S, St Helen G, Tarran R, 
Lorkiewicz PK, Blair IA, Kimmel HL, Doerschuk CM, Benowitz  NL, Bhatnagar A. Biomarkers of exposure to 
new and emerging tobacco delivery products. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2017;313(3):L425 -L52. doi: 
10.1152/ajplung.[ZIP_CODE].2016. PubMed PMID: 28522563; PMCID: PMC5626373.  
8. Farsalinos KE, Poulas K, Voudris V, Le Houezec J. Electronic cigarette use in the European Union: 
analysis of a representative sample of 27 460 Europeans from 28 countries. Addiction. 2016;111(11):2032 -40. 
doi: 10.1111/add.[ZIP_CODE]. PubMed PMID: 27338716.  
9. Farsalinos KE, Romagna G, Voudris V. Factors associated with dual use of tobacco and electronic 
cigarettes: A case control study. Int J Drug Policy. 2015;26(6):595 -600. doi: 10.1016/j.drugpo.2015.01.006. 
PubMed PMID: 25687714.  
10. (ASH) AoSaH. ASH Factsheet: Use of e -cigarettes (vapourisers) among adults in Great Britain.2017.  
11. Brown CJ, Cheng JM. Electronic cigarettes: product characterisation and design considerations. Tob 
Control. 2014;[ADDRESS_811594] 2:ii4 -10. doi: 10.1136/tobaccocontrol -2013 -051476. PubMed PMID: 24732162; PMCID: 
PMC3995271.  
12. National Academy of Sciences E, and Medicine. Public Health Consequences of E -cigarettes. 
Washington, DC: The National Academicis Press.; 2018.  
13. USDHHS. The Health Consequences of Smoking: Nicotine Addiction. a report of the Surgeon 
general.1988.  
14. Browne M, Todd DG. Then and now: Consumption and dependence in e -cigarette users who formerly 
smoked cigarettes. Addict Behav. 2018;76:113 -21. doi: 10.1016/j.addbeh.2017.07.034. PubMed PMID: 
28780356.  
15. Etter JF. Throat hit in users of the electronic cigarette: An exploratory study. Psychol Addict Behav. 
2016;30(1):93 -100. doi: 10.1037/adb0000137. PubMed PMID: 26653150.  
16. Kasza KA, Ambrose BK, Conway KP, Borek N, Taylor K, Goniewicz ML, Cummings KM, Sharma E, 
Pearson JL, Green VR, Kaufman AR, Bansal -Travers M, Travers MJ, Kwan J, Tworek C, Cheng YC, Yang L, 
Pharris -Ciurej N, van Bemmel DM, Backinger CL, Compton WM, Hyla nd AJ. Tobacco -Product Use by [CONTACT_612156] 2013 and 2014. N Engl J Med. 2017;376(4):342 -53. doi: 
10.1056/NEJMsa1607538. PubMed PMID: 28121512; PMCID: PMC5317035.  
17. Carroll Chapman SL, Wu LT. E -cigarette prevalence and correlates of use among adolescents versus 
adults: a review and comparison. J Psychiatr Res. 2014;54:43 -54. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2014.03.005. 
PubMed PMID: 24680203; PMCID: PMC4055566.  
18. Simmons VN, Quinn GP, Harrell PT, Meltzer LR, Correa JB, Unrod M, Brandon TH. E -cigarette use in 
adults: a qualitative study of users' perceptions and future use intentions. Addict Res Theory. 2016;24(4):313 -
21. doi: 10.3109/16066359.2016.1139700. PubM ed PMID: 27725794; PMCID: PMC5055066.  
 
19. Etter JF, Bullen C. A longitudinal study of electronic cigarette users. Addict Behav. 2014;39(2):491 -4. 
doi: 10.1016/j.addbeh.2013.10.028. PubMed PMID: 24229843.  
20. Malas M, van der Tempel J, Schwartz R, Minichiello A, Lightfoot C, Noormohamed A, Andrews J, 
Zawertailo L, Ferrence R. Electronic Cigarettes for Smoking Cessation: A Systematic Review. Nicotine Tob 
Res. 2016;18(10):1926 -36. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntw119. Pub Med PMID: 27113014.  
21. Polosa R, Caponnetto P, Maglia M, Morjaria JB, Russo C. Success rates with nicotine personal 
vaporizers: a prospective 6 -month pi[INVESTIGATOR_612127]. BMC Public Health. 
2014;14:1159. doi: 10.1186/1471 -2458 -14-1159. PubMed PMID: 2 5380748; PMCID: PMC4247211.  
22. Lee YO, Hebert CJ, Nonnemaker JM, Kim AE. Multiple tobacco product use among adults in the United 
States: cigarettes, cigars, electronic cigarettes, hookah, smokeless tobacco, and snus. Prev Med. 2014;62:14 -
9. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2014.01.014. PubMed P MID: 24440684.  
23. Soneji S, Barrington -Trimis JL, Wills TA, Leventhal AM, Unger JB, Gibson LA, Yang J, Primack BA, 
Andrews JA, Miech RA, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_133285], Dick DM, Eissenberg T, Hornik RC, Dang R, Sargent JD. Association 
Between Initial Use of e -Cigarettes and Subsequent Ciga rette Smoking Among Adolescents and Young Adults: 
A Systematic Review and Meta -analysis. JAMA Pediatr. 2017;171(8):788 -97. doi: 
10.1001/jamapediatrics.2017.1488. PubMed PMID: 28654986; PMCID: PMC5656237.  
24. Glantz SA, Bareham DW. E -Cigarettes: Use, Effects on Smoking, Risks, and Policy Implications. Annu 
Rev Public Health. 2018. doi: 10.1146/annurev -publhealth -040617 -013757. PubMed PMID: 29323609.  
25. Glantz S. Accumulating evidence suggests e -cigs 1/3 to 1/2 as bad as cigs (maybe higher). University 
of [LOCATION_004], San Francisco2016 [December 14, 2017].  
26. Leventhal AM, Stone MD, Andrabi N, Barrington -Trimis J, Strong DR, Sussman S, Audrain -McGovern 
J. Association of e -Cigarette Vapi[INVESTIGATOR_540498]. JAMA. 
2016;316(18):1918 -20. doi: 10.1001/jama.2016.[ZIP_CODE]. PubM ed PMID: 27825000; PMCID: PMC5580820.  
27. Bullen C. Rise in e -cigarette use linked to increase in smoking cessation rates. BMJ. 2017;358:j3506. 
doi: 10.1136/bmj.j3506. PubMed PMID: 28747300.  
28. Kozlowski LT, Abrams DB. Obsolete tobacco control themes can be hazardous to public health: the 
need for updating views on absolute product risks and harm reduction. BMC Public Health. 2016;16:432. doi: 
10.1186/s12889 -016-3079 -9. PubMed PMID: 27221096;  PMCID: PMC4878038.  
29. Hursh SR. Behavioral economics of drug self -administration: an introduction. Drug Alcohol Depend. 
1993;33(2):165 -72. PubMed PMID: 8261881.  
30. Smith TT, Sved AF, Hatsukami DK, Donny EC. Nicotine reduction as an increase in the unit price of 
cigarettes: a behavioral economics approach. Prev Med. 2014;68:23 -8. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2014.07.005. 
PubMed PMID: 25025523; PMCID: PMC4446706.  
31. Bickel WK, Marsch LA, Carroll ME. Deconstructing relative reinforcing efficacy and situating the 
measures of pharmacological reinforcement with behavioral economics: a theoretical proposal. 
Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2000;153(1):44 -56. PubMed PMID: 112 [ZIP_CODE].  
32. Bickel WK, Snider SE, Quisenberry AJ, Stein JS. Reinforcer Pathology: The Behavioral Economics of 
Abuse Liability Testing. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2017;101(2):185 -7. doi: 10.1002/cpt.443. PubMed PMID: 
27509043.  
33. Hursh SR. Behavioral economics of drug self -administration and drug abuse policy. J Exp Anal Behav. 
1991;56(2):377 -93. doi: 10.1901/jeab.1991.56 -377. PubMed PMID: 1955823; PMCID: PMC1323109.  
34. Tidey JW, Cassidy RN, Miller ME, Smith TT. Behavioral Economic Laboratory Research in Tobacco 
Regulatory Science. Tob Regul Sci. 2016;2(4):440 -51. doi: 10.[ZIP_CODE]/TRS.2.4.13. PubMed PMID: 28580378; 
PMCID: PMC5453650.  
35. Hursh SR, Roma PG. Behavioral economics and empi[INVESTIGATOR_612128]. J Exp Anal Behav. 
2013;99(1):98 -124. doi: 10.1002/jeab.7. PubMed PMID: 23344991.  
36. Smith TT, Cassidy RN, Tidey JW, Luo X, Le CT, Hatsukami DK, Donny EC. Impact of smoking reduced 
nicotine content cigarettes on sensitivity to cigarette price: further results from a multi -site clinical trial. 
Addiction. 2017;112(2):349 -59. doi: 10.1111 /add.[ZIP_CODE]. PubMed PMID: 27741367; PMCID: PMC5233558.  
37. Shahan TA, Bickel WK, Madden GJ, Badger GJ. Comparing the reinforcing efficacy of nicotine 
containing and de -nicotinized cigarettes: a behavioral economic analysis. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 
1999;147(2):210 -6. PubMed PMID: 10591889.  
38. Donny EC, Caggiula AR, Mielke MM, Jacobs KS, Rose C, Sved AF. Acquisition of nicotine self -
administration in rats: the effects of dose, feeding schedule, and drug contingency. Psychopharmacology 
(Berl). 1998;136(1):83 -90. PubMed PMID: 9537686.  
 
39. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_133285], Breland AB, Karaoghlanian NV, Shihadeh AL, Eissenberg T. Preliminary results of an 
examination of electronic cigarette user puff topography: the effect of a mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_13959] -based topography 
measurement device on plasma nicotine and subjective ef fects. Nicotine Tob Res. 2015;17(2):142 -9. doi: 
10.1093/ntr/ntu186. PubMed PMID: 25239957; PMCID: PMC4838000.  
40. Dawkins L, Turner J, Hasna S, Soar K. The electronic -cigarette: effects on desire to smoke, withdrawal 
symptoms and cognition. Addict Behav. 2012;37(8):970 -3. doi: 10.1016/j.addbeh.2012.03.004. PubMed PMID: 
22503574.  
41. Tseng TY, Ostroff JS, Campo A, Gerard M, Kirchner T, Rotrosen J, Shelley D. A Randomized Trial 
Comparing the Effect of Nicotine Versus Placebo Electronic Cigarettes on Smoking Reduction Among Young 
Adult Smokers. Nicotine Tob Res. 2016;18(10):1937 -43. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntw017. PubMed PMID: 26783292; 
PMCID: PMC5016841.  
42. Rupprecht LE, Smith TT, Schassburger RL, Buffalari DM, Sved AF, Donny EC. Behavioral mechanisms 
underlying nicotine reinforcement. Curr Top Behav Neurosci. 2015;24:19 -53. doi: 10.1007/978 -3-319-[ZIP_CODE] -
6_2. PubMed PMID: 25638333; PMCID: PMC4536896.  
43. Caggiula AR, Donny EC, Palmatier MI, Liu X, Chaudhri N, Sved AF. The role of nicotine in smoking: a 
dual-reinforcement model. Nebr Symp Motiv. 2009;55:91 -109. PubMed PMID: 19013940; PMCID: 
PMC2694565.  
44. Goldenson NI, Kirkpatrick MG, Barrington -Trimis JL, Pang RD, McBeth JF, Pentz MA, Samet JM, 
Leventhal AM. Effects of sweet flavorings and nicotine on the appeal and sensory properties of e -cigarettes 
among young adult vapers: Application of a novel met hodology. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2016;168:176 -80. doi: 
10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2016.09.014. PubMed PMID: 27676583; PMCID: PMC5086287.  
45. Brown and Williamson Management SH. B&W: Ammonia, Nicotine Delivery, pH and Related Issues.; 
Confidential Draft Report Regarding Nicotine Delivery Prepared by B&W Management for B&W Outside 
Counsel to Facilitate the Rendition of Legal 1995. Available f rom: 
https://www.industrydocumentslibrary.ucsf.edu/tobacco/docs/ - id=kzll0041 . 
46. Morris P. Outline of presentation Unknown. Available from: 
https://www.industrydocumentslibrary.ucsf.edu/tobacco/docs/ - id=njpn0149 . 
47. Chen Z, Zeng DD. Mining online e -liquid reviews for opi[INVESTIGATOR_612129] e -liquid features. BMC 
Public Health. 2017;17(1):633. doi: 10.1186/s12889 -017-4533 -z. PubMed PMID: 28683797; PMCID: 
PMC5501340.  
48. Harlay J. In depth with “Throat Hit” Throat hit in vapi[INVESTIGATOR_366068]’t as important when you’ve moved away 
from smoking reveals a recent survey. 2016 [December 19, 2017]. Available from: 
https://www.vapi[INVESTIGATOR_612130].com/2016/08/11/in -depth -with -throat -hit/. 
49. Kershaw O. All about Throat Hit! 2016 [December 19, 2017]. Available from: 
http://vapi[INVESTIGATOR_007].com/blog/guides/throat -hit. 
50. The truth behind vapor production 2012 [December 19, 2017]. Available from: 
http://guidetovapi[INVESTIGATOR_007].com/2012/01/28/the -truth -behind -vapor -production/ . 
51. Volts, Watts, and Ohms - how do they affect the e -cigarette experience?  [December 19, 2017]. 
Available from: https://www.nicorex.eu/volts -watts -and-ohms -how -do-they -affect -the-e-cigarette -
experience . 
52. Talih S, Balhas Z, Eissenberg T, Salman R, Karaoghlanian N, El Hellani A, Baalbaki R, Saliba N, 
Shihadeh A. Effects of user puff topography, device voltage, and liquid nicotine concentration on electronic 
cigarette nicotine yield: measurements and mode l predictions. Nicotine Tob Res. 2015;17(2):150 -7. doi: 
10.1093/ntr/ntu174. PubMed PMID: 25187061; PMCID: PMC4837998.  
53. El-Hellani A, Salman R, El -Hage R, Talih S, Malek N, Baalbaki R, Karaoghlanian N, Nakkash R, 
Shihadeh A, Saliba NA. Nicotine and Carbonyl Emissions From Popular Electronic Cigarette Products: 
Correlation to Liquid Composition and Design Characteristics . Nicotine Tob Res. 2016. doi: 
10.1093/ntr/ntw280. PubMed PMID: 27798087.  
54. Shihadeh A, Eissenberg T. Electronic cigarette effectiveness and abuse liability: predicting and 
regulating nicotine flux. Nicotine Tob Res. 2015;17(2):158 -62. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntu175. PubMed PMID: 
25180079; PMCID: PMC4837999.  
55. Lopez AA, Hiler MM, Soule EK, Ramoa CP, Karaoghlanian NV, Lipato T, Breland AB, Shihadeh AL, 
Eissenberg T. Effects of Electronic Cigarette Liquid Nicotine Concentration on Plasma Nicotine and Puff 
Topography in Tobacco Cigarette Smokers: A Preliminary Report. Nicotine Tob Res. 2016;18(5):720 -3. doi: 
10.1093/ntr/ntv182. PubMed PMID: 26377515.  
 
56. Goldenson NI, Leventhal AM, Stone MD, McConnell RS, Barrington -Trimis JL. Associations of 
Electronic Cigarette Nicotine Concentration With Subsequent Cigarette Smoking and Vapi[INVESTIGATOR_612131]. JAMA Pediatr. 2017. doi: 10.1001/jamapediatrics.20 17.3209. PubMed PMID: 29059261.  
57. Etter JF. Explaining the effects of electronic cigarettes on craving for tobacco in recent quitters. Drug 
Alcohol Depend. 2015;148:102 -8. doi: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2014.12.030. PubMed PMID: 25592454.  
58. Farsalinos KE, Yannovits N, Sarri T, Voudris V, Poulas K. Protocol proposal for, and evaluation of, 
consistency in nicotine delivery from the liquid to the aerosol of electronic cigarettes atomizers: regulatory 
implications. Addiction. 2016;111(6):1069 -76. doi: 10.1111/add.[ZIP_CODE]. PubMed PMID: 26756124.  
59. Farsalinos K, Poulas K, Voudris V. Changes in puffing topography and nicotine consumption depending 
on the power setting of electronic cigarettes. Nicotine Tob Res. 2017. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntx219. PubMed PMID: 
29059377.  
60. Etter JF. Characteristics of users and usage of different types of electronic cigarettes: findings from an 
online survey. Addiction. 2016;111(4):724 -33. doi: 10.1111/add.[ZIP_CODE]. PubMed PMID: 26597453.  
61. Dawkins LE, Kimber CF, Doig M, Feyerabend C, Corcoran O. Self -titration by [INVESTIGATOR_375361] e -cigarette 
users: blood nicotine delivery and subjective effects. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2016;233(15 -16):2933 -41. 
doi: 10.1007/s00213 -016-4338 -2. PubMed PMID: [ADDRESS_811595] combustible cigarettes met their match? The nicotine delivery profiles and harmful 
constituent exposures of second -generation and third -generation electronic cigarette users. Tob Control. 
2017;26(e1):e23 -e8. doi: 10.1136/tobaccocontrol -2016 -053041. PubMed PMID: 27729564; PMCID: 
PMC5574194.  
63. Deeming tobacco products to be subject to the federal Food, Drug, And Cosmetic Act, as amended by 
[CONTACT_461991], Restrictions on the sale and distribution of tobacco 
products and required warning statements for t obacco products, (2016).  
64. Hajek P, Goniewicz ML, Phillips A, Myers Smith K, West O, McRobbie H. Nicotine intake from 
electronic cigarettes on initial use and after 4 weeks of regular use. Nicotine Tob Res. 2015;17(2):175 -9. doi: 
10.1093/ntr/ntu153. PubMed PMID: 25122503; PMCID:  PMC4892703.  
65. Farsalinos KE, Spyrou A, Stefopoulos C, Tsimopoulou K, Kourkoveli P, Tsiapras D, Kyrzopoulos S, 
Poulas K, Voudris V. Nicotine absorption from electronic cigarette use: comparison between experienced 
consumers (vapers) and naive users (smokers). Sci Rep . 2015;5:[ZIP_CODE]. doi: 10.1038/srep11269. PubMed 
PMID: 26082330; PMCID: PMC4469966.  
66. Lee YH, Gawron M, Goniewicz ML. Changes in puffing behavior among smokers who switched from 
tobacco to electronic cigarettes. Addict Behav. 2015;48:1 -4. doi: 10.1016/j.addbeh.2015.04.003. PubMed 
PMID: 25930009; PMCID: PMC4457608.  
67. Zhu SH, Sun JY, Bonnevie E, Cummins SE, Gamst A, Yin L, Lee M. Four hundred and sixty brands of 
e-cigarettes and counting: implications for product regulation. Tob Control. 2014;[ADDRESS_811596] 3:iii3 -9. doi: 
10.1136/tobaccocontrol -2014 -051670. PubMed PMID: 2 4935895; PMCID: PMC4078673.  
68. Berg CJ, Barr DB, Stratton E, Escoffery C, Kegler M. Attitudes toward E -Cigarettes, Reasons for 
Initiating E -Cigarette Use, and Changes in Smoking Behavior after Initiation: A Pi[INVESTIGATOR_612132]. Open J Prev Med. 2014 ;4(10):789 -800. doi: 10.4236/ojpm.2014.410089. PubMed 
PMID: 25621193; PMCID: PMC4304080.  
69. Farsalinos KE, Romagna G, Tsiapras D, Kyrzopoulos S, Spyrou A, Voudris V. Impact of flavour 
variability on electronic cigarette use experience: an internet survey. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 
2013;10(12):7272 -82. doi: 10.3390/ijerph10127272. PubMe d PMID: 24351746; PMCID: PMC3881166.  
70. Soule EK, Rosas SR, Nasim A. Reasons for electronic cigarette use beyond cigarette smoking 
cessation: A concept mappi[INVESTIGATOR_120229]. Addict Behav. 2016;56:41 -50. doi: 10.1016/j.addbeh.2016.01.008. 
PubMed PMID: 26803400; PMCID: PMC4753528.  
71. Kong G, Morean ME, Cavallo DA, Camenga DR, Krishnan -Sarin S. Reasons for Electronic Cigarette 
Experimentation and Discontinuation Among Adolescents and Young Adults. Nicotine Tob Res. 
2015;17(7):847 -54. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntu257. PubMed PMID: 25481917; P MCID: PMC4674436.  
72. Colby [CONTACT_10009]. Evaluating new nicotine standards for cigarettes -Project 3.  
73. Litt MD. Taste, preferences, and behavior: Effects of nicotine and flavorings in electroni.  
74. Donny EC. Evaluating new nicotine standards for cigarettes -Project 2.  
75. Krishnan -Sarin S. Project 3: Flavors and e -cigarette effects in adolescent smokers P238 -273. 
 
76. Jones I. PG vs VG 2016 [December 19, 2017]. Available from: http://vapi[INVESTIGATOR_007]360.com/pg -vs-vg-
what -is-the-difference -and-what -should -i-use/ . 
77. Carpenter M, Heckman BW, Wahlquist AE, Wagener TL, Goniewicz ML, Gray KM, Froeliger B, 
Cummings KM. A Naturalistic, Randomized Pi[INVESTIGATOR_36733] E-Cigarettes: Uptake, Exposure, and Behavioral 
Effects. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_1948]. 2017. doi: 10.1158/1055 -9965.EPI -17-0460. PubMed PMID: 
29127080.  
78. Eissenberg TE. Project 3: Randomized control trial methods for MRTP evaluation National Institute on 
Drug Abuse.  
79. Mermelstein RJ. Predictors and consequences of combustible cigarette smokers’ switch to 
standardized research e -cigarette. University of Illinois at Chicago: National Institute on Drug Abuse; 2017.  
80. Hyland A, Ambrose BK, Conway KP, Borek N, Lambert E, Carusi C, Taylor K, Crosse S, Fong GT, 
Cummings KM, Abrams D, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_18152], Sargent J, Messer K, Bansal -Travers M, Niaura R, Vallone D, Hammond 
D, Hilmi N, Kwan J, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_612133] A, Kalton G, Lohr S, Pharris -Ciurej N, Castleman V, Green VR, Tessman G, 
Kaufman A, Lawrence C, van Bemmel DM, Kimmel HL, Blount B, Yang L, O'Brien B, Tworek C, Alberding D, 
Hull LC, Cheng YC, Maklan D, Backinger CL, Compton WM. Design and methods of the Population 
Assessment of Tobacco  and Health (PATH) Study. Tob Control. 2017;26(4):371 -8. doi: 
10.1136/tobaccocontrol -2016 -052934. PubMed PMID: 27507901; PMCID: PMC5299069.  
81. Sutfin EL. TOBACCO USE DURING THE TRANSITION TO ADULTHOOD.  
82. Barrington -Trimis JL. Understanding transitions from vapi[INVESTIGATOR_612134].  
83. Audrain -McGovern JE. The imapct of e -cigarette use on adolescent uptake and persistence of 
conventional smoking: Who is most vulnerable? .  
84. Adriaens K, Van Gucht D, Baeyens F. Differences between dual users and switchers center around 
vapi[INVESTIGATOR_612135]. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 
2018;15(1).  
85. Eissenberg T, Shihadeh A. Nicotine flux: a potentially important tool for regulating electronic cigarettes. 
Nicotine Tob Res. 2015;17(2):165 -7. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntu208. PubMed PMID: 25332456; PMCID: 
PMC4838002.  
86. Krishnan -Sarin S, Green BG, Kong G, Cavallo DA, Jatlow P, Gueorguieva R, Buta E, O'Malley SS. 
Studying the interactive effects of menthol and nicotine among youth: An examination using e -cigarettes. Drug 
Alcohol Depend. 2017;180:193 -9. doi: 10.1016/j.d rugalcdep.2017.07.044. PubMed PMID: 28915478; PMCID: 
PMC5659733.  
87. Cheng T. Chemical evaluation of electronic cigarettes. Tob Control. 2014;[ADDRESS_811597] 2:ii11 -7. doi: 
10.1136/tobaccocontrol -2013 -051482. PubMed PMID: 24732157; PMCID: PMC3995255.  
88. Tidey JW, Colby [CONTACT_10009], Xavier EM. Effects of smoking abstinence on cigarette craving, nicotine 
withdrawal, and nicotine reinforcement in smokers with and without schizophrenia. Nicotine Tob Res. 
2014;16(3):326 -34. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntt152. PubMed PMID: 24113929; PMCID: PMC3920337.  
89. Westman EC, Behm FM, Rose JE. Dissociating the nicotine and airway sensory effects of smoking. 
Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1996;53(2):309 -15. PubMed PMID: 8808137.  
90. Jacobs EA, Bickel WK. Modeling drug consumption in the clinic using simulation procedures: demand 
for heroin and cigarettes in opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480] -dependent outpatients. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 1999;7(4):412 -26. 
PubMed PMID: 10609976.  
91. Mackillop J, Murphy JG, Tidey JW, Kahler CW, Ray LA, Bickel WK. Latent structure of facets of alcohol 
reinforcement from a behavioral economic demand curve. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2009;203(1):33 -40. doi: 
10.1007/s00213 -008-1367 -5. PubMed PMID: 1892 5387; PMCID: PMC2774887.  
92. Meneses -Gaya IC, Zuardi AW, Loureiro SR, Crippa JA. Psychometric properties of the Fagerstrom 
Test for Nicotine Dependence. J Bras Pneumol. 2009;35(1):73 -82. PubMed PMID: 19219334.  
93. Smith SS, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_46746], Bolt DM, Fiore MC, Wetter DW, Cinciripi[INVESTIGATOR_83629], Baker TB. Development of the 
Brief Wisconsin Inventory of Smoking Dependence Motives. Nicotine Tob Res. 2010;12(5):489 -99. doi: 
10.1093/ntr/ntq032. PubMed PMID: 20231242; PMCID: PMC28618 88. 
94. Foulds J, Veldheer S, Yingst J, Hrabovsky S, Wilson SJ, Nichols TT, Eissenberg T. Development of a 
questionnaire for assessing dependence on electronic cigarettes among a large sample of ex -smoking E -
cigarette users. Nicotine Tob Res. 2015;17(2):186 -92. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntu204. PubMed PMID: 25332459; 
PMCID: PMC4838001.  
95. Hughes JR, Hatsukami D. Signs and symptoms of tobacco withdrawal. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 
1986;43(3):289 -94. PubMed PMID: 3954551.  
 
96. Tiffany ST, Drobes DJ. The development and initial validation of a questionnaire on smoking urges. Br 
J Addict. 1991;86(11):1467 -76. PubMed PMID: 1777741.  
97. Cahn Z, Siegel M. Electronic cigarettes as a harm reduction strategy for tobacco control: A step forward 
or a repeat of past mistakes? Journal of Public Health Policy. 2011;32:16 -31. doi: 10.1057/jphp.2010.41.  
98. Goniewicz ML, Lingas EO, Hajek P. Patterns of electronic cigarette use and user beliefs about their 
safety and benefits: An internet survey. Drug and Alcohol Review. 2013;32:133 -40. doi: 10.1111/j.1465 -
3362.2012.[ZIP_CODE].x; PMCID: 3530631.  
99. Dawkins L, Turner J, Roberts A, Soar K. 'Vapi[INVESTIGATOR_007]' profiles and preferences: An online survey of 
electronic cigarette users. Addiction. 2013;108:1115 -25. doi: doi: 10.1111/add.[ZIP_CODE].  
100. Etter JF, Bullen C. Electronic cigarette: Users profile, utilization, satisfaction and perceived efficacy. 
Addiction. 2011;106:2017 -28. doi: 10.1111/j.[ADDRESS_811598] of an electronic nicotine 
delivery device (e cigarette) on desire to smoke and withdrawal, user preferences and nicotine delivery: 
Randomised cross -over trial. Tobacco Control. 2010 ;19:98 -103. doi: 10.1136/tc.2009.031567.  
102. Bullen C, Howe C, Laugesen M, McRobbie H, Parag V, Williman J, Walker N. Electronic cigarettes for 
smoking cessation: A randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2013;382:1629 -37. doi: 10.1016/S0140 -
6736(13)[ZIP_CODE] -5. 
103. Caponnetto P, Campagna D, Cibella F, Morjaria JB, Caruso M, Russo C, Polosa R. Efficiency and 
safety of an electronic cigarette (ECLAT) as tobacco cigarettes substitute: A prospective 12 -month randomized 
control design study. PLoS ONE. 2013;8:e66317. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066317; PMCID: 3691171.  
104. Benowitz NL. Nicotine Safety and Toxicity. [LOCATION_001]: Oxford University Press; 1998.  
105. Carpenter MJ, Hughes JR, Gray KM, Wahlquist AE, Saladin ME, Alberg AJ. Nicotine therapy sampling 
to induce quit attempts among smokers unmotivated to quit: A randomized clinical trial. Archives of Internal 
Medicine. 2011;171:1901 -7. doi: 10.1001/archi nternmed.2011.492; PMCID: 3372898.  
106. Carpenter MJ, Hughes JR, Solomon LJ, Callas PW. Both smoking reduction with nicotine replacement 
therapy and motivational advice increase future cessation among smokers unmotivated to quit. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 2004;72:371 -81. 
107. Carpenter MJ, Jardin BF, Burris JL, Mathew AR, Schnoll RA, Rigotti NA, Cummings KM. Clinical 
strategies to enhance the efficacy of nicotine replacement therapy for smoking cessation: A review of the 
literature. Drugs. 2013;73(5):407 -26. Epub 2013/04/1 1. doi: 10.1007/s40265 -013-0038 -y. PubMed PMID: 
23572407; PMCID: 3662024.  
108. Etter JF, Bullen C. Saliva cotinine levels in users of electronic cigarettes. Eur Respir J. 
2011;38(5):1219 -20. Epub 2011/11/03. doi: 10.1183/09031936.00066011. PubMed PMID: 22045788.  
109. Grana RA, Popova L, Ling PM. A longitudinal analysis of electronic cigarette use and smoking 
cessation. JAMA Internal Medicine. 2014;174:812 -3. doi: 10.1001/jamainternmed.2014.187; PMCID: 4122246.  
110. Adkison SE, O'Connor RJ, Bansal -Travers M, Hyland A, Borland R, Yong H -H, Cummings KM, McNeill 
A, Thrasher JF, Hammond D, Fong GT. Electronic nicotine delivery systems: International tobacco control four -
country survey. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2013;44:207 -15. doi: 
10.1016/j.amepre.2012.10.018; PMCID: 3627474.  
111. Polosa R, Caponnetto P, Morjaria JB, Papale G, Campagna D, Russo C. Effect of an electronic nicotine 
delivery device (e -Cigarette) on smoking reduction and cessation: A prospective 6 -month pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. BMC 
Public Health. 2011;11. doi: 10.1186/1471 -2458-11-786; PMCID: 3203079.  
112. Siegel MB, Tanwar KL, Wood KS. Electronic cigarettes as a smoking -cessation tool: results from an 
online survey. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2011;40:472 -5. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2010.12.006.  
 