Protocol Version Tracking Date : 06/1/2022 COVER PAGE  
 
 
STUDY TITLE : Suture closure AFtEr VEIN access for cardiac procedures (SAFE -VEIN) Trial: A 
randomized, prospective study of the safety and efficacy of venous closure device compared to conventional 
closure strategies in post venous access procedures  
 
NCT NUMBER : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
VERSION DATE : 06/01/2022   
Protocol Version Tracking Date : 06/01/22  Page  2 
    
AURORA HEALTH  CARE , INC.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE :   
Suture closure AFtEr  VEIN access for cardiac procedures (SAFE -VEIN) Trial: A randomized, 
prospective study of t he safety and efficacy of venous closure device compar ed to conventional 
closure strategies  in post venous access  procedures .   
 
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR :   
[INVESTIGATOR_766914] , MD  
Electrophysiology  
[ADDRESS_1051743] Oklahoma Avenu e 
Milwaukee WI [ZIP_CODE]  
[PHONE_15996]  
[EMAIL_14645]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Protocol Version Tracking Date : 06/01/22  Page  3 
    
 
I. Backg round and Rationale  
Venous access is commonly used in interventional catheter procedures such as atrial fibrillation (AF)  ablation , WATCHMAN ™ 
device placement , and Patent Foramen Ovale (PFO) closure . Access site bleeding and hematoma are anticipated vascular 
complications post procedure , and risk of complications may rise  with a longer time to hemostasis (TTH) .   Two conventional method 
closure strategies  (1) that are  usually  used for hemostasis in t hese procedures are: 
1. figure 8 suture and  
2. manual compression.  
Using a vascular closure device to achieve hemostasis has been shown to shorten time to both hemostasis and ambulation as wel l as 
improve patient comfort and satisfaction ( 2).  Perclose ProGlide  Suture -Mediated Closure System (SMC) is a commonly used vascular 
closure device for  arterial closure and is approved by [CONTACT_766920]  (3).  
Perclose ProGlide  SMC  has been shown to be safe with low incidence of vascular complication ( 3,4) and reduce the time to 
hemostasis  (3).   The device  has been shown in a small study to  lower the time to ambulation and shorten the length of stay  compared 
to manual compression (5).  To our knowledge,  there have be en no  studies published that compare efficacy and safety of Perclose 
ProGlide  SMC  vs. figure 8 suture method.  
II. Objectives and Specific Aim  
Primary objective : To compare the safety and efficacy  of closure strategies post venous access procedures  in large -bore venous access 
procedures .   
Hypothesis:  We anticipate that the use of a venous closure device will decrease the  time to hemostasis (TTH), time to ambulation 
(TTA) and time to discharge  (TTD)  compared to conventional methods of closure following venous access procedure.  
III. Study Design & Methodology  
This study will be a prospective , randomized  study of patients who are  undergoing one or more  of the following  procedures at 
ASLMC:  
Protocol Version Tracking Date : 06/01/22  Page  4 
   Large -Bore Procedures  >13 F  
1. WATCHMAN ® device placement  
2. Atrial fibrillation /flutter/SVT  ablation using cryoballoon or laser balloon   
3. Leadless pacemaker  
4. Pulmonary embolism thrombectom y (Inari FlowTriever system)  
5. MitraClip transcatheter mitral valve repair  
 
 
 
RANDOMIZATION :  
Patients will be randomized into  one of two venous closure groups after a clean stick has been achieved with no complications:  
Large -bore  (14F -25F)  venous access 
group  (1:1)  
Perclose proglide smc  
Figure 8 suture  
 
 
Protocol Version Tracking Date : 06/01/22  Page  5 
   Prior to enrollment a series of 1 10 randomization envelopes will be put together in a 1:1 to determine the closure strategy – Figure 
[ADDRESS_1051744] will be withdrawn from the study  and considered a screen failure .  
For both Perclose ProGlide  SMC  and figure 8 suture , supplemental manual compression may be used following device/suture 
placemen t if needed.   If at any time the physician decides to use an alternate standard of care method as the primary method to 
achieve hemostasis other than that which the patient was randomized to, they may do so, and the patient will be considered a 
screen fail ure.   
We will co llect demographic data, past medical history, medication at the time of procedure, lab values at the time  of procedure  and 
post procedure, the need for blood transfusion, procedure details, and outcomes post procedure . Study variables are listed in detail in 
the attached Excel  file.  
Table 1: Schedule of Study Events:  
Study Procedure  Screening  Day of 
Procedure  Follow -up ([ADDRESS_1051745] procedure)  
Inclusion/exclusion  X   
Informed Consent   X  
Randomization to determine closure strategy   X  
Data collection  (medical history/baseline demographics, medications, lab 
values, procedure details, and outcomes post procedure)   X X 
 
Protocol Version Tracking Date : 06/01/22  Page  6 
   IV. Eligibility   
Inclusion criteria:  
Large -bore (>13F)  Venous Access Procedures  Inclusion Criteria : 
All patients 18 years and older who are undergoing any of the following:   WATCHMAN® device placement, atrial fibrillation 
ablation using cryoballoon or laser balloon, leadless pacemaker, Pulmonary embolism thrombectomy (Inari FlowTriever system) , 
MitraClip transcatheter mitral valve repair  at Aurora St. Luke’s Medical Center from date of IRB approval through December 202 2. 
All arterial line access should be radial.  
 
Exclusion criteria:  
 
Large-bore (>13F)  Venous Access Procedures  Exclusion Criteria : 
• Patients in whom introducer sheaths >25F were  used in the vein during the catheterization procedure.  
• Patients with small femoral arteries or veins (< 5 mm in diameter).  
• Patients with access sites in vascular grafts.  
• Patients with intra -procedural bleeding around access site. Patients who cannot receive radial arterial line access.  
• Patients who have complications during the procedure not related to the Perclose ProGlide SMC closure device  
• The physician determines that they must use an alternate method as the primary venous closure method other than that which 
the patient was randomiz ed to  
• Active systemic or cutaneous infection, or inflammation in vicinity of the groin  
• Pre-existing immunodeficiency disorder or chronic use of high dose systemic steroids  
• Known history of bleeding diathesis, coagulopathy, hypercoagulability or platelet count < 100,000 cells/mm3  
• Severe co -existing morbidities with life expectancy less than 12 months  
Protocol Version Tracking Date : 06/01/22  Page  7 
   • Femoral arteriotomy or femoral venotomy in < 10 days, or with any known vascular complications or residual hematoma, or 
with use of an intravascular closure d evice w/in previous 30 days  
• Planned femoral venous or arterial access within next 30 days  
• Unable to routinely walk at least 20 ft. without assistance  
• LMWH within 8 hours before or after procedure  
• Pregnant and/or lactating women  
• Extreme morbid obesity (BMI  > 40 kg/m2) or underweight (BMI < 20 kg/m2)  
 
 
 
V. Subject Enrollment  
Recruitment and consent are required since it is a prospective study.  Patients will be identified for potential enrollment in this study 
from the lab schedules at Aurora St. Luke’s Medical Center. The potential subjects medical record will be screened to determine 
eligibility. Patients found to be eligible will be considered for enrollment and may be contact[CONTACT_766921] a ssess interest 
in participation.  
VI. Specimen/Data Collecti on and Procedures  
The source of data for this study will be the electronic medical record (Epic, Madison, WI) . Only people included in this IRB  will 
access the compi[INVESTIGATOR_248375]. Medical record information generated after the approval of this IRB will be collected up until the conclusion 
of the s tudy.  
VII. Risks, Protection & Benefits  
Risks/adverse events as reported in the IFU – these complications may occur and/or be related to the procedure or the vascular 
closure:  
Protocol Version Tracking Date : 06/01/22  Page  8 
   • Allergic response  
• Anemia  
• Arterial stenosis/occlusion  
• Arterio -venous fistula  
• Bleeding from the puncture site  
• Bruising /hematoma  
• Death  
• Device failure/malfunction /misplacement  
• Device Entrapment  
• Diminished pulses distal to closure site  
• Hypotension/hypertension  
• Edema  
• Emboli sm 
• Pulmonary Embolism  
• Numbness  
• Infection /sepsis  
• Inflammatory response  
• Intimal tear/dissection  
• Ischemia distal to closure site  
• Perforation of the vessel wall  
• Nerve injury  
• Pseudoaneurysm  
• Retroperitoneal hematoma/ bleeding  
• Deep vein thrombosis  
• Vascular injury  
• Vasovagal epi[INVESTIGATOR_1865]  
• Vasoconstriction/vasospasm  
• Wound dehiscence  
• Pain 
Protocol Version Tracking Date : 06/01/22  Page  9 
   • Thrombus formation  
Risks of figure 8 suture method:  
• Pain 
• Pressure  
• Hematoma  
• Bleeding  
• Vessel rupture  
• Surgery  
Benefits : 
Depending on the closure strategy subjects may experience a decrease in bedrest time post procedure with potentially less 
complications.  
Results of this study may also be generalizable to the larger healthcare community by  [CONTACT_766922].  
VIII.  Adverse Event Reporting  
a. Definitions  
Adverse event: Any untoward medical occurrence, unintended disease or injury or untoward clinical signs in subjects, users, o r 
other persons, whether or not related to the medical device.  
 
Serious adverse event: Any adverse event that led to  
• Death  
• Life-threatening illness or injury  
• Permanent impairment  
• Prolonged hospi[INVESTIGATOR_766915]  
• Requires medical or surgical intervention to prevent life -threatening illness or injury or permanent impairment  
• Fetal distress, fetal de ath, or congenital abnormality or birth defect  
Protocol Version Tracking Date : 06/01/[ADDRESS_1051746] randomization will be 
recorded in the subjects’ case histories, regardless of th e study group or suspected causal relationship. For all adverse events, 
sufficient information will be obtained in order to permit: 1) adequate determination of the seriousness, and 2) causal 
relationship of the adverse event. Adverse events or serious adv erse events found to be a result of the treatment regimen will be 
followed until resolution of the adverse event.  
 
Reportable adverse events include:  
• Excessive Bleeding  
• Hematoma  
• Ischemia  
• Infection  
• Rash at access site  
All adverse events and seriou s adverse events are to be reported to the Aurora Health Care Internal Review Board as outlined 
in the applicable policies.  
 
c. Assessment of Relationship  
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_766916].  
 
IX. Data Analysis and Review   
Continuous variables will be presented as means and standard deviation  or median and interquartile ranges if normality is not 
assumed .  Baseline demographic and medical data will be summarized and compared by [CONTACT_766923] 
(ANOVA for continuous variables and Chi squared test for categorical variables  or their non parametric equivalents ). Comparisons 
will be made among groups based upon clinical factors using univariate  regression to select potential independent predictors of 
outcomes (as defined in section III of the current document).  Relevant potential independent predictors as determined by [CONTACT_766924] .   Assumptions and goodness of fit will 
be assessed for each model. Statistical significance will be defined as a two tailed p value < 0. 048 at final analysis .   Further data 
analysis will be performed by [CONTACT_766925] (TBD).  
Protocol Version Tracking Date : 06/01/[ADDRESS_1051747] 25 subjects are enrolled and then  again after 75 
subjects are enrolled will be reviewed by [CONTACT_766926], accuracy, and consistency with 
the study objectives/hypotheses as well as preliminary analysis.  
 
X. Statistical Considerations  
A convenient sample size of  approximately 5 5 subjects in each of the two randomized groups (Perclose ProGlide SMC and figure 8 
suture) was determined to allow for parametric statistical methods. Following interim analysis : O’Brien -Fleming me thod was selected 
to adjust the p -value for interim analysis and final analysis. It was also used to calculate the required sample size at each stage of 
analysis in order to achieve 80% power in the outcome.  Final sample size required was determined at 10 1 subjects.  A 10% +/ - should 
be added, to bring the total enrollment to 110 subjects.   
XI. Outcomes  
Primary outcomes: time to achieve hemostasis (TTH)  and time to ambulate (TTA)  
Secondary outcomes: time to discharge (TTD)/length of stay, post procedure major bleeding , mortality due to vascular complications, 
minor bleeding, access site hematoma, vascular thrombosis, vascular dissection, pseudoaneurysm , or AV fistula.   
 
TTH:  The elapsed time between “device” removal and first observed and confirmed venous hemostasis.  
 
TTA:  The e lapsed time between removal of the final Perclose  ProGlide SMC device (treatment arm) or removal of the final sheath 
(control arm), and the ability of  subjects to stand and ambulate 20 feet without evidence of venous re -bleeding from the femoral access 
sites.  
 
TTD /LOS : The elapsed  time between  removal  of the final sheath,  and the ability  of subjects  to be discharged.  Length  of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_41836].  
 
Protocol Version Tracking Date : 06/01/22  Page  12 
   Major ble eding: Bleeding  associated with ≥2 g/dl  drop in hemoglobin  level requiring  transfusion,  bleeding  that occurs at a critical 
site, or  bleeding  contributing to death . 
 
Minor Bleeding: Any bleeding that does not meet the criteria for major bleeding .  
 
XII. Regulatory Requirements  
Approval from the Aurora Health Care IRB will be obtained to perform this study, which includes approval of all associated in formed 
consent forms. All protocol modifications and corresponding informed consent forms will be submitted for review and approval prior 
to implementing.  
 
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_766917] p erform the 
assigned duties.  
 
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_766918], and will documen t and 
report protocol deviations as required by [CONTACT_766927].  
 
XIII.  Monitoring Plan  
The goal of monitoring in this study is primarily to make sure that the primary data are collected and recorded properly,  and 
consenting process was done.  
 
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_766919] t of the participants, and will ensure that   
a) Only subjects who meet the study eligibility criteria will be enrolled. All subject inclusion/exclusion criteria were 
reviewed and verified with source documents, when applicable.  
b) The informed consent pro cess will be obtained prior to proceeding with any study procedures.  Any problems with 
informed consent will also be documented, and reported to the IRB, if required.  
c) Data is collected and analyzed as specified in the protocol.  
d) Adverse events are re viewed promptly and reported as required.  
e) Privacy and confidentiality of subjects is maintained.  Consent forms will be stored in a room accessible only to 
research personnel.  
Protocol Version Tracking Date : 06/01/22  Page  13 
   f) Subject withdrawals will be documented for the reason of withdrawal.  
g) Subjects will be informed during the informed consent process that study results may be disseminated in the form of 
presentations at conferences and publications in journals. The data/results that will be presented will only include 
anonymous/aggregate dat a, nothing that will identify subjects.  
h) A regulatory binder will be kept to document: IRB approvals, protocol versions, informed consents (all versions), all 
formal communications with the IRB (approval letters, acknowledgements), Delegation of Authorit y Log.  
 
XIV. Reference s 
1. U. Lakshmanadoss et al.  Figure -of-eight suture for venous hemostasis in fully anticoagulated patients after atrial fibrillation 
catheter ablation.  Indian  Pacing and Electrophysiology Journal 17 (2017) 134e139  
2. PMA P960043/S097: FDA Summary of Safety and Effectiveness Data  
3. Noori V J, Eldrup -Jørgensen J. A systematic review of vascular closure devices for femoral artery puncture sites. J Vasc Surg. 
2018 Sep;68(3):887 -899. doi: 10.1016/j.jvs.2018.05.019. Epub 2018 Jun 29. PMID: 30146036.  
4. Vinayakumar D, Kayakkal S, Rajasekharan S, Thot tian JJ, Sankaran P, Bastian C. 24h and 30 day outcome of Perclose Proglide suture mediated 
vascular closure device: An Indian experience.  Indian Heart J . 2017;69(1):37 -42. doi:10.1016/j.ihj.2016.06.[ADDRESS_1051748], Chorianopoulos  E, Müller OJ, Katus HA, Bekeredjian R. Feasibility and clinical benefit of a suture -
mediated closure device for femoral vein access after percutaneous edge -to-edge mitral valve repair. EuroIntervention. 2015 
Mar;10(11):1346 -53. doi: 10.4244/EIJV10I11A231.  PMID: 24694560.  
6.  