Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 1 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08  
    
CLINICAL INVESTIGATION PLAN  
   
 
Use of the Zenith® Dissection Endovascular System in the Treatment of Patients  
with Acute, Complicated Type B Aortic Dissection  
 
   
Global Clinical Number 11 -007 
  
  Sponsor: Cook Research Incorporated  
  [ADDRESS_992645] Lafayette, IN [ZIP_CODE]  
[LOCATION_003]   
 
Summary of Revisions  
Version # Description        Date  
11-007-[ADDRESS_992646] information     19 Mar 2018  
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 4 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08  
CONFIDENTIALITY STATEMENT  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
This document shall be treated as a confidential document for 
the sole information and use of the clinical investigation team 
and the Ethics Committee/IRB.  
  
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial [ADDRESS_992647]-operative Treatment of Entry- flow .....................................................20  
6.6 Follow-up Treatment of Entry-flow and Flow Through Secondary Tears .21  
6.7 Treatment of Obstruction  ............................................................................21  
6.8 Secondary Interventions  .............................................................................21  
6.9 Follow-up....................................................................................................22  
6.10  Criteria and Procedures for Study Termination ..........................................22  
7.0 Statistical Considerations  ....................................................................................22  
7.1 Sample Size Calculations  ...........................................................................22  
7.2 Performance Goals  .....................................................................................23  
7.3 Site-level Poolability  ..................................................................................24  
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial [ADDRESS_992648] Information  ........................................................................................... Appendix A 
Written Procedures for Monitoring Investigation .............................................. Appendix B 
Definitions .......................................................................................................... Appendix C 
References  .......................................................................................................... Appendix D
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 7 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 1.0 Clinical Investigation Plan Overview  
This clinical investigation is designed as a prospective, non-randomized study enrolling 
73 patients (67 patients for hypothesis testing) to receive the Zeni th® Dissection 
Endovascular System at up to 30 global clinical sites with a maximum enrollment of up to 14 patients per individual site.  The primary safety and effectiveness endpoints, as described in Section 3.1, will be compared to the performance goals derived from the combined physician-sponsored studies reported by [CONTACT_727008].
1 
Any patient with an acute, complicated, type B aortic dissection with either aortic rupture or branch vessel obstruction/compromise that results in malperfusion (see Appendix C, Definitions) is eligible for enrollment in the study.  The study flow diagram is presented in Figure 1. 
 
 Patient with  an acute, complicated, type B aortic dissection with either aortic rupture or branch vessel 
obstruction/compromise   
      
 Physician reviews available medical history and imaging and considers patient candidate for enrollment  
  
      
 Informed consent is obtained   
      
 Pre-procedural CT, blood tests, clinical exam   
      
 Patient meets inclusion/exclusion criteria   
    
 Endovascular repair with procedural angiography   
  
 30-day: CT, blood tests, clinical exam   
  
 6-month: CT, blood tests, clinical exam   
  
 12-month and yearly thereafter to 5 years: CT, blood tests, clinical exam   
Figure 1.  Study flow diagram  
 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial [ADDRESS_992649] Operating 
Procedures to maintain the integrity of the results.  In vitro testing has established reaso nable safety of the device for the expected duration of the study and in the trial 
population to be studied.  Please refer to the Clinical Investigator Brochure for a summary of non- clinical testing.  
 
2.2 Previous Clinical Experience Refer to the Clinical Investigator Brochure for a complete description of the previous 
clinical experience with similar devices.  
 
2.3 Justification for the Investigation  
This study design and the performance goal are justified given there are no other 
treatment alternatives that are being commonly practiced at present for patients with acute, complicated Type B aortic dissection.  Open surgica l repair is rarely performed in 
these patients due to the very high rate of mortality associated with the procedure.  Likewise, medical therapy is not practical as the definitive treatment for these patients, who often require a more aggressive therapy in the form of endovascular/surgical intervention to relieve symptoms and prevent any further adverse clinical sequelae. 
 
3.0 Objectives of the Clinical Investigation  
 
3.1 Primary Objectives  
The objective of the study is to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the Zenith
® 
Dissection Endovascular System in the treatment of patients with complicated, type B 
aortic dissection. The primary safety endpoint will be rate of freedom from major adverse events (see Appendix C, Definitions) at 30 days.  The primary effectiveness endpoint will be the survival rate at 30 days.   
9 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 Cook Research Incorporated 
Zenith® Dissection C lin ical Trial 
3.[ADDRESS_992650] atistical D ata 
3.3.1 Primary Safety Hypothesis 
The
 primary safety endpoint is the rate of freedom from 30 -day major adverse events (see 
Appendix C, Definitions).  The published rate of freedom from 30-day MAE from the 
combined physician-sponsored studies is 61.2%.1 With a clinically relevant non -
inferiority margin of 10%, a performance goal of 51.2% has been established for the primary safety endpoint.  The performance goal will be said to have been met provided that the null hypothesis is rejected in favor of the alternative with a one- tailed exact 
binomial test at the 0.025 level.  Given that π
noMAE(30)  is the probability that a randomly 
selected patient did not experience any MAE at 30 days, the null and alternative hypotheses are as follows. 
Null Hypothesis: The rate of freedom from 30- day MAE, π noMAE(30) , does not meet the 
performanc e goal (51.2%). 
H0: πnoMAE(30)   ≤ 51.2%  
Alternate Hypothesis: The rate of freedom from 30 -day MAE, π noMAE(30) , meets the 
performance goal (51.2%). 
Ha: πnoMAE(30)  > 51.2% 
3.3.2 
Primary Effectiveness Hypothesis 
The primary effectiveness endpoint is the survival rate at 30 days.  The published survival rate at 30 days from the combined physician-sponsored studies is 89.4%.
1 With a 
clinically relevant non -inferiority margin of 10%, a performance goal of 79.4% has been 
established for the primary effect iveness endpoint.  The performance goal will be said to 
have been met provided that the null hypothesis is rejected in favor of the alternative with a one- tailed exact binomial test at the 0.025 level.  Given that π
s(30) is the probability that 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 10 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 a randomly selected patient is alive at 30 days, the null and alternative hypotheses are as 
follows. 
 
Null Hypothesis: The survival rate at 30 days, π s(30), does not meet the performance goal 
(79.4%). 
 H 0: πs(30) ≤ 79.4%  
 
Alternate Hypothesis: The survival rate at 30 days, π s(30), meets the performance goal 
(79.4%). 
 H a: πs(30) > 79.4% 
 For each endpoint, the hypothesis will be assessed by a one- sided exact binomial test, at a 
type I error rate of 0.[ADDRESS_992651] Description and Intended Use  
 
The Zenith
® Dissection Endovascular System is a disease- specific family of components 
intended for the treatment of patients with Type B aortic dissection.   
 4.[ADDRESS_992652] Description  
As depi[INVESTIGATOR_6517] 2, the system is comprised of a covered proximal component (Zenith
® TX2® Dissection Endovascular Graft) and an uncovered distal component 
(Zenith® Dissection Endovascular Stent). 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 11 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08  
Figure 2.  Zenith® Dissection Endovascular System  
   
Zenith® TX2® Dissection Endovascular Graft  
The Zenith® TX2® Dissection Endovascular Graft is predicated on the Zenith® TX2® 
TAA Endovascular Graft, which is commercially -available in the [LOCATION_002] for the 
treatment of patients with descending thoracic aortic aneurysms and ulcers, and in many 
countries outside the U.S. for the treatment of patients with aneurysms, dissections, or contained ruptures.  The design of the Zenith
® TX2® Dissection Endovascular Graft is 
identical to the Zenith® TX2® TAA Endovascular Graft, except for the removal of 
fixation barbs in order to provide a disease-specific covered component (Figure 3).   
 
Figure 3. Zenith® TX2® Dissection Endovascular Graft  
 Zenith® TX2® Dissection 
Endovascular Graft  
Zenith® Dissection 
Endovascular Stent  

Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 12 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 As shown in Table 1, the Zenith® TX2® Dissection Endovascular Graft is available in 
multiple sizes ranging from 22 to 42 mm in diameter and 79 to 218 mm in length and is 
also available in both straight and tapered configurations.  Tapered components with diameter changes of 4 mm or 8 mm are available.  
 
Table 1. Zenith® TX2® Dissection Endovascular Graft sizes  
Graft 
Diameter  
 
(mm)  Length of Straight 
Component  
(mm)  Length of Tapered 
Component – 4 mm 
Taper  
(mm)  Length of Tapered 
Component – 8 mm 
Taper  
(mm)  
22 79 / 117  n/a n/a 
24 79 / 117  n/a n/a 
26 79 / 136  n/a n/a 
28 82 / 142 / 202  n/a n/a 
30 82 / 142 / 202  n/a n/a 
32 82 / 142 / 202  162 / 202  158 / 196  
34 79 / 154 / 204  159 / 199  156 / 194  
36 79 / 154 / 204  159 / 199  159 / 199  
38 79 / 154 / 204  154 / 204  159 / 199  
40 83 / 164 / 218 160 / 210  165 / 205  
42 83 / 164 / 218  160 / 210  160 / 210  
 
Zenith® Dissection Endovascular Stent 
The Zenith® Dissection Endovascular Stent consists of multiple z- stent segments, made 
of nitinol, sewn together end- to-end with polyester sutures (Figure 4).   
  
 
 
     
 
     
 
 Figure 4. Zenith® Dissection Endovascular Stent  
 

Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 13 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 As shown in Table 2, the Zenith® Dissection Endovascular Stent is available in multiple 
sizes.  
 
Table 2. Zenith® Dissection Endovascular Stent sizes  
Stent Diameter 
(mm)  Stent Length 
(mm)  
36 80 / 120 / 180  
46 80 / 120 / 185  
 
 
4.2 Intended Use 
The Zenith® Dissection Endovascular System is intended for the endovascular treatment 
of patients with symptomatic aortic dissection of the descending thoracic aorta having 
morphology suitable for endovascular repair.  Refer to the Instruc tions for Use (IFU) for 
further details . 
 
4.[ADDRESS_992653] Logs will be maintained in the site’s Investigator File.  Additionally, the quantity(s), size(s) and lot number of products used in subject s will be recorded on the case report forms.  
 
4.4 Instructions for Use  Please reference the manufacturer’s Instructions for Use for complete instructions 
including installation, storage and handling requirements, preparation for use and precautions to be taken after use.  
 
4.5 Summary of Necessary Training and Experience Please reference the manufacturer’s Instructions for Use for a summary of the necessary 
training and experience required for use of this product. 
 
 
 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 14 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 4.6 Description of the Necessary Medical or Surgical Procedures  
Please reference the manufacturer’s Instructions for Use for a description of the 
procedures involved in the use of this product. 
 
4.7 Adjunctive Devices 
At physician discretion, adjunctive devices may be used on an individual basis during 
either the initial implant procedure or secondary intervention and may include the following (as discussed in Section 6, Methods): aneurysm stent-graft components (for coverage of reentry tears), coils/occluders (for embolization of sources for false lumen flow), uncovered balloon-expandable or self-expanding stents (for branch vessel obstruction), and covered balloon-expandable or self-expanding stents (for coverage of reentry tears involving branch vessels).  If adjunctive devices are used, it is recommended 
that the Instructions for Use (IFU) of that device be reviewed, and the risks of using that device be considered.  The specific type/make/model of any adjunctive device implanted during either the initial implant procedure or secondary intervention should be recorded on the case report forms.  Additionally, the performance of any adjunctive device placed should be monitored during follow-up.     
 
5.0 Design of the Clinical Investigation  
 
5.1 Type of Investigation 
The current investigation is a prospective, non-randomized, non-blinded study.  5.2 Endpoints The primary safety endpoint will be r ate of freedom from major adverse events (see 
Appendix C, Definitions) at [ADDRESS_992654] procedural risk associated with alternative treatments and is also the p rincipal outcome any treatment is intended to 
prevent (up to 50% of patients are at risk for mortality within 48 hours if untreated
2). 
 
 
 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 15 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 5.3 Variables to be Measured to Demonstrate Achievement of Endpoints 
To evaluate deployment characteristics, procedural outcome and follow-up, the following 
data points will be collected: 
1) Assessment of system performance including: deployment issues, ease of insertion, visualization, and ease of removal; 
2) Clinical utility measures such as days to discharge from hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]; 
3) Ancillary equipment needed; 
4) Adjunctive maneuvers including: balloon dilation of iliac arteries, additional stents required, and additional surgical procedures; 
5) Complications including major adverse events during procedure and at follow-up; 
6) Device integrity findings at completion of procedure and follow-up: device patency, stent fracture, and graft  kinks; 
7) Type and sources of entry-flow at procedure and follow-up; 
8) Dimensions of the true and false lumen over the course of follow- up; and  
9) Secondary interventions performed. 
 
5.[ADDRESS_992655] 
information regarding the safety and effectiveness of the Zenith
® Dissection 
Endovascular System.  The study will utilize uniform definitions for study endpoints, event adjudication by [CONTACT_422198], and imaging data analysis by a centralized core laboratory.  Study results will be analyzed in accordance with a prospectively defined analysis plan. 
 5.[ADDRESS_992656]-operatively (including the results from core lab analysis of pre-procedure imaging) may contradict pre- operative assessment.  However, 
such contradiction is not considered a violation of the Clinical Investigation Plan and should not be construed as evidence of inadequate or inaccurate pre- operative assess ment 
with respect to the enrollment criteria or evidence of inappropriate enrollment.  Enrollment is to be based upon best available pre- operative data.  Some criteria relate to 
subjective assessment while other criteria are considered absolute and able to  be 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial [ADDRESS_992657] one of the following characteristics (see Appendix C, Definitions): 1) Aortic rupture; or 
2) Branch vessel obstruction/compromise resulting in malperfusion  
 
5.5.[ADDRESS_992658] be excluded from the study if any of the following conditions are true:  
General Exclusion Criteria  
1) Age < 18 years;  
2) Other medical condition (e.g., cancer, congestive heart failure) that may cause the 
patient to be non- compliant with the Clinical Investigation Plan, confound the results, 
or is associated with limited life expectancy (i.e., less than 2 years);  
3) Pregnant, breast-feeding, or planning on becoming pregnant within 60 months; 4) Unwilling or unable to comply with the follow-up schedule;  
5) Inability or refusal to give informed consent; or 6) Simultaneously participating in another investigative device or drug study.  (The 
patient must have completed the primary endpoint of any previous study at least 30 days prior to enrollment in this study.) 
 
 
Medical Exclusion Criteria  
 
7) Suspi[INVESTIGATOR_727003] (as determined by [CONTACT_727009], peritoneal signs, surgical exploration, elevated serum lactate levels, and/or acidosis) 
8) ASA risk class V (i. e., moribund patient not expected to live 24 hours with or without 
operation) 
9) Embolic stroke within the last 14 days prior to potential enrollment in the study or 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 17 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 hemorrhagic stroke within 30 days prior to potential enrollment in the study; 
10) Diagnosed or suspected congenital degenerative connective tissue disease (e.g., no 
Marfan’s or Ehler -Danlos syndrome);  
11) Systemic infection (e.g., sepsis); 
12) Bleeding diathesis, uncorrectable coagulopathy, or refuses blood transfusion; 
13) Allergy to stainless steel, polyester, solder (tin, silver), polypropylene, nitinol, or gold; 
14) Untreatable reaction to contrast, which, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], cannot be adequately pre- medicated; 
15) Surgical or endovascular AAA repair within 30 days before or after disse ction repair;  
16) Previous placement of a thoracic endovascular graft; 
17) Prior open repair involving descending thoracic aorta including suprarenal aorta and/or arch; or 
18) Interventional and/or open surgical procedures (unrelated to dissection) within 30 days before or after dissection repair.  
 
Anatomical Exclusion Criteria  
 19) Dissection of aorta proximal to left subclavian artery (either primary entry tear or most proximal extent of dissection);  
20) Proximal landing zone length measuring < [ADDRESS_992659] proximal extent of dissection (covering left subclavian artery is acceptable, except in patients with a dominant vertebral artery off of the arch in the region of the subclavian or a dominant vertebral off of the subclavian); 
21) Proximal landing zone diameter for proximal stent-graft component < 20 mm or > 38 mm, measured outer- wall to outer -wall on a sectional image or multiplanar 
reconstruction; 
22) Aortic arch radius of curvature < 35 mm (if device deployed in the arch);  
23) Distal landing zone diameter for proximal stent- graft component < 20 mm (estimate 
based on transaortic diameter) or > 38 mm (estimate based on true lumen diameter), measured outer- wall to outer -wall on a sectional image or multiplanar reconstruction; 
24) Diameter < 20  mm (estimate based on transaortic diameter) or > 38 mm (estimate 
based on true lumen diameter) for any segment of vessel into which deployment of bare stent device is intended, measured outer -wall to outer- wall on a sectional image 
or multiplanar reconstruction; 
25) Prohibitive angulation in segments of vessel into which deployment of bare stent 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 18 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 device is intended (e.g., radius of curvature < 35 mm, or localized angle 
> 45 degrees);  
26) Both iliac arteries having prohibitive tortuosity, calcification, occlusive di sease or 
arterial diameter, measured inner -wall to inner -wall on a sectional image, that are not 
conducive to placement of the introducer sheath (use of access conduit permitted); 
27) Prohibitive calcification, occlusive disease, or angulation in intended proximal landing zone; 
28) Circumferential thrombus in region of intended proximal landing zone; 
29) Inability to preserve the native left common carotid artery and celiac artery origins; or  
30) Aneurysm or angulation in the distal thoracic aorta that would preclude advancement of the introduction system. 
 
5.6 Point of Enrollment Point of enrollment will be based on the intent- to-treat population, and is defined to 
include any patient for whom the treatment procedure is initiated.  More specifically, 
once a procedure has begun (i.e., cutdown or percutaneous access initiated), the patient would be included in the intent- to-treat population.  The patient’s informed consent will 
be obtained and assessment of the patient’s conformance to the inclusion/exclusion criteria will occur prior to the procedure.   
Study results will also be analyzed with respect to the consented patient population (i.e., all patien ts who gave consent to participate in the study, regardless of treatment). 
 
5.7 Enrollment Objective  
67 patients will be enrolled  in accordance with Version 4 of the CIP at up to 30 global 
clinical sites with a maximum enrollment of up to 14 patients per individual site.   In 
order to account for patients who would not be eligible for enrollment based on the clarifications reflected in Version 4  of the CIP,  the total enrollment for the study has 
increased to pro vide for six additional patients (73 patients total).  
 
 
 
  
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial [ADDRESS_992660] Consent 
Patients who meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria will be invited to participate in this 
investigation.  All patients eligible for entry into the investigation will have the Clinical Investigation Plan explained to them, as well as potential risks and benefits of their participation in the investigation.  Each patient who a grees to participate will be required 
to sign an informed consent document prior to the procedure. 
 6.2 Pre-procedure 
Stent -grafts and dissection stents are sized based on the findings from pre- operative 
computerized tomography (CT) in conjunction, if necessary, with other imaging 
modalities such as angiograms and intravascular ultrasound (IVUS).  Refer to the Instruction s for Use for details regarding the suggested sizing guidelines.     
 
6.[ADDRESS_992661] techniques for placement of arterial access sheaths, guiding catheters, 
angiographic catheters, and wire guides should be employed during use of the Zenith
® 
Dissection Endovascular System.  Care must be exercised in placing of sheaths and wireguides, and in advancing the delivery system of the devices.  Molding balloon angioplasty in the dissected region of the aorta must be avoided.     
Precautions should be taken to minimize the risk of stroke.  All air should be flushed 
from sheaths and lumens before insertion using elevated tip technique.  Wire placement and manipulation in the ascending thoracic aorta and aortic arch should be m inimized.  
Fluoroscopic guidance and angiography should be used throughout the procedure to verify positioning of the device with respect to the patient’s anatomy. 
Refer to institutional protocols relating to anesthesia, anticoagulation, access technique, 
spi[INVESTIGATOR_727004].  Coverage of the left subclavian artery is acceptable; however, revascularization of the left subclavian artery should be considered.
3   
Refer to the Instructions for Use for complete details regarding use of t he Zenith® 
Dissection Endovascular System.  In general, placement of a bare stent following 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial [ADDRESS_992662] ent-graft 
coverage of the primary entry tear may not be necessary in patients for whom all of the 
following are applicable: 
- No continued signs or symptoms of obstructed/compromised branch vessel (if patient was included in the study for obstructed/compromised branch vessel) after placement of the proximal component 
- Systolic pressure gradient ≤ 20 mm Hg between the aortic root and a distal 
obstructed aortic segment/vessel (if patient was included in the study for 
obstructed/compromised branch vessel) 
- No false lumen flow through secondary re- entry tears  
Bare stent deployment within regions of tortuosity or acute angulation should be avoided.  
It might be necessary to use multiple Zenith
® Dissection Endovascular Stents of shorter 
length, so as to avoid deployment of the bare stents within tortuous or acutely angled segments.  
 
6.[ADDRESS_992663]-operative Treatment of Entry- flow 
All instances of entry -flow should be evaluated promptly with an angiogram, and if 
necessary a selective angiogram, to determine the origi n of the flow.  The completion 
angiogram should be examined carefully for entry-flow.    Type I entry-flow should be promptly considered for treatment using additional balloon 
seating or if necessary, placement of additional stent- graft prostheses (use of Zenith main 
body extensions is recommended).  Placement of embolization coils may be needed to occlude sources of Type II entry- flow and collateral flow if the leak is believed to be 
significant and/or in the presence of an enlarging false lumen.  Use of occluder devices (e.g., Amplatzer) to embolize the left subclavian artery has also been reported.
  Type III 
entry -flow represents graft or junctional defects and should be promptly considered for 
treatment with additional ballooning or prostheses.  Type IV entry -flow is generally 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 21 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 associated with grafts with a high porosity and is unlikely with the graft component of 
this system.  Secondary/reentry tears may also require coverage with placement of additional stent- graft prostheses in the aorta or covered ball oon-expandable and/or self-
expanding stents in branch vessels if flow through the tear is significant and/or in the presence of an enlarging false lumen. 
 6.6  Follow-up Treatment of Entry-flow and Flow Through Secondary Tears Perfusion of the false lumen should be carefully monitored over the course of the follow-
up exams.  Treatment for significant entry-flow and flow through secondary tears should be considered especially in the presence of enlarging false lumen (as described  in Section 
6.5).   
 
6.7 Treatment of Obstruction  
Obstruction of the aortic true lumen resulting in end-organ ischemia/malperfusion may 
require placement of additional stent-graft prostheses or Dissection stents.  Obstruction within a branch vessel true lumen resulting in end-organ ischemia/malperfusion may require placement of uncovered balloon- expandable and/or self -expanding stents. 
 
6.8 Secondary Interventions  
Some patients may need secondary intervention(s) for treatment of entry-flow, flow 
through secondary tears, obstruction/compromise of branch vessels, device migration, etc.  The use of Zenith stent -graft components is recommended when additional stent-
graft placement in the aorta is necessary to extend the length of primary graft coverage or to selectively cover secondary/reentry tears.  The placement of uncovered balloon-expandable and/or self-expanding stents may be necessary to assist with true lum en 
patency in obstructed/malperfused branch vessels.  Similarly, the placement of balloon-expandable and/or self-expanding covered stents may be necessary to assist with sealing secondary tears involving branch vessels.
  The timing and method of such interventions 
are based on the judgment of the treating physician.  If ancillary devices (such as balloons, stents, etc.) are used during these interventions, it is recommended that the Instructions for Use (IFU) of that device be reviewed, and the risks of usi ng that device 
be considered.   
 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 22 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 6.9 Follow-up  
The study follow-up schedule is provided in Table 3.  The suggested guidelines for 
scheduling the clinical and/or imaging evaluation is as follows:  at the time of graft insertion, within [ADDRESS_992664]-procedure, at 30 days (± 10 days), 6 months (180 ± 30 days), 12 months (365 ± 45 days), 2 years (730 ± 60 days), 3 years (1095 ± 60 days), 4 years (1460 ± 90 days), and 5 years (1825 ± 90 days). 
Table 3.  Study follow -up schedule  
 Pre-
operative  Intra -
operative  Post-procedure  30-day 6-month  12-month  24-month to  
5-year5 
 Clinical Exam  X  X X X X X 
 Blood Tests1 X  X X X X X6 
 Contrast  
 CT Scan   X    X3,[ADDRESS_992665] imaging may be used for those patients experiencing documented renal failure (eGFR 
< 30) or who are otherwise unable to undergo contrast enhanced CT scan.   
4. CT must be performed prior to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345].  In case of impaired renal  function at the time of discharge,  
CT may be performed at 30 days.  
5. Yearly through 5 years.  
6. Required only for patients with malperfusion that has not stabilized.  
  
6.10 Criteria and Procedures for Study Termination  
A patient’s follow -up in the study will end after: 
1) Failure to deploy the device + 30 days; 
2) Conversion to open surgical repair + 30 days; 3) Patient withdrawal; 
4) Patient death;  
5) Closure of the investigation; or 6) Completion of all scheduled clinical and imaging visits through 5 years. 
 
7.0  Statistical Considerations 
 
7.1  Sample Size Calculations  
The study is designed to enroll 67 patients to evaluate the safety and effectiveness 
hypotheses (Section 3.3).   
For the primary safety endpoint, based on the data from the combined physician-
sponsored studies
1, the rate of freedom from 30-day major adverse events (see Appendix 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 23 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 C, Definitions) was estimated to be 61.2%.  With a clinically relevant non- inferiority 
margin of 10%, a performance goal of freedom from 30-day MAE was established to be 
51.2%.  Sixty patients will be necessary to assess the primary safety hypothesis, under an expected rate of freedom from 30 -day MAE at 69.2% (estimated from an on-going 
clinical trial with the Zenith
® Dissection Endovascular System in patients with 
complicated, type B aortic dissection), with a one- sided exact binomial test, at a type I 
error rate of 0.025 and a power of 0.8.  
 For the primary effectiveness endpoint, based on the data from the combined physician-
sponsored studies, the survival rate at 30 days was estimated to be 89.4%.  With a clinically relevant non -inferiority margin of 10%, a performance goal for 30-day survival 
was established to be 79.4%.  Forty patients will be necessary to assess the primary effectiveness hypothesis, under an expected 30-day survival rate of 94.9% (estimated from an on- going clinical trial with the Zenith
® Dissection Endovascular System in 
patients with complicated, type B aortic dissection), with a one -sided exact binomial test, 
at a type I error rate of 0.[ADDRESS_992666] to follow-up, and to account for six previously enrolled patients that would not be 
eligible for enrollment based on the clarifications provided in Version 4 of the CIP (i.e., patients who were ASA class V or who were without confirmed absence of bowel necrosis  at the time of enrollment).  While the data from all 73 patients enrolled in the 
study will be reported, the primary safety and effectiveness hypotheses wi ll be assessed 
based on the 67 patients enrolled according to the inclusion/exclusion criteria specified in Version 4 of the CIP.   
 7.2 Performance Goals  
The performance goals used in the hypotheses of section 3.3 and the s ample size 
calculations in section 9.1 were derived from the combined physician-sponsored studies. 
Using those data, the performance goal for the 30-day freedom from major adverse events was 61.2%, while the performance goal for the 30-day survival rate was 89.4%. With a clinically relevant margin of 10%, the performance goals are established as 51.2% and 79.4%, respectively. 
 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial [ADDRESS_992667] too few patients to provide reasonable site -level 
estimates of primary, secondary, and baseline measures.  Each investigative site will be allowed to enroll no more than 14 patients (20% of the total enrollment) to ensure the overal l result is not biased by [CONTACT_567431] a single site. Pooling of this information 
will be explored based on hospi[INVESTIGATOR_257760] (large versus small), site enrollment (large versus small), type of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (community versus teaching), and other group- wise str ategies.  
It is recognized that patient baseline characteristics may differ among sites, with some sites routinely treating patients with more severe disease progression.  It is anticipated that the primary and secondary endpoint measures may be related to covariate s that  
reflect this disease progression, which are in turn related to outcome.  Thus, any observed site-specific differences among the primary or secondary endpoints will be checked for 
confounding with other measured covariates.  This can be accomplished using regression models (linear and logistic where appropriate) that include site and other measured covariates as independent variables.  
Should one or more sites significantly differ from the rest, then all subsequent analyses will include the discrimina ting covariate or a covariate to distinguish between the unusual 
site(s) and those sites that are considered poolable. 
 7.4 Missing Data  
Missing data will be addressed using three primary strategies: 1) estimating missing data 
with the best available data, 2) case deletion, and 3) multiple imputation. 
The first strategy may be used for missing imaging data.  Previous clinical trial experience suggests that some portion of the imaging data may not meet the criteria for accurate measurements by [CONTACT_89709].  However, it is recognized that the treating physician uses this information to provide the best possible care for the patient.  Therefore, it is reasonable to substitute any missing core laboratory measurements with the corresponding measurements made by [CONTACT_1963] (or their staff).  In addition, the absence or presence of clinical sequelae may provide the required missing 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial [ADDRESS_992668]- case analysis.  
 
7.5 Future Use of Study Data Information redacted due to confidential content   
8.0 Risk Analysis and Risk Assessment  
 
8.1 Risks and Foreseeable Adverse Device Effects  
Information r edacted. Please refer to the Instructions for Use  
 
8.2 Methods to Minimize Risks The device design, non- clinical testing, clinical study design, and the Instructions for Use 
are intended to minimize the risks associated with the endovascular procedures.   
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial [ADDRESS_992669] (DSMB) consisting of independent physicians, who are 
not investigators in the investigation, nor have a perceived conflict of interest with the conduct and administration of the investigation, will be convened on a regular basis to 
evaluate investigation progress and review adverse events. 
 9.2 Clinical Events Committee  
An independent Clinical Events Committee (CEC) consisting of physicians, who are not 
investigators in the investigation, nor have a perceived conflict of interest with the conduct and administration of the investigation, will be established to adjudicate clinical events reported during the investigation.  This adjudication will be performed according to standard operating procedures to assess whether the events were due to a pre-existing or unrelated condition, procedure- related, technique- related, and/or device- related.  
Regularly scheduled review/monitoring of all patient data will be conducted at the Data Coordinating Center, in part, for identification of adverse events and assurance that they are correctly reported to the DSMB and CEC.  
 
9.3 Adverse Event Reporting 
Events known to be related to pre-existing conditions or existing at admission are not 
considered adverse events (e.g., prior medically-treated cardiac arrhythmia with no change in status during the endovascular procedure).  Additionally, common standard of care practices are not considered adverse events (e.g., centers located at high geographical altitudes that discharge all patients on home oxygen therapy regardless of procedure).   
All adverse events (i.e., device-related and non-device- related) are to be reported using 
the appropriate case report form (Adverse Event/Complication form).  In cases of adverse 
device effects (adverse event with relation to the study device) or serious adverse events, completed forms should be submitted to the Data Coordinating Center immediately upon knowledge of the event.   
 
Cook Research Incorporated 
 [ADDRESS_992670]  
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial [ADDRESS_992671] Lafayette, IN  [ZIP_CODE]  
Telephone:  [PHONE_13952] 
 Fax:  [PHONE_13953] 
 
The Data Coordinating Center will notify the sponsor accordingly.  In accordance with 
applicable requirements, the investigator will notify the local Ethics Committee/IRB, 
while the sponsor will notify the regulatory authority.  Furthermore, if the sponsor determines that the device presents a potential risk to the study patients, all investigators in the study will be notified.  Refer to section 8.[ADDRESS_992672] of potential adverse events related to this study. 
 
10.0 Administrative  
 
10.1 Data Collection  
Patient data will be collected and entered by [CONTACT_727010] (eCRF) system.  This is a secure, web-based system, allowing those with permission to access data from any location at any time.  Data will be entered by [CONTACT_1746].  Site personnel are required to have unique login names and passwords in order to enter patient data, and, in accordance with [ADDRESS_992673] 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 28 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 appropriate training and follow procedures for proper handling of patient- identified 
information.  Furthermore, whenever feasible, de- identified health information will be 
used by [CONTACT_727011].  “Researchers” include the patient’s physician 
and the staff of collaborators, investigators in other locations studying this device, the sponsor, and the companies or individuals with research responsibilities delegated by [CONTACT_456].   
These data may be used to gain additional experience with this device and to advance 
medical knowledge through presentations and articles regarding the study.  These data may also be reviewed by [CONTACT_727012].  
These data may also be combined with health information about other patients.  The sponsor or their designee will keep the data in an ongoing database of information about the Zenith
® Dissection Endovascular System, so that information can be studied and 
analyzed.  When the follow-up period is complete, no new information about individual patients will be added, but review of the data may continue.  Presentations, reports, and articles about this investigation will contain only de -identified information. 
 
10.1.[ADDRESS_992674] on Processing of Personal Data (Act No 429 of May 31, 2000) which entered into force on July 1, 2000, and which implements the Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data. 
 10.2 Data Reporting  
Progress reports and a final report at the conclusion of the clinical investigation will be 
submitted by [CONTACT_727013]. 
    
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 29 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 10.3 Emergency Situations and Vulnerable Subjects 
Patients  will not be treated with the Zenith® Dissection Endovascular System in 
emergency situations where prior consent of the patient or the patient’s legally-authorized 
representative in accordance with   [ADDRESS_992675]’s rights.  The reasons for withdrawal and discontinuation of any patient from the investigation shall be recorded.  If such discontinuation is because of problems with safety or lack of effectiveness, that patient shall still be followed -up in the investigation, if possible. 
 
10.5 Deviations from Clinical Investigation Plan  
Deviations or non-compliances will be recorded together with an explanation.  Deviations 
shall be reported to the sponsor, regulatory authorities, and Ethics Committee/IRB as required.   
 10.6 Early Termination or Suspension of the Investigation The sponsor reserves the right to terminate/suspend the study at any point should they 
believe that important harmful events might result from its continuation.  Subjects may withdraw from the study at any time without penalty or loss of benefits.  T he investigator 
may also decide to withdraw a subject from the study at any time on the basis of medical judgement.  In any case, the reasons for withdrawal will be documented, when available. 
 10.7 Limitations of the Investigation  
This study is inherently limited by [CONTACT_727014], medical, and anatomical exclusion criteria.  Additional challenges to the study include the anticipated comorbidities, which may confound data analysis.   
  
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial [ADDRESS_992676] been negotiated, 
detailed and defined in the Investigation Contractual Documents and Agreements with the Investigation Site and Investigators. 
 10.9 Approvals and Agreements The sponsor, coordinating investigator (if applicable), and the principal clinical 
investigators for each site shall agree to this document and any modifications.  A justification for any modifications will be documented.  Approval and agreement will be indicated by [CONTACT_727015]. 
 10.[ADDRESS_992677] information. 
 10.10.4 Investigation Compliance The investigation shall be performed according to the Declaration of Helsinki .  
The investigator is responsible for obtaining approval of this clinical investigation by [CONTACT_727016]/IRB.  The sponsor must be provided with a copy of this approval before delivery of any study device.  Furthermore, the investigator will ensure that local regulations concerning data protection are followed. 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 31 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 Cook Research Incorporated is certified with the U.S. Department of Commerce's Safe 
Harbor Privacy program for the transfer of clinical study data pertaining to residents of the European Union.  The Safe Harbor Privacy Program, which is jointly sponsored by [CONTACT_727017], allows organizations to self-
certify to privacy standards that are higher than those currently required in the [LOCATION_002].  
The U.S. companies that participate in the Safe Harbor Privacy Program voluntarily agree to uphold seven Safe Harbor Privacy Principles: Notice, Choice/Consent, Onward Transfer, Access and Correction, Data Integrity, Security, and Enforcement. 
Adherence to these Safe Harbor Privacy Principles may be limited to the extent required 
by [CONTACT_727018], governmental, national security or public interest obligation. 
 10.10.[ADDRESS_992678] operating 
procedures consistent with applicable regulations.  Written procedures for monitoring the 
investigation are maintained by [CONTACT_727019] B. 
 10.10.7 Insurance The devices are covered by [CONTACT_3211]’s product liability insurance with Chubb Group of 
Insurance Companies, and a clinical study insurance policy will be taken out according to local requirements.  A copy of the insurance certificate(s) will be included in the investigator file.  By [CONTACT_727020], all the investigators and co -
investigators involved declare to be covered by [CONTACT_727021]® Dissection investigation. 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 32 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08  
10.10.8 Exposition of the Clinical Investigation Plan  
In case of translation of the Clinical Investigation Plan into the language of the 
participating countries, the English version is to be considered as the original; i.e., when expounding the contents of the Clinical Investigation Plan in these languages, the English version is definitive in case of doubt. 
 11.0 Bibliography Please reference the Clinical Investigator Brochure for a complete literature review and 
evaluation. 
                  
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial [ADDRESS_992679] Information  
 
 
 
  
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial [ADDRESS_992680]  
Jennifer Kerr  / President  
Telephone:   [PHONE_13952] Fax:    [PHONE_13953] 
E-mail:  Jennifer.Kerr @CookMedical.com 
  Manufacturer  
William Cook Europe, ApS Sandet 6  
4632 Bjaeverskov, Denmark   Data Coordinating Center/Monitor Cook Research Incorporated [ADDRESS_992681]:  
Jennifer Kerr  / President  
Telephone:   [PHONE_13952] Fax:    [PHONE_13953] 
E-mail:  [EMAIL_13874] 
   
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 35 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08  
 
APPENDIX B  
Written Procedures for Monitoring Investigations 
 
 
 
  
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 36 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08  
Written Procedures for Monitoring Clinical Investigations  
 
 
A. Selection of the monitor. 
Designated by [CONTACT_257792], the monitor may be an 
employee of Cook, an employee of a monitoring organization (CRO) or an 
independent contractor or consultant.  The monitor shall be qualified by [CONTACT_727022]. 
 
B. General duties of the monitor. 
The monitor must ensure that the investigation is conducted in accordance with: 
1. The signed investigator agreement. 
2. The Clinical Investigation Plan (CIP).  
3. Any conditions imposed by [CONTACT_1201]/EC or regulatory authority. 4. The requirements of the applicable regulations and standards. 
 C. Reports by [CONTACT_383888]. 
1. Any noncompliance with the items listed above.  In the event that the 
investigator is not complying with the requirements outlined above, it is 
the sponsor's responsibility to secure compliance. 
2. Any adverse events or effects that are potentially reportab le to a regulatory 
authority. 
 D. Initiating the investigation.  
Prior to initiating any clinical use of the device, the monitor will participate in a 
pre-investigation or initiation visit with each investigative site.  
At a minimum, the following items sha ll be addressed during the site initiation 
visit:  
• Provide training to investigator on his/her responsibilities per the investigator 
agreement, applicable laws, regulations and standards; and 
• Provide training to investigator that the IRB/EC approval letter and informed 
consent/patient information is on file before initiation of the clinical investigation. 
Additionally, training may be provided to the investigator on: 
• The regulatory status of the device/product(s) and the requirements for the 
accountab ility of same;  
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 37 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 • The nature of the clinical investigation plan (CIP); 
• The requirements for an adequate and well -controlled clinical investigation; 
• His or her obligation to obtain informed consent in accordance with 
applicable regulations; 
• His or her obligation to ensure continuing review of the clinical investigation by [CONTACT_1201]/EC in accordance with conditions of approval and applicable 
regulations and to keep the sponsor informed of such IRB/EC approval and subsequent IRB/EC actions concerning the investigation; 
• The importance of access to an adequate number of suitable subjects to conduct the investigation; 
• The importance of adequate facilities for conducting the clinical investigation; and 
• The importance of sufficient time from other obligations to carry out the responsibilities to which the investigator is committed by [CONTACT_5279]. 
E. During the course of the investigation, at the direction of the Project Manager, the 
monitor should visit the site frequently enough to ensure that: 
• The facilities  and research staff used by [CONTACT_727023]; 
• The applicable version of the CIP and agreements are being followed; 
• Changes to the CIP, informed consent/patient information have been 
approved by [CONTACT_1201]/EC and/or reported to the sponsor and the IRB/EC; 
• Accurate, complete, and current records are being maintained;  
• Accurate, complete, and timely reports are being made to the sponsor and IRB/EC; and  
• The investigator is carrying out the agreed -upon activities and has not 
delegated them to other previously unspecified staff. 
As appropriate, the following tasks could be performed during periodic visits:  
• Device/product accountability review; 
• Adverse event review to ensure that events are ap propriately reported within 
the time periods required by [CONTACT_456], CIP, IRB/EC, and applicable 
regulatory requirements; and 
• Source data verification per the monitoring plan to determine that : 
o Informed consent/patient information has been documented in 
accordance with applicable regulations and expectations of local IRB/EC;  
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 38 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 o The information recorded in the case report forms (paper or electronic) 
is complete, accurate, and legible;  
o There are no omissions in the case report forms (CRFs) of specific data elements, such as the administration to any patient of concomitant test articles or the development of an intercurrent illness; 
o Missing visits or examinations are noted; and  
o Subjects failing to complete the clinical investigation and the reason for 
each failure are noted.  
F. Records of the monitor. 
The monitor shall prepare and maintain records of each initiation visit and each 
periodic visit, general site contact, or discussion.  These will include: 
1. Date, name [CONTACT_257810], and names of other staff 
members present at each meeting.  
2. A summary of the findings of the visit. 3. A statement of any action taken by [CONTACT_727024].  
4. The monitor shall immediately notify the sponsor of any conditions of non-compliance with the Clinical Investigations Plan, conditions of IRB/EC or regulatory authority approval, or the applicable regulations. 
 
                
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 39 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08  
 
APPENDIX C  
Definitions  
 
 
  
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 40 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 Calcification:  Landing zone and iliac calcification will be graded based upon the 
following: 
  None:  Lack of calcification;  
  Mild:          Less than 40% circumferential calcification;  
  Moderate:   40- 70% circumferential calcification; or  
   Severe:     Greater than 70% circumferential.  
Clinical Utility Measures :  Number of blood transfusions;  Ventilator days ;  Days to 
resumption of oral fluids; Days to resumption of normal diet; Days to resumption of normal 
bowel function; Duration of ICU stay; Days to discharge. 
Disabling Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease:    Forced expi[INVESTIGATOR_12194] (FEV 1) 
< 1.0 liter or receiving home oxygen therapy. Dissection Grade:    Acute:     Within 14 days of onset;
 
   Subacute:    Between 15 days and 30 days of onset; or 
   Chronic:    Between 31 days and 90 days of onset. 
Embolization:   Clinical evidence of ischemic tissue remote from the operative field, 
caused by [CONTACT_94269], thrombus dislodged from the aneurysmal sac, aortic neck, and/or false 
lumen, including those tissues supplied by [CONTACT_705963], renal arteries, aortic visceral branches,  pelvic vessels, and vessels of the upper and lower limbs.  This is, of course, distinct from pre-operative, operative or post- operative intentional embolization 
procedures (e.g., to treat Type II entry- flow).   
Entry -flow:  Contrast-enhanced blood entering the false lumen for one or more of the 
following reasons: 
Type I entry- flow:   Entry -flow caused by [CONTACT_240058]- prosthetic flow at the proximal 
and/or distal seal zones;  
Type II entry- flow:   Entry -flow caused by [CONTACT_727025];   
Collateral entry -flow:  Entry -flow caused by [CONTACT_727026]; 
  
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 41 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 Type III entry -flow:   Entry -flow caused by a defect in the graft fabric, inadequate 
seal (between covered graft components only), or disconnection of covered graft 
ancillary components; 
Type IV entry -flow:  Entry - flow caused by [CONTACT_532894], often res ulting in 
a generalized blush of contrast within the false lumen; or Unknown entry- flow:   Entry -flow through undefined origin. 
Left Ventricular Ejection Fraction:   The measurement of the left ventricular function in 
the resting state. The normal LVEF ranges between 55% and 80% (mean = 67%). 
Major Adverse Events:   Myocardial infarction, chronic renal insufficiency/chronic renal 
failure requiring dialysis, bowel ischemia, stroke, paraplegia or paraparesis, and 
prolonged (> 72 hours) ventilatory support.   
Malperfusion:  Malperfusion in the setting of an aortic dissection is defined as one or more of the following
1: 
1. Visceral hypoperfusion by [CONTACT_727027], abdominal pain out of proportion to physical examination findings in setting of radiographic hypoperfusion of mesenteric bed, lactic acidosis attributed to visceral malperfusion, or need for bowel resection. 
2. Renal hypoperfusion including oliguria or aneuria in setting of rising rnalfunction tests (creatinine or blood urea nitrogen) or radiographic evidence of impaired renal artery blood flow. 
3. Lower extremity hypoperfusion indicated by [CONTACT_727028], pallor, paresthesias or paralysis.  
4. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_727005] a possible spi[INVESTIGATOR_727006]. 
MI (Non -Q-Wave) :  Clinical evidence of a myocardial infarction with elevated peak CK 
values greater than three times the upper limit of normal with elevated CK -MB (above 
the institutions upper limit of normal) in the absence of new pathological Q- waves or 
clinical evidence of a myocardial infarction with troponin greater than three times the upper limit of normal, as determined by [CONTACT_093]. 
MI (Q -Wave):    Post-procedure chest pain or other acute symptoms consistent with 
myocardial ischemia and the presence of new pathological Q -waves in two or more 
contiguous ECG leads.  
  
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 42 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 Migration (radiographic):   Antegrade or retrograde movement of the proximal or distal 
components of the endoprosthesis > [ADDRESS_992682] scan as evaluated by [CONTACT_274972].  
Migration (clinical):   Antegrade or retrograde movement of the proximal or distal 
components of the endoprosthesis resulting in the need for a secondary intervention. 
[LOCATION_001] Heart Association Classification:  
1. Patient with cardiac disease but without resulting limitations of physical 
activity.  Ordinary physical activity does not cause undue fatigue, palpi[INVESTIGATOR_332], or 
dyspnea. 
2. Patients with cardiac disease resulting in slight limitation of physical activity.  
They are comfortable at rest; ordinary physical activity results in fatigue, pa lpi[INVESTIGATOR_593530]. 
3. Patients with cardiac disease resulting in marked limitation of physical activity.  
They are comfortable at rest; less than ordinary physical activity causes fatigue, 
palpi[INVESTIGATOR_42243]. 
4.   Patients with cardiac disease resul ting in inability to carry out any physical 
activity without discomfort.  Symptoms of cardiac insufficiency may be present even at rest.  If any physical activity is undertaken, discomfort is increased. 
Occlusive Disease of iliacs:   Occlusive disease will be graded based upon the following: 
   None:        Lack of occlusive disease;   
  Mild:         Some disease, focal with less than 30% narrowing; 
            Moderate:   Between 30 -50% narrowing not requiring interventional 
techniques to meet inclusion criteria; or  
   Severe:      Greater than 50% or any patient requiring angioplasty prior 
to endograft delivery. 
  
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 43 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 Pain/Symptoms rating:  
   None:   No pain/symptoms; 
   Mild:    Nagging, annoying, interfering little with activities of daily 
living (ADLs); 
   Moderate:   Interferes significantly with ADLs; or  
   Severe:   Disabling; unable to perform ADLs. 
Resistant Hypertension:   arterial pressure > 140/90 mm Hg despi[INVESTIGATOR_727007].  (Kaplan NM.  Resistant hypertension.  Journal of 
Hypertension 2005; 23: 1441-1444.)  
Renal Failure :  Acute or progressive renal insufficiency leading to the need for dialysis 
or hemofiltration.   Reversible ischemic neurologic deficit (RIND):   Clinically significant central nervous 
system deficit lasting > 24 hours and < 72 hours. Renal Insufficiency:   A rise in serum creatinine of more than 30% above the pre-
procedure level, resulting in a serum creatinine level > 2.0 mg/dl that does not 
spontaneously resolve (does not include those patients with a pre- procedure serum 
creatinine > 2.0 mg/dl). 
Rupture :  Rupture in the setting of aortic dissection is defined by [CONTACT_727029], which is noted on CT scans.
1 
Stent/attachment system fracture/break :  Fracture or breakage of any portion of the stent 
or attachment syste m including metallic fracture or breakage of any suture material used 
to construct the stent or secure the stent or attachment system to the graft material.  
Stroke :  Permanent, clinically significant central nervous system deficit.  
Tortuosity of iliac arte ries:  Tortuosity will be graded based upon the following: 
  None:          Lack of tortuosity;   Mild:   Fairly straight arteries;  
  Moderate:  Angulation manageable with stiff wires, < 70 degrees; or 
  Severe:  Angulation difficult, may require surgical exposure for  
       straightening, not straightened entirely with wires. 
  
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 44 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 Transient Ischemic Attack (TIA) :  Central nervous system deficit lasting ≤ 24 hours. 
Type B Aortic Dissection : Thoracic aortic dissection with the most proximal extent of 
dissection distal to the left subclavian artery.  
  
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 45 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08  
 
APPENDIX D  
References  
 
 
Cook Research Incorporated  
Zenith® Dissection Clinical Trial 46 
 
COMPANY CONFIDENTIAL  
CIP 11 -007-08 1. White RA, Miller DC, Criado  FJ et al. Report on the results of thoracic endovascular 
repair for acute, complicated, type B aortic dissection at 30 days and 1 year from a 
multidisciplinary subcommittee of the Society for Vascular Surgery Outcomes Committee.  J Vasc Surg 2011; Apr; 53(4):1082-90. 
 2. Fann JI, Miller DC.  Aortic dissection.  Ann Vasc Surg 1995; 9:311-323.  3. Matsumura et al., The Society for Vascular Surgery practice guidelines: management 
of the left subclavian artery with thoracic endovascular aortic repair. J Vasc Surg 2009; Nov; 50(5):1155-8.   
4. Schafer, JL. Analysis of Incomplete Multivariate Data. London: Chapman & Hall; 
1997. 
 5. Schafer, JL. Missing Data: A Review. A seminar sponsored by [CONTACT_567439]; October 14, 2002; Cleveland, OH.  
 