Dana Farber IRB NUMBER: 20 -420 IRB APPROVAL DATE: 0 8/16/202 2 My Moments Protocol  
Title:  My Mindful Moments: A Mindfulness Meditation and Digital Art Activity  
Background  
Stress and anxiety are pervasive in the current healthcare environment. During the COVID -[ADDRESS_619516] been required to cope with multiple changes in the work environment. According to Phillips  
(2019) systematic review, expressive arts interventions show effectiveness at reducing acute anxiety in 
healthcare workers. Mindfulness meditation is a well -established technique to promote re laxation in 
various adult populations and has demonstrated effectiveness in reducing consequences of anxiety in 
healthcare workers as well (Regeher, et al., 2018; Burton, et al., 2017). This project provides an 
opportunity for patient care staff in an ambu latory oncology setting to participate in and evaluate an 
activity that includes a mindfulness meditation technique and an expressive digital arts activity. 
Feasibility of conducting the activity in the workplace and differences in anxiety level pre - and p ost- 
intervention will be evaluated. The project will be conducted with strict adherence to COVID -19 related 
safe environment policies.  
Purpose & Objectives   
The purpose of this evidence -based practice project is to evaluate the feasibility of providing a  
relaxation mindfulness meditation and an expressive digital arts activity among clinical staff on the 
Yawkey 9 ambulatory oncology care clinic at Dana Farber Cancer Institute (DFCI) (Longwood Campus).  
Specific objectives are: 1.) To evaluate the feasibil ity of conducting a guided activity that combines a 
relaxation mindfulness meditation and an expressive, digital arts activity by [CONTACT_147572] a.) the frequency 
of staff participation, b.) the frequency of staff completion of the activity, c. the time neede d to 
complete the activity; 2.) To evaluate change scores in participants' stress using the Global Anxiety - 
Visual Analog Scale (GA -VAS) a validated measure of anxiety in adult populations (Williams, Morlock, & 
Feltner; 2010) pre - and post - participation in the activity; and 3.) To evaluate staff perceptions of the 
activity using additional survey items developed by [CONTACT_5051]; and 4.) to identify common 
themes that emerge from digital art images created by [CONTACT_4317].  
Methods   
Currently, approxi mately 60 patient care staff work on Yawkey 9 ambulatory infusion clinic at Dana 
Farber Cancer Institute. The meditation/digital arts activity will be conducted in a designated, private 
meeting space. Participation is strictly voluntary, and all Yawkey 9 s taff will be invited to participate. An 
email will be sent to all staff and a flyer will be posted on the unit to include a sign -up sheet with the 
dates and times for the activity (see Appendix A). [ADDRESS_619517] - activity surveys will be provided at each Dana Farber 
participant space (see Appendix B) with an iPad for each participant to use. Groups of 4 -8 participants 
Dana Farber IRB NUMBER: 20 -420 IRB APPROVAL DATE: 0 8/16/[ADDRESS_619518] se ats 6 feet apart from each other. Participants will 
be required to wear masks for the entirety of the activity. As noted above, I -pads will be provided to 
each participant and wiped down between uses per COVID -19-related current policies. The guide with 
script for study team members conducting the activity is detailed in Appendix C.  
We are requesting a waiver of registration of participants in OnCore.  
The mindfulness intervention consists of a mindfulness meditation led by a trained APRN. Participants 
listen to the meditation provided in person or via Zoom, depending on the status of COVID policies at 
DFCI at the time of the study. A video demonstration is provided in Appendix D.  
The My Moments® application (app) is a tool used to facilitate expressive art  creation in a digital 
photography media. The tool will be used with the permission of the author (see Appendix E) on iPads 
during the activity. Use of the application is described in Appendix F.  
The My Moments app will be loaded on DFCI iPads provided to  participants. Participants do not enter 
individual identifiers into the app. The only information that the app collects is the IP address of the 
device, which in this case will not be that of the individual but will be identified as owned by [CONTACT_262956], i.e. 
DFCI Blum iPad 1, DFCI Blum iPad 2, etc...  
The individual participant interacts with the app by [CONTACT_40397] a digital image. A description of the activity 
is found in Appendix F: My Moments Digital Imagery Activity. If the participant chooses to do so, they 
can share the image by [CONTACT_17325] "share" button within the app. They are immediately notified that 
the image has been sent to a workshop folder which is private and managed by [CONTACT_482199]. When an image is shared, only the "name" of the device (ie.DFCI Blum iPad 1) t is attached to 
the image and viewable in the private workshop folder. No other info is collected about the image 
creator and sharing is optional. The app does not automatically save any images. The participant can 
save the im age to the individual device if they choose to do so. The research team will delete any saved 
content between iPad uses and at the end of the study.  
A collection box will be available in the meeting space for participants to deposit completed surveys. 
Participants will be identified only by [CONTACT_482200]. Each survey packet will contain a cover 
letter, a pre - and a post - survey. Each pre - and post - survey within a packet will be numbered, i.e. pre -
survey [ADDRESS_619519] the protocol in person, all procedures will be done remotely. 
The intervention activity may be conducted with participants via Zoom and surveys may be administered 
via RedCap.  
Eligibility Criteria:  
Dana Farber IRB NUMBER: 20 -420 IRB APPROVAL DATE: 0 8/16/202 2 Inclusion Criteria   
1. Ad ults > 18 years of age 2. Currently employed at DFCI 3. Providing patient care on Yawkey 9  
Exclusion Criteria   
1. None  
Evaluation & Outcome   
Feasibility will be evaluated by [CONTACT_482201] Y9 clinical staff who choose to 
participate, th e percentage who complete the activity, and the mean time required for groups to 
complete the activity. Participant feedback from open ended survey items will be analyzed for common 
themes. In previous unit -based mindfulness meditation activities provided at DFCI, a range of 20 -60% of 
staff have chosen to attend, depending on the total number and times of day sessions were provided. 
We will consider the intervention feasible if > 50% of staff choose to participate, if > 80% of those who 
participate complete  the activity, and if the activity is completed by [CONTACT_274590] [ADDRESS_619520] comparison of means. Shared digital i mages will be analyzed using a 
qualitative methodology (Lincoln, 2005), in which common themes among all images as a group are 
identified with regard to color, light, and artistic effect. Aggregate results will be shared with staff and 
administration.  
Refe rences  
Burton, A., Burgess, C., Dean, S et al. (2017). How effective are mindfulness -based interventions for 
reducing stress among healthcare professionals? A systematic review and meta -analysis. Stress and 
Health, 33 (1). pp. [ADDRESS_619521], N. K. D. Y. S . (2005). The Sage handbook of qualitative research: Sage.  
Phillips, C. & Becker, H. (2019). Systematic Review: Expressive arts interventions to address psychosocial 
stress in healthcare workers. Journal of Advanced Nursing; 75: 2282298.  
Regeher, C. Glan cy, D., Pi[INVESTIGATOR_7929], A. & LeBalnc, V.R. (2018). Interventions to reduce the consequences of 
stress in physicians: a review and meta -analysis. Journal of Nervous Mental Disorders; 202(5): 353 -359.  
Williams, V.S., Morlock, R.J., & Feltner, D. (2010). Psychometric evaluation of a visual analog scale for 
the assessment of anxiety. Health and quality of life outcomes; 8:57.  