
•Other information as needed to protect confidentiality of [COMPANY_005] or partners, personal
information, or to otherwise protect the integrity
 of the clinical study.Title: An Open-Label, Phase 1, Dose Escalation Study of MLN2480 in Patients With Relapsed or 
Refractory Solid Tumors Followed by a Dose Expansion Phase in Patients With Metastatic 
Melanoma
Study ID: [REMOVED]
SAP Approve Date: 29 July 2016
Certain information  within this Statistical Analysis Plan has been r edacted (ie, specific content is masked 
irreversibly  from view with a black/blue bar) to protect either personally  identifiable ([COMPANY_003]) information 
or company confidential information (CCI). 
This may include, but is not limited to, redaction of the following: 
Named persons or organizations associated with the study.
Proprietary information, such as scales or coding systems, which are considered confidential  
information under prior agreements with license holder.
MLN-2480
Statistical Analysis Plan, Study C28001
MLN2480C28001 SAP Version 2.01STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN
An Open-Label, Phase 1, Dose Escalation Study of MLN2480 in
Patients With Relapsed or Refractory Solid Tumors Followed by
a Dose Expansion Phase in Patients With Metastatic Melanoma
Protocol #: C28001
SAP Version: Date of Statistical Analysis Plan:
Final 29July2016
Approval Signatures
[COMPANY_003]
MLN-[ADDRESS_230639] (DSMB) ...................................................................... [ADDRESS_230640] ory ................................................................................................. 13
5.6.3 Baseline Dis ease Statu s...................................................................................... 13
5.7 Treatments and Medications ..................................................................................... 13
5.7.1 Concomitant Medications .................................................................................. 13
5.7.2 Study Tr eatments............................................................................................... 13
5.8 Efficacy Analyses ..................................................................................................... 14
5.9 Pharmacokinetic, Pharmacodynamic, and Pharmacogenetics Analysis ...................... 14
5.9.1 Pharmacokinetic Analyses ................................................................................. 14
5.9.2 Pharmacodynamic Analyses ............................................................................... 19
5.9.3 Pharmacogenetics Analyses ............................................................................... 20
5.10 Safety Analyses ...................................................................................................... 20
5.10.1 Adverse Events ................................................................................................ 20
5.10.2 Laboratory  Data............................................................................................... 22Property of [COMPANY_005]: For non-commercial use only and subject to the applicable Terms of Use...[ADDRESS_230641]-2480
Statistical Analysis Plan, Study C28001
MLN2480C28001 SAP Version [IP_ADDRESS] Electroca rdiograms .......................................................................................... [ADDRESS_230642] aspartate aminotransferaseAUC area under the plasma concentration versus time curveBLQ below level of quantificationCI confidence interval
CL R renal clearance
Cmax maximum plasma concentration
CR complete response C
trough trough concentration
CTCAE Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse EventsCYP cytochrome P
450
DLT dose-limiting toxicityDOR duration of responseECG electrocardiogramECOG Eastern Cooperative Oncology GroupeCRF electronic case report formERK extracellular signal-regulated kinase
 
IL interleukinKi Inhibition constantLLOQ lower limit of quantitationMedDRA Medical Dictionary for Regulatory ActivitiesMTD maximum tolerated doseNALQ number of observations above lower limit of quantitationNCI National Cancer InstituteORR overall response ratePD progressive disease (disease progression)pERK phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated kinasePFS progression-free survivalPK pharmacokinetic(s)PR partial responseQ2D every other dayQTc rate-corrected QT interval (millisec) of electrocardiographQW once weeklyRECIST Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid TumorsRP2D recommended phase 2 doseSAE serious adverse eventSD stable disease
Property of [COMPANY_005]: For non-commercial only and subject to the applicable Terms of Use
roupoup
ted kinad kin
antnt
of quantf quan
DictionDictio
mum toum t
umber oumber
NatioNati
ov
K
PRPR
Q2QCCI
MLN-2480
Statistical Analysis Plan, Study C28001
MLN2480C28001 SAP Version 2.05Abbreviation Term
t1/2z Terminal disposition phase half-life
Tmax first time to maximum plasma concentration
TEAE Treatment Emergent Adverse EventTTR time to response
on-commercial use only and subject to the applicable Terms of Use
MLN-2480
Statistical Analysis Plan, Study C28001
MLN2480C28001 SAP Version 2.061. INTRODUCTION
In general, the purpose of the Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP) is to provide a framework that 
addresses the protocol objectives in a statistically rigorous fashion, with minimized bias or 
analytical deficiencies. Specifically, this plan has the following purpose:
To prospectively (a priori) outline the types of analyses and data presentations that will 
address the study objectives outlined in the protocol, and to explain in detail how the data 
will be handled and analyzed, adhering to commonly accepted standards and practices of 
biostatistical analysis in the pharmaceutical industry.
1.1 Study Design
This is a phase 1, multicenter, nonrandomized, open-label, dose escalation study. The study 
is conducted in 2 phases (dose escalation and dose expansion) and will test 2 dosing 
schedules (every other da y (Q2D) and once weekly (QW)) of MLN2480 also known as 
TAK-580. 
In the Dose Escalation phase, a 3 + 3 dose escalation design is implemented to evaluate 
MLN2480 Q2D or QW in dose intervals with continuous dosing (no washout) prespecified
in the Dose Escalation Algorithm . Patients in the Dose Escalation cohorts are evaluated for 
dose-limiti ng toxicity (DLT) during the first cy cle of treatment, and decisions regarding
escalation to the next dose level, expansion of a dose level, or evaluation of an intermediate
dose level are determined based on DLT evaluation. Patients in the Dose Escalation phase 
may continue treatment for additional cycles until disease progression, unacceptable
toxicity, or the patient discontinues for any other reason. The maximum duration of 
treatment will be 12 months unless it is determined that a patient would derive benefit from
continued therapy beyond 12 months.
The dose used for the Dose Expansion phase (MTD and/or RP2D) is selected based on data 
from the Dose Escalation phase at the corresponding dosing schedule (Q2D or QW). The 
Dose Expansion phase may commence be fore establishing the MTD/RP2D upon medical 
determination of a safe dose that is lower than MTD/RP2D. Patients fast (with the exception 
of water) for at least [ADDRESS_230643] 2 hours after taking their dose of MLN2480. 
Patients in the Dose Expansion phase take MLN2480 orally Q2D or QW in 28-day cycles 
until disease progression, unacceptable toxicity, or the patient discontinues for any other 
reason. The maximum duration of treatment will be 12 months unless it is determined that a 
patient would derive benefit from continued therapy beyond 12 months. 
Patients who discontinue study treatment during Cycle 1 for reasons other than 
MLN2480-related toxicity are replaced in the Dose Escalation phase of the study.
A total of approximately 198 patients with solid tumors w ill be enrolled in this study 
(approximately 54 patients in the Dose Escalation phase [Q2D and QW] and approximately 
144 patients in the Dose Expansion phase [Q2D and QW]). Of the approximately 
144 patients enrolled in the Dose Expansion phase, approximately 128 patients with locally 
advanced metastatic and/or unresectable melanoma (each cohort with a maximum of 
16 patients) and 16 patients with advanced solid tumors (excluding lymphona) will be 
enrolled.on-comommercial use only and subject to the applicable Terms of Useta ta 
es of s of 
n studyn stud
ll test 2l test 
N2480 a2480 
n isisimpim
s dosingdosin
e Escale Esca
off treat treaff
dose ledose l
uation.ation
es untes unt il
anynyothoty
t is detet is det
ths.hs.
xpansiopans
phase athase 
ay comay co
fe dosee do
hoh
MLN-2480
Statistical Analysis Plan, Study C28001
MLN2480C28001 SAP Version 2.07When patients discontinue study treatmen t, they return to the study site 30 ( ! 10) days after 
administration of the last dose of study drug or the start of subsequent antineoplastic 
therapy, whichever occurs first, to complete the End of Study visit procedures. All 
MLN2480-related toxicities are followed until the E nd of Study visit or until the toxicities 
have resolved, stabilized, or returned to baseline, whichever occurs later.
1.2 Study Objectives1.2.1 Primary Objectives
The primary objectives of the study are as follows:
∀To evaluate the safety and tolerability of  MLN2480 taken orally Q2D or QW by [CONTACT_194395]  (Dose Escalation phase and Dose Expansion 
phase and Pharmacokinetic (PK) Expansion c ohort) or locally advanced, metastatic, 
and/or unresectable melanoma (Dose Expansion phase).
∀To determine the MTD of MLN2480 taken Q2D or QW by [CONTACT_194396] (Dose Escalation phase).
∀To determine the recommended phase 2 dose (RP2D) of MLN2480 taken Q2D or QW 
by [CONTACT_194397] (Dose Escalation phase).
1.2.2 Secondary Objectives
The secondary objectives in this study population are as follows: 
∀To evaluate the preliminary efficacy of MLN2480 as measured by [CONTACT_194398] (RECIST), version 1.1.
∀To evaluate the pharmacokinetics of MLN2480.
∀To evaluate the effect of MLN2480 on pharmacodynamic markers in paired tumor 
biopsies.
1.2.[ADDRESS_230644] to the applicable Terms of Use
QW by[CONTACT_122967] b
Dose Exose E
ananced, mced,
patientpatien
D) of M) of M
rs (Doss (Do
ulatiation aon 
y of MLof M
ST), verT), v
netetics oics 
f MLN2MLN
ObjOb
CCI
MLN-[ADDRESS_230645] 75% of the planned 
doses of MLN2480 and have sufficient follow-up data to allow the investigators and sponsor 
to determine whether DLT occurred. This population will be used for analysis of MTD.
2.[ADDRESS_230646] baseline response assessment. This 
population will be used for response related analyses (eg, ORR, DOR, etc).
2.[ADDRESS_230647] 1 dose of study drug 
(MLN2480). This population w ill be used for all safety analyses, as well as other analyses 
such as pharmacogenomic analyses except the response related analyses.
2.[ADDRESS_230648] (DSMB)
There is no DSMB in this study.
5. STATISTICAL METHODOLOGY
In general, summary tabulations will be presented that display the number of observations, 
mean, standard deviation, median, minimum, and maximum for continuous variables, and 
the number and percent (of non-missing) per category for categorical data, unless specified 
otherwise. 
At the time of CSR database lock, all relevant data will be queried and cleaned; a database 
snapshot will be taken and used for the CSR. Additional tr eatment data w ill be entered into 
the database through study termination. Analyses may be updated based on additional 
information. An addendum to the CSR may be written if warranted based on these analyses 
at study termination.
Unless specified otherwise, all the summary tables will be presented by [CONTACT_194399], subtotal of Q2D patients at escalation, subtotal of QW patients at 
escalation, total at escalation, each expansion cohort, total at expansion, and if applicable,
subtotal of Q2D patients at expansion, subtotal of QW patients at expansion.
5.1 Sample Size Justification
The total sample size for the study will be approximately 198 patients (approximately 
54 patients in the Dose Escalation phases (Q2D and QW) and approximately 144 patients in 
the Dose Expansion phase [Q2D and QW]). In the Dose Escalation phase, a 3 + 3 dose
escalation design will be used; therefore, the sample size is dependent on the number of dose
escalation steps and the number of patients per cohort. To further evaluate the safety and
preliminary antitumor activity of the selected MLN2480 dose for the Dose Expansion phase, 
approximately 128 patients with locally adva nced, metastatic, and/or unresectable melanoma
(each cohort will have a maximum of 16 evaluable patients) and 16 patients with advanced
solid tumors (excluding lymphoma) will be enrolled in the Dose Expansion phase (Q2D and
QW).
5.2 Randomization and Stratification
Randomization is not used in this study; however, patients are assigned to 1 of 8 Expansion 
cohorts based on tumor type, mutational status, and/or treatment history (see Section 5.1of 
the protocol). No stratification is planned for this study. An interactive voice response
system is used for cohort management. Refer to the Study Manual for details.on-commercial use only and subject to the applicable Terms of Use
er of obr of o
nuous vnuous 
al datal data
ueried ueried
reatmeatm e
be updbe up
tenenif if w
tables wtables
entnts at s at 
ansion ansion
n, subtn, sub
ionon
he studhe stu
Escalatcal
phase [hase
b
MLN-[ADDRESS_230649] data management operating procedures. No data 
imputation will be applied for missing values unless specified.
[IP_ADDRESS] Missing/Partial Dates in Screening Visit
The following rules apply to dates recorded during the screening visits. 1. If only the day-component is missing, the first day of the month will be used if the year 
and the month are the same as those for the first dose of study drug. Otherwise, the 15th 
will be used. 
2. If only the year is present, and it is the same as the year of the first dose of study drug, 
the 15th of January will be used unless it is  later than the first dose, in which case the 
first of January will be used. 
3. If only the year is present, and it is not the same as the year of the first dose of study 
drug, the 15th of June will be used, unless other data indicates that the date is earlier.
[IP_ADDRESS] Missing/Partial Dates in Adverse Events/Concomitant Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]5.[IP_ADDRESS] Missing/Partial D ates in Adverse Events
Adverse events with stop dates that are completely or partially missing will be imputed as 
follows:
1. If the stop date has month and year but day is missing, the last day of the month will be 
imputed.
2. If the stop date has year, but day and month are missing, the [ADDRESS_230650] the date of death, if 
available. If the date is later than the date of death, the date of death will be used as the 
imputed date instead. 
If the stop date of an adverse event is completely missing, then this event will be regarded as 
ongoing and will be included in the summary table.
Adverse events with start dates that are completely or partially missing will be imputed as 
follows:
1. If the start date has month and year but day is missing.
a. If the onset month and year are the same as that of first dose date, the first dose date 
will be used instead. If the onset month and year are different from that of the first 
dose date, then the first day of the month will be used.be be 
data ata 
will be will b
drug.drug. O
r of the r of the
n the firthe 
me as the as
other therd
verse Erse E
in Advn Ad
that arhat a
month aonth
MLN-[ADDRESS_230651] the stop date. If this 
date is later than the stop date (possibly imputed), then the stop date will be used 
instead.
2. If the start date has year, but day and month are missing.
a. If the onset year is the same as that of first dose date, then the first dose date will be 
used instead
b. If onset year is different than that of the first dose date, the first of January of the 
year will be imputed.
c. After the imputation, the imputed dates will be compared against the dose stop date. 
If this date is later than the stop date (possibly imputed), then the stop date will be 
used instead.
3. If the start date of an adverse event is completely missing, then it is imputed with the 
first dose date.
[IP_ADDRESS].2 Missing/Partial Dates in Concomitant Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_194394]:
1. If the start date has month and year but day is missing, the therapy will be included in 
the summary table if the month and year are: 
a. On or after the month and year of the date of the first dose of study drug
and 
b. On or before the month and year of the date of the last dose of study drug plus 
30 days.
2. If the start date has year, but day and month are missing, the therapy will be included in 
the summary table if the year is:
a. On or after the year of the date of the first dose of study drug
and 
b. On or before the year of the date of the last dose of study drug plus [ADDRESS_230652] to, but prior to, the start of study drug administration. For the triplicate 
electrocardiogram (ECG) summaries in the Dose  Escalation and PK Expansion cohorts, the on-commercial use only and subject to the applicable Terms of Usee e 
stop dastop d
date wildate w
imputemput
or partiar part
issing, tsing,
date ofate o
r of theof th
daydayananyy
year iear is:s
ar of thr of t
he yehe y
MLN-2480
Statistical Analysis Plan, Study C28001
MLN2480C28001 SAP Version 2.012baseline is defined as the average of the triplicate 12- lead ECG measur ements recorded at 
2 to 5 minute intervals on Cycle 1, Day 1 before dosing (predose).
5.4.[ADDRESS_230653] to 
follow-up before documentation of the events (progressive disease /death).
5.4.6 General Conventions for Determining Duration
The duration of an event is calculated as: date of end of the event – date of start of the event 
+1, eg, days on treatment = date of last dose – date of first dose + 1.
Time to ev ent analyses such as survival time or time to tumor progression are calculated in a 
similar way. Table shells will specify if there are any exceptions
5.5 Patient Disposition
Disposition of patients includes the number and percentage of patients for the following 
categories: safety population, PK-evaluable population, pharmacodynamic-evaluable 
population, response-evaluable population, DLT-evaluable population. These categories will 
be summarized in each dose group and total for Dose Escalation phase, for the PK 
expansion and other expansion cohorts and the total for Expansion Phase. The primary 
reason for study discontinuation will also be summarized in this table. All percentages will 
be based on the number of patients in the safety population.
5.5.1Protocol Deviations
A listing of major protocol deviations will be provided.
5.[ADDRESS_230654] wi
througthrou
ncesces.
ycle 1 cle 1
e allocaalloc
hdraw, draw
ssive dissive d
g DuraDur
e of endof en
see––dad
al tl timeim
ifyifyififyy thtff
cludes udes
ulatatioion,n
evalueval
MLN-2480
Statistical Analysis Plan, Study C28001
MLN2480C28001 SAP Version 2.013parameters as appropriate. No inferential statistics will be carried out. Demographic data 
will also be presented in a by-patient listing.
Age is calculated from date of birth to date of informed consent.
Body surface area (m2) = {[height(cm) x weight(kg)]/3600}1/2
5.6.2 Medical History 
Medical history data will be presented in a by-patient listing, including medical and surgical 
history, date of onset and status (ongoing or resolved).
5.6.[ADDRESS_230655] of baseline Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group 
(ECOG) score, primary diagnosis, years since initial diagnosis, method of stage 
classification, disease stage at study entry and disease-specific markers. 
By-patient listings will also be presented for baseline disease characteristics.
A separate table will summarize the numbers and percentages of patients who had prior 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014], including prior antineoplastics, prior radiation therapy, prior surgery and best 
response to the last therapy.  Separate by-patient listings will also be presented.
5.7 Treatments and Medications5.7.1 Concomitant Medications and Procedures
Concomitant medications will be coded by [CONTACT_194400] (WHO) Drug Dictionary. The number and percentage of patients taking 
concomitant medications from the first dose date through [ADDRESS_230656] dose data w ill be 
tabulated by [CONTACT_194401] (ATC) classificat ion phar macological 
subgroup and WHO drug generic term. Concomitant medications will also be presented in a 
by-patient listing.
Concomitant procedures will not be coded, but will be presented in a by-patient listing.
5.7.2 Study Treatments
MLN2480 is administered Q2D or QW. MLN2480 is formulated as an immediate release 
tablet for oral administration.
[IP_ADDRESS] Extent of Exposure 
The exposure to study drug will be summarized by [CONTACT_194402] (mg), total 
number of doses received, number of treated cycles, numbers and percentages of patients 
who had ≥1, ≥2, …, and ≥13 treated cycles, and relative dose intensity. 
A treated cycle is defined as a cycle in which the patient received any amount of study drug.
Planned dose is determined by [CONTACT_194403] a patient is enrolled at study entry.
Relative Dose intensity (%) is defined as 100 x (total dose received (mg)) / (planned total 
dose per day x planned total number of treated days per cycle x number of treated cycles).on-commercial use only and subject to the applicable Terms of Usergical rgical
ncologyncolo
of of stagsta
errs. s. 
aracteriracter
es of paes of p
therapyherap
gs will ags will
roceduoced
by [CONTACT_194404]. The. Th
fifirst drstiii
herapeuerape
enericneric t
res wiles w
MLN-2480
Statistical Analysis Plan, Study C28001
MLN2480C28001 SAP Version 2.014Dosing data will also be presented in by-patient listings.
The actions on study drug (Reduced, Increased, Held, Missed, Interrupted, Cycle Delay, 
Delayed within a Cycle, or Discontinued Permanently) will be summarized by [CONTACT_194405] (each of Cycle 1 through Cycle 6, Cycle 7-12, Cycle >=13, and total).
5.[ADDRESS_230657] guideline (version 1.1). The number and percentage of patients will be 
summarized by [CONTACT_194406] (ie, complete response [CR], 
partial response [PR], stable disease [SD], and progressive disease [PD]). Disease response 
category will also be presented in a by-patient listing.
Overall response rate (ORR) is defined as the proportion of patients whose best overall 
response is either CR or PR. ORR will be tabulated with point estimates. Confidence 
intervals (95% CIs) will be provided for each expansion cohort as well as the total for the 
expansion cohorts and total for the escalation cohorts.
Time to response (TTR) is defined as the time from the date of first dose of study  treatment 
to the date of the first documentation of a PR or better response up to the alternative therapy 
in a patient who responded. TTR w ill be summarized and listed.
Duration of response (DOR) will be assesse d from the date of first documented response 
(CR or PR) to the date of first documented PD and will be censored at the date of the last 
assessment for responders who die without documented PD and for responders who are still 
alive and have not progressed. DOR will be summarized and listed.
Progression-free survival (PFS) is defined as  the time from the date of first study drug 
administration to the date of first documented PD or death due to any cause, whichever 
occurs first. PFS will be censored at the last response assessment that is SD or better for a 
patient that has not progressed and last known to be alive. Patients with no response 
assessment will be censored at the date of first dose. PFS will be summarized and listed.
Time-to-event data for each melanoma expansion cohort and the total of the expansion 
cohorts and total of the escalation cohorts will be analyzed by [CONTACT_8761]-Meier method and 
results will be summarized by 25th, 50th(median) and 75thpercentiles wi th associated 
2-sided 95% CIs, as well as the percentage of censored observations.
5.[ADDRESS_230658] to the applicable Terms of Use
will be ll be 
d as thed as th
udydyvisivisyy
atients wents 
esponsespon
D])D]).DisDi
ients whents wh
nt estimesti
ohort ahort 
m the dam the d
better bette
marizemariz
ssed froed f
nted PDted 
witwithouho
OR wiOR w
FS)FS)is dis
of firsof fir
be cense cen
ogresogr
MLN-2480
Statistical Analysis Plan, Study C28001
MLN2480C28001 SAP Version 2.015Methods for PK Data Handling
No data imputation will be applied for missing concentration values, with one exception. If 
the end of dosing interval (trough) plasma concentration value is missing after Cycle 1, 
Day [ADDRESS_230659] for the purpose of calculating Cycle 1, Day 21 PK parameters (eg, C trough, 
PTR, AUC tau) that depend on the end of dosing interval plasma concentration. Additionally, 
if the time between Cycle 1, Day 21 dosing time and actual sample co llection time for the 
Cycle 1, Day 21 end of dosing interval (trough) plasma sample is less than 40 hr 
(approximately 20% deviation from the scheduled sample collection time of 48 hr in the 
case of Q2D dosing), that concentration may be imputed at the discretion of the Clinical 
Pharmacologist for the purpose of calculating Cycle 1, Day [ADDRESS_230660] 2 patients 
in the PK evaluab le population a nd the number of observations above the lower limit of 
quantitation (NALQ) is ≥50% of the number of patients. The summary statistics will consist 
of: N, arithmetic mean, standard deviation, coefficient of variation (CV), median, minimum, 
maximum, geometric mean, and NALQ. Arithmetic mean, geometric mean, median,
minimum, and maximum will be reported when there are at least [ADDRESS_230661] 3 non-missing values. For ease 
of presentation, scheduled sampling times will be  used to present results in summary tables
and figures.
Concentrations that are below level of quantification (BLQ) w ill be set to zero for 
calculation of summary s tatistics, except for geometric means, where BLQ values will be 
excluded. Arithmetic mean, geometric mean, median, minimum and maximum values less 
than the lower limit of quantitation (LLOQ) will be displayed as BLQ in concentration 
summaries.
Concentration data that are considered anomalous may be excluded from the concentration 
summaries and plots. Evidence or explanations will be provided in the clinical study report
to justify the exclusion of data.on-commercial use only and subject to the applicable Terms of Use,
e e
n the n the 
ClinicaClinic
s that d that 
med, thmed
lasma casma
can be an be
ioon of n of
lasma casma 
dose grdose 
ion andon an
ed sepad sep
a from from
ohorts,ohorts
nd groud gro
portedported
attioion ann
≥50%50%
n, n, stansta
MLN-[ADDRESS_230662]-2480
Statistical Analysis Plan, Study C28001
MLN2480C28001 SAP Version 2.017As data permit, the following PK parameter s will be calculated for MLN2480 by 
[CONTACT_38875]™ WinNonlin®version 6.2 or higher: 
Parameter Definition Units
Cmax Observed maximum plasma concentration ng/mL
Tmax First time Cmax is observed hr
λz Terminal disposition phase rate constant 1/hr
t1/2z Terminal disposition phase hal f-life hr
Ctrough Observed plasma concentration at the end of a dosing interval ng/mL
AUCt Area under the plasma/blood/serum concentration-time curve from time 
[ADDRESS_230663] quantifiable concentration. using the linear-log 
trapezoidal methodhr*ng/mL
AUC tau Area under the plasma concentration-time curve, time 0 to end of dosing 
interval, estimated using the linear-log trapezoidal methodhr*ng/mL
CL/F Apparent clearance after extravascular administration, calculated as 
Dose/AUC ∞ after a single dose and as Dose/AUC τ after multiple dosing 
(at steady state)L/hr
PTR Peak-trough ratio in the steady state unitless
Rac(AUC) Accumulation ratio (based on AUC), calculated as AUC τ at steady 
state/AUC τ after a single doseunitless
Aet Amount of MLN2480 excreted in the urine, collected from time 0 to 
time = 8 hoursmg
fe Fraction of drug excreted in urine, calculated as (Aet/dose)×100. %
CL R Renal clearance, calculated as Ae t/AUC(0-t) L/hr
on-commercial use only and subject to the applicable Terms of Useeseee
s of UfU
ng/mLng/mLso
Termrm
hrhT
ab
of dosinf dosipli
lculatedculate
fter multer mhe
jec
lated as ated asu
nly aan
n the urithe urinly
in urinen urinus
lated asated aial
erc
MLN-2480
Statistical Analysis Plan, Study C28001
MLN2480C28001 SAP Version 2.018Different PK parameters will be estimated in the dose escalation and PK expansion cohorts 
for different dosing cycles and days, as follows:
Cohort(s) Dosing Cycles and Day Parameter
Dose Escalation& PK Expansion 
CohortCycle 1, Day 1 C max
Tmax
Ctrough
AUC tau
Cycle 1, Day 9 C trough
Cycle 1, Day 15 C trough
Cycle 1, Day 21 C max
Tmax
Ctrough
AUC t
AUC tau
CL/F
PTR
Rac(AUC)
Aet
fet
CL R
PK Expansion Cohort Onl y Cycle 1, Day 21 λzt1/2z
To report λzand t 1/2z, the terminal disposition phase data t ime span must be gr eater than or 
equal to 1.[ADDRESS_230664] be present within the terminal disposition phase.
Cycle 1, Day 1 C trough and AUC tauwill not be reported if the time between Cycle 1, Day 1 
dosing time and actual sample co llection time for the end of dosing interval (trough) plasma 
sample is less than 40 hr (in the case of Q2D dosing). Cycle 1, Day 1 C trough also will not be 
reported if the end of dosing interval plasma sample is collected after start of the next dosing 
interval. Cycle 1, Day 9 C trough will not be reported if the time between Cycle 1, Day 7 
dosing time and actual samp le co llection time for the Cy cle 1, Day 9 predose plasma sample 
is less than 40 hr, or if the Cycle 1, Day 9 predose plasma sample is collected after Cycle 1, 
Day 9 dosing. Cycle 1, Day 15 C trough will not be reported if the time between Cycle 1, Day 
13 dosing time and actual sample collection t ime for the Cycle 1, Day 15 predose plasma 
sample is less than 40 hr, or if the Cycle 1, Day 15 predose plasma sample is collected after 
Cycle 1, Day 15 dosing. Cycle 1, Day 21 C trough will not be reported if the end of dosing 
interval plasma sample is collected after start of the next dosing interval.
If the time between Cycle 1, Day 21 dosing time and actual sample co llection time for the 
end of dosing interval (trough) plasma sample is less than [ADDRESS_230665]  for the purpose of calculating Cycle 1, Day 21 PK 
parameters (eg, C trough, PTR, and AUC tau) that are dependent on the end of dosing interval 
plasma concentration. If imputation is performed, the end of dosing interval plasma on-commercial use only and subject to the applicable Terms of Usee
o
ughughrm
CCmaxm
TTm
CTe
ot
ly
eo
disposidispos ti
reater thater 
must bemust b
d AUCAUC
l samplsamp
 hr (ihr
MLN-2480
Statistical Analysis Plan, Study C28001
MLN2480C28001 SAP Version 2.019concentration will be set equal to the pre-dose plasma concentration for the same dosing 
interval. 
For the Dose Escalation and PK expansion cohorts, PK parameters will be summarized and 
grouped by [CONTACT_194407]. If the same dose is administered in a Dose 
Escalation and the PK expansion cohort, PK parameters will be summarized separately for 
the Escalation and PK expansion cohorts, as well as combined for both the Dose Escalation 
and PK expansion cohorts. In addition, Cycle 1, Day 21 T max, AUC tau, CL/F, CL R, fe t, PTR, 
Rac(AUC) , and t 1/2z will be summarized across all patients in the Dose Escalation and PK 
expansion cohorts., provided no apparent dos e-dependency is observed for these PK 
parameters.
Except for T max, the summary s tatistics w ill consist of: N, mean, SD, CV, median, min, max, 
and geometric mean. The summary statistics for T maxwill consist of: N, median, min, and
max. Summary statistics of parameter data will be reported for doses with at least 2 patients 
in the PK parameter population and ≥50% of patients ha ve available PK parameter values.
Scatter plots will be generated for Cycle 1, Day 1 and Day 21 C maxversus dose, Cycle 1, 
Day 1 and Day 21 AUC tauversus dose. 
Individual PK parameter data will be listed.Provisional Assessment of Dose Proportionality
If data permit, a regression analysis may be used to assess the dose proportionality of Cycle 
1, Day 21 AUC
tau. If the same dose is administered in a Dose Escalation and the PK 
Expansion cohort, only the above PK parameters from the escalation cohort will be include 
in the regression analysis.
Dose proportion ality will be assessed using a power model, described by [CONTACT_194408]:
ln (PK parameter/dose) = ln (a) + b * ln(dose),
where a and b are the estimated parameters of the model. The 95% confidence interval of the 
estimate of b will be provided. 
Population PK Analysis
MLN2480 plasma concentration-time data collected in this study, together with data 
collected from future studies, may contribute to population PK analysis. Patients undergoing 
serial or sparse PK sampling will contribute to  population PK analysis. The objectives of 
this analysis are to understand potential s ources of PK variability, including patient-specific 
covariates (eg, age, gender, weight, renal and hepatic function), and to enable exploratory 
analysis of the relationships between PK and pharmacodynamic effects, efficacy, and safety.
If applicable, the specifics of the population PK mod eling approaches will be described 
separately in a population PK analysis plan and the results will be reported separately from 
the CSR.
5.9.[ADDRESS_230666] (a) +ln (a)
timatedmate
providerovi
MLN-2480
Statistical Analysis Plan, Study C28001
MLN2480C28001 SAP Version 2.020Summary and percent change from baseline of the PD biomarkers will be tabulated with 
descriptive statistics (N, mean, standard deviation, median, min, and max).
The PD biomarkers in the tumor immunohistochemistry (IHC) w ill include, but not be 
limited to the direct pathway marker of Raf inhibition (pERK), proliferation marker (Ki67) 
and apoptotic marker (Bim-1).
Relationships between response and PD biomarkers may be explored graphically.
The relationship between MLN2480 exposures and tumor PD biomarkers may also be 
explored.
Individual PD data will be presented in a by-patient listing.
5.9.3 Pharmacogenetics Analyses
Individual patient DNA genotype (BRAF, NRAS, and others) w ill be listed with clinical 
response.
If applicable, drug metabolizing enzyme and/or transporter genotypes will be listed by 
[CONTACT_4676]. Descriptive statistics and graphical methods may be used to explore the relationship 
between these genotypes and selected PK parameters of MLN2480.
5.10 Safety Analyses
Safety evaluations will be based on the in cidence, intensity, and type of AEs and on 
clinically significant changes in the patient’s vital signs, weight and clinical laboratory 
results. Safety variables will be tabulated  and presented for th e safety population. The 
incidence of DLT will be presented in a listing.
These analyses will be performed  using the sa fety population.
5.10.1 Adverse Events5.10.1.1 Adverse Events
Adverse events will be coded using MedDRA Version 16.0. All AEs will be presented in a 
by-patient listing. Treatment-emergent AEs (TEAEs) w ill be tabul ated. A TEAE is defined 
as any AE that occurs after administration of the first dose of study treatment and up through 
[ADDRESS_230667] that AE counted only once 
within each body system, each high level term,  and each preferred term. TEAEs will be 
tabulated by [CONTACT_9313], high lev el term and preferred term for the following 
categories:
∀TEAEs.
∀Drug-related TEAEs.
∀Grade 3 or higher TEAEs.
∀Grade [ADDRESS_230668]-2480
Statistical Analysis Plan, Study C28001
MLN2480C28001 SAP Version 2.021∀The most commonly reported TEAEs (ie, those events reported by #10% of all patients 
in the safety population).
∀TEAEs by [CONTACT_11196] (CTCAE grade).
∀Drug-related TEAEs by [CONTACT_11196] (CTCAE grade).
∀TEAEs resulting in study drug discontinuation.
∀TEAEs resulting in study drug dose6 reduction.
TEAEs will be tabulated by [CONTACT_9313], preferred term, and highest intensity. Most 
commonly reported (at least 10% of all subjects) TEAEs will be presented by [CONTACT_194409].
AEs will be summarized by [CONTACT_194410] (NCI CTCAE) version 4.03. Patients with the same AE occurring more than 
once will have the maximum intensity of th at AE counted once within each body system, 
high level term and preferred term. 
An overall summary AE table will include numbers and percentages of patients who had any 
AE, drug-related AE, grade 3 or higher AE, grade 3 or higher drug-related AE, serious AE 
(SAE), drug-related SAE, AE resulting in treatment discontinuation, AE resulting in dose 
reduction, AE resulting in dose modification (defined as delay, reduction or 
discontinuation), and on-study deaths. On-study death is defined as the death that occurs 
between the first dose of study drug and [ADDRESS_230669] will be presented including 
rash or others as appropriate.
[IP_ADDRESS] Serious Adverse Events
The number and percentage of patients experien cing at least one treatm ent-emergent serious 
AE (SAE) will be summarized by [CONTACT_194411] y system organ class, high level term, 
and preferred term. A drug-related SAE summary will also be produced.
In addition, a by-patient listing of the SAEs will be presented (the patient listing will contain 
all SAEs regardless of treatment-emergent status).
[IP_ADDRESS] Deaths
A by-patient listing of the on-study deaths w ill be presented. On-study death is defined as 
the death that occurs between the first dose of study drug and [ADDRESS_230670] dose of 
study drug.
[IP_ADDRESS] Adverse Events Resulting in Discontinuation of Study Drug
A by-patient listing of TEAEs resulting in discontinuation of study drug will be presented. The number and percentage of patients experiencing at least one AE resulting in 
discontinuation of study drug will be summar ized by [CONTACT_11189], high 
level term, and preferred term.on-commercial use only and subject to the applicable Terms of Use
ty.y. MoMo
refeferrederrefff
ciitytyiiCriCyy
AE occuE occ
hin eacin ea
centagecentag
gher drgher d
scontcontini
ed as dd as d
death ieath 
ays of thys of 
E of speof spe
tss
of patief pati
rized by[CONTACT_194412] b
drugug--relre
ntnt lli
MLN-[ADDRESS_230671] one AE resulting in dose 
reduction will be summarized by [CONTACT_11189], high level term, and 
preferred term.
[IP_ADDRESS] Dose Limiting Toxicities (DLTs)
A by-patient listing of DLTs that occur during Cycle [ADDRESS_230672] units. If a lab value is reported using a non-numeric qualifier 
(eg, less than (<) a certain value, or greater than (>) a certain value), the given numeric value 
will be used in the summary statistics, ignoring the non-numeric qualifier. If there are 
multiple values with the same date at a visit for any patient, the average of those values will 
be used. If there are multiple values with different dates for the same visit, then the latest 
value will be used.
Shift tables of the change in National Cancer Institute Common Terminology Criteria for 
(NCI CTC) for toxicity from baseline to the post baseline worst CTC grade will be 
generated for relevant parameters. Scatter plot s of baseline versus worst post-baseline values
will be generated. Parameters to be tabulated will include:
∀Hematology: ANC, hemoglobin, platelets, WBC.
∀Clinical chemistry: ALT, AST, alkaline phos phatase, creatinine, total bilirubin, calcium, 
CO 2, potassium, glucose, albumin and sodium.
All hematology and clinical chemistry data will be also presented in by-patient listings, 
respectively.
5.10.3 Electrocardiograms
For the triplicate 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG ) summaries, the baseline is defined as the 
average of the triplicate 12-lead ECG measurements recorded at 2 to 5 minute intervals on 
Cycle 1, Day 1 before dosing (predose).
A summary of ECG abnormalities will be presen ted by [CONTACT_765]. The ECG intervals, including 
QT, QT adjusted by [CONTACT_194413] (QTcB and QTcF [Bazett and Fridericia]), 
PR, QRS, and RR, will be summarized at each scheduled time point, along with change 
from baseline to each post-treatment time point.
QTc (Bazett) = QT / (RR0.5)
QTc (Fridericia) = QT / (RR0.33)
where RR = 60 / heart rate (bpm)on-commercial use only and subject to the applicable Terms of Use
edfofor r
boratororato
numerinume
ue), the ), the
ic qualiic qu
the avethe av
for the or the
tute Coute C
st baselt base
lots of bots of
ated wied wi
platelelatel
T, alT, alkakll
albuminlbum
alal chemchell
MLN-2480
Statistical Analysis Plan, Study C28001
MLN2480C28001 SAP Version 2.023The number and percent of patients with QTc falling into the following categories: ≤450, 
>450-480, >480–500, and > 500 msec, will be summarized at each scheduled time point as
well as the number and percent of patients with changes from baseline of ≥30 msec and
≥60 msec. A similar summary will also be presented for maximum QTc (maximum over all
time points) using the same categories.
Individual ECG data will be presented in by-patient listings.
In addition, the relationship between ML N2480 plasma concentrations and select ECG 
parameters (eg, change in QTc from baseline)  may be evaluated using data from this and 
other studies using a population concentration-effect analysis approach. If conducted, this 
analysis will be reported separately from the CSR.
5.10.4 Vital Signs
The actual values of vital sign parameters, includi ng oral temperature, heart rate, weight and 
systolic and diastolic blood pressure, w ill be su mmarized over time. Summary of change 
from baseline will also be presented. A by-patient listing will be presented. 
5.10.5 Eastern Cooperative On cology Group Performance Status
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status over time will be 
summarized. Shifts from baseline to the worst post-baseline over time will be summarized.
A by-patient listing will also be presented.
5.10.6 Other Safe ty Assessments
A listing of DLTs occurring in Cycle 1 w ill be presented.
A listing of dermatology exam results and percent change from baseline in size will be 
presented.
Additional safety analyses may be determined at any time without prejudice to enumerate 
rates of toxicities and to further define the safety profile of study drugs. 
6. CHANGES TO PLANNED ANALYSES FROM PROTOCOL
There is no change made to the planned analyses from the protocol.Reference materials for this statistical plan include Clinical Study Protocol C28001 
Amendment 8 (dated 22 July 2015).
7. PROGRAMMING CONSIDERATIONS7.1 Statistical Software 
SAS version 9.2 (or higher) will be used for all analyses. 
7.[ADDRESS_230673]-2480
Statistical Analysis Plan, Study C28001
MLN2480C28001 SAP Version 2.024Treatment emergent AEs are defined as in Section [IP_ADDRESS].
8. REFERENCES
1. U.S. Department of Health and Human Se rvices, National Institutes of Health National
Cancer Institute. Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE). Version
4.03. [ADDRESS_230674] to the applicable Terms of Use