Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_466816], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], (802) 656 -5040  
Human Subjects Research Protocol  Form 07/01/[ADDRESS_466817] a specific “protocol,” such as a grant 
application.  This form must  be submitted along with a copy of the  complete grant proposal  and all the information in this form 
must  be consistent with that proposal .  This protoc ol form, once IRB approved, will be the working protocol for that research.  
When completing this document, do not refer to page numbers within your grant .   If revisions are necessary during the 
course of the research, amendments should  refer to this prot ocol form, not the grant  proposal .  Enter responses for all 
sections.  Check N/A if the section does not apply.  
 
 
PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
 
Project Title:  Protocol Version Date:  
A randomized trial  to compare switching to very low nicotine content 
cigarettes vs reducing cigarettes per day  9/20/2016  
  
Principal Investigator:   [INVESTIGATOR_372964]:  NIH Grant  Number s: 1  P50 DA036114; T 32 DA07242  
                                                                                              (For grants routed through UVM, indicate the OSP Proposal ID #  
                                                                                                 located at the top of the OSP Routing Form)  
 
 
Lay Language Summary:   (Please use non-technical  language that would be  understood by [CONTACT_372974].  The information must include: (1) a brief statement of the problem and related 
theory supporting the intent of the study, and (2) a brief but specific description of the procedure(s) involving the human  
subjects.  Please do not exceed one single -spaced  8 ½ X 11”  page.)  
 
 
The FDA recently gained the authority to regulate the nicotine content of cigarettes. Prior research suggests that 
smokers who switch to very low nicotine content (VLNC) cigarettes expe rience reduced addiction to nicotine and 
are more likely to quit smoking. Currently, the most common method for smokers to reduce their nicotine intake 
is to reduce their number of cigarettes per day (CPD).  No research has compared reducing  smokers’ nicoti ne 
intake by [CONTACT_372975] ; thus 
we plan to examine  the two  strategies  by [CONTACT_372976] 1) switch to VLNC cigarettes  or 2) reduce CPD . 
In addition, all smokers will use the nicotine patch  to help  them reduce  their nicotine intake.    
 
Primary aims:  
1. Determine whether it is easier to switch to VLNC cigarettes or reduce  CPD.   
2. Determine whether switching to VLNC cigarettes or reducing CPD reduces nicotine  addiction more .  
 
Secondary aims  
3. Determine whether switching to VLNC cigar ettes or reducing CPD increases  attempts to stop smoking or 
ability to stop smoking  more .  
4. Determine whether switching to VLNC cigarettes or reducing CPD  better reduces a) craving, b) 
withdrawal, c) perceived harm from smoking, and d) enjoyment from smoking.     
  
The University of Vermont Committees on H uman Research  
  
For Committee Use Only 
PROTOCOL NUMBER  
 
 
---------------------------------------  
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_466818], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], (802) 656 -5040  
Human Subjects Research Protocol  Form 07/01/15   2 of 17  
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES   
 
Purpose :  The importance of the research and the potential knowledge to be gained should be explained in detail.  Give background infor mation .  
Background   
Smoking is the single most preventable cause of death and is associated with over 480,000 deaths per year in the [LOCATION_002].1 Though the prevalence of 
smoking has declined dra matically since 1964, it has slowed to less than 1% per year since [ZIP_CODE] due,  in part, because the majority of smokers do not want to 
quit in the near future.2,3 A policy to reduce the nicotine c ontent of cigarettes4-7 could be useful for those who are not ready to quit.  Specifically, the FDA 
recently gained the authority to regulate cigarettes’ nicotine content and s witching to very low nicotine content (VLNC) cigarettes has been proposed a s a 
future regulatory policy to give smokers the option to decrease nicotine intake from cigarettes in order to decrease nicotine  dependence  and quit smoking .8-
[ADDRESS_466819] that switching to VLNC cigarettes with and without nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) reduc es dependence, carcinogens, 
and carbon monoxide  and increases quitting ;4,6,12 -16 however, its long -term effects are unclear.  
Nicotine dependence is determined by [CONTACT_372977] (i.e., y ield) as well as non -nicotine reinforcers conditioned by [CONTACT_372978] (i.e., 
multiple cigarettes per day).17,18 Presently, reducing cigarettes per day (CPD) is the most common strategy to reduce nicotine intake3,19,20 and appears to be 
an effective21-23 method of reducing dependence. However, a regulatory policy that introduces VLNC cigarettes will provide smokers with the opportunity to 
reduce nicotine intake without changing the frequency of their smoking behavior (i.e., CPD). Thus, reducing nicotine by [CONTACT_372979] d ifferently than reducing nicotine intake via reducing CPD. We know of no research that has compared the 
regulatory policy of reducing nicotine intake via VLNC cigarettes vs the common method of reducing nicotine intake via reduci ng CPD. This comparison w ill 
provide important information regarding the components involved in changing nicotine dependence and the potential effects of a policy that regulates the 
nicotine content of cigarettes.  
NRT appears to increase the feasibility and effectiveness of switchi ng to VLNC cigarettes13-16 as well as reducing full nicotine CPD.21-23 In both scenarios, NRT 
facilitates a net reduction in nicotine.24 Further, NRT is currently available to smokers who reduce CPD, will be available to  smokers if cigarettes’ nicotine 
levels are reduced by [CONTACT_1622] , and is likely to be used as an aid for both.  
The present study will  compare  participants who switch to VLNC cigarettes  vs participants who reduce CPD  when all participants receive NRT patch . 
Specifically th is comparison will examine differences in feasi bility and effectiveness of reducing nicotine dependence .   
 
 
 
References . Include references to prior human or animal research and references that are relevant to the design and conduct of the stud y. 
 
1. US Department of Health and Human Services. The health consequences of smoking —50 years of progress: A report of the surgeon general. Atlanta, 
GA: US Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for C hronic Disease Prevention and 
Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health. 2014;17.  
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_466820], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], (802) 656 -5040  
Human Subjects Research Protocol  Form 07/01/[ADDRESS_466821]. Distribution of daily smokers by [CONTACT_372980]: Current Population Survey  results. Prev. Med. 
2003;36:[ADDRESS_466822]. Tobacco Use in Canada: Patterns and Trends 2014 Edition. 2014; www.tobaccoreport.ca . Accessed 
March 13, 2015.  
4. Benowitz NL, Dains KM, Hall SM, et al. Progressive comm ercial cigarette yield reduction: biochemical exposure and behavioral assessment. Cancer 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. Biomarkers Prev. 2009;18(3):876 -883.  
5. Benowitz NL, Dains KM, Hall SM, et al. Smoking behavior and exposure to tobacco toxicants during 6 months of smoking  progressively reduced 
nicotine content cigarettes. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. Biomarkers Prev. 2012;21(5):[ADDRESS_466823] LA, et al. Reduced nicotine content cigarettes: effects on toxicant exposure, dependence and cessation. 
Addict ion. 2010;105(2):[ADDRESS_466824] smoking cessation. Tob. Control. 2014.  
8. Benowitz NL, Henningfield JE. Estab lishing a nicotine threshold for addiction. The implications for tobacco regulation. N. Engl. J. Med. 
1994;331(2):123 -125.  
9. Hatsukami DK, Perkins KA, Lesage MG, et al. Nicotine reduction revisited: science and future directions. Tob. Control. 2010;19(5): e1-10. 
10. Henningfield JE, Benowitz NL, Slade J, Houston TP, Davis RM, Deitchman SD. Reducing the addictiveness of cigarettes This repo rt was presented by 
[CONTACT_121310] (AMA) Council on Scientific Affairs to the AMA House of Delegates a t its 147th annual meeting in June 1998. The 
recommendations at the end of the report were adopted by [CONTACT_372981]. Tob. Control. 1998;7(3):281 -293.  
11. Tengs TO, Ahmad S, Savage JM, Moore R, Gage E. The AMA proposal to mandate nicotine reductio n in cigarettes: a simulation of the population 
health impacts. Prev. Med. 2005;40(2):[ADDRESS_466825] standards for combustible tobacc o: building an 
empi[INVESTIGATOR_45496] f or effective regulation. Prev. Med. 2014;68:[ADDRESS_466826] LA, Vogel RI, et al. Reduced nicotine content cigarettes and nicotine patch. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. Biomarkers Prev. 
2013;22(6):1015 -1024.  
14. Donny EC, Jones M. Prolonged exposure to denicotinized cigarettes with or without transdermal nicotine. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2009;104(1 -2):[ADDRESS_466827] to usual Q uitline care (nicot ine 
replacement therapy and behavioural support), on smoking cessation: a randomized controlled trial. Addiction (Abingdon, England). 
2012;107(10):1857 -1867.  
16. Rose JE, Behm FM, Westman EC, Kukovich P. Precessation treatment with nicotine skin patch facilitates smoking cessation. Nicotine & tobacco 
research : official journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco. 2006;8(1):[ADDRESS_466828]. 
1991;86(5):605 -609.  
18. Rose JE, Behm FM, Westman EC, Johnson M. Dissociating nicotine and nonnicotine components of cigarette s moking. Pharmacol. Biochem. Behav. 
2000;67(1):[ADDRESS_466829] R. Use of nicotine replacement therapy for smoking reduction and duri ng enforced temporary 
abstinence: a national survey of English smokers. Addiction. 2011;106(1):[ADDRESS_466830] R, Brown J. Smoking and smoking cessation in England 2011: Findings from the smoking toolkit study. Age (years). 2012;1:1.[ADDRESS_466831], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], (802) 656 -5040  
Human Subjects Research Protocol  Form 07/01/15   4 of 17 21. Hughes JR, Solomon LJ, Livingston AE, Callas PW, Peters EN. A randomized, control led trial of NRT -aided gradual vs. abrupt cessation in smokers 
actively trying to quit. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2010;111(1 -2):105 -113.  
22. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_313918] C, Godtfredsen NS. Is there a health benefit of reduced tobacco consumption? A systematic review. Nicotine & to bacco research : official 
journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco. 2007;9(6):631 -646.  
23. Mooney M, Johnson E, Bierut L, Hatsukami D. Cigarette smoking reduction and changes in nicotine dependence. Nicotine & Tobacco Research. 
2011;13:[ADDRESS_466832] KP, et al. Serum nicotine and cotinine levels during nicotine patch therapy. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 1993;54:98 -106.  
25. Cummings KM, Hyland A, Ockene JK, Hymowitz N, Manley M. Use of the nicotine skin patch by [CONTACT_38673] i n 20 communities in the [LOCATION_002], 1992 -
1993. Tobacco Ctl. 1997;6(2):S63 -S70.  
26. Rose JE, Herskovic JE, Behm FM, Westman EC. Precessation treatment with nicotine patch significantly increases abstinence rat es relative to 
conventional treatment. Nicoti ne & tobacco research : official journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco. 2009;11(9):1067 -1075.  
27. Hatsukami DK, Donny EC, Koopmeiners JS, Benowitz NL. Compensatory smoking from gradual and immediate reduction in cigarette n icotine con tent. 
Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. Biomarkers Prev. 2015;24(2):472 -476.  
28. Donny EC, Denlinger RL, Tidey JW, et al. Randomized Trial of Reduced -Nicotine Standards for Cigarettes. N. Engl. J. Med. 2015;373(14):1340 -1349.  
29. Haustein KO. Study 980 -CHC-0013: A double -blind, randomized, placebo -controlled multicenter trial of a nico tine chewing gum in smoking 
reduction.: [COMPANY_007] Ltd; 2001.  
30. Hughes JR, Carpenter MJ. The feasibility of reduced smoking: An update. Addiction. 2005;100:1074 -1089.  
31. Benowitz NL, Nardone N, Hatsukami DK, Donny EC. Biochemical estimation of noncompliance  with smoking of very low nicotine content cigarettes. 
Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. Biomarkers Prev. 2015;24(2):331 -335.  
32. Aguinis H, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_372965], Quigley BM. Conditions Under Which a Bogus Pi[INVESTIGATOR_372966]‐Reported Ci garette Smoking: A 
Meta‐Analytic Review1. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 1993;23(5):[ADDRESS_466833], Bickel WK, et al. Caffeine self -administration, withdrawal and adverse effects among coffee drinkers. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry. 
1991;48:611 -617.  
34. Shiffman S, Wat ers AJ, Hickcox M. The Nicotine Dependence Syndrome Scale: A multidimensional measure of nicotine dependence. Nicotine & 
Tobacco Research. 2004;6:[ADDRESS_466834], Christen AG. Evaluation of the brief questionnaire of smoking urges (QSU -brief) in laboratory and clinical settings. Nicotine & 
tobacco research : official journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco. 2001;3(1):7 -16. 
36. Hughes JR, Hatsukami DK. Signs and symptoms of tobacco withdrawal. Arch Gen Psychiatr. 1986;43:2 89-294.  
37. Westman E, Levin E, Rose J. SMOKING WHILE WEARING THE NICOTINE PATCH -IS SMOKING SATISFYING OR HARMFUL. Paper presented at: Clinical 
Research1992.  
38. MacKillop J, Murphy J, Ray L, et al. Further validation of a cigarette purchase task for asses sing the relative reinforcing efficacy of nicotine in college 
smokers. Experimental and Clincial Psychopharmacology. 2008;16:57 -65. 
39. Velicer WF, DiClemente CC, Rossi JS, Prochaska JO. Relapse situations and self -efficacy:  An integrative model. Addict. Behav. 1990;15:[ADDRESS_466835] Smoking Cessation? A Qualitative Revie w. Nicotine & 
tobacco research : official journal of the Society for Research on Nicotine and Tobacco. 2015.  
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_466836], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], (802) 656 -5040  
Human Subjects Research Protocol  Form 07/01/15   5 of 17 42. Samet JM, Benowitz NL, Clanton MS, et al. Tobacco Products Scientific Advisory Committee. 2011. 
http://www.fda.gov/downloads/AdvisoryCommittees/CommitteesMeetingMaterials/TobaccoProductsScientificAdvisoryCommittee/UCM2696 97.pdf . 
Accessed March 17,2016.  
 43.        Glover ED, Nilsson F, Westin A, Glover PN, Laflin MT, Persson B. Developmental history of the Glover -Nilsson smoking behavioral questionnaire. Am J 
Health Behav . 2005;29(5):443 -455. doi: 10.5555/ajhb.2005.29.5.443.  
44. Velicer WF, DiClemente CC , Rossi JS, Prochaska JO. Relapse situations and self -efficacy:  An integrative model. Addict Behav . 1990;15:271 -283. doi: 
10.1016/0306 -4603(90)[ADDRESS_466837] Behav . 2005;30:653 -662. doi: 
10.1016/j.addbeh.2004.08.011.  
46. Groenwold RHH, Donders ART, Roes KCB, Harrell FE, Moons KGM. Dealing with missing outcome data in randomized trials and obser vational studies. 
Am J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] . 2012;175(3):210 -217. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwr302.  
47. Hall SM, Delucchi K, Velicer WF, et al. Statistical analysis  of randomized trials in tobacco treatment: Longitudinal designs with dichotomous outcome. 
Nicotine & Tobacco Research . 2001;3:193 -203. Accessed  
48.         Spi[INVESTIGATOR_84620] B. Guide To Clinical Trials.  Philadephia, PA: Lippi[INVESTIGATOR_4431] & Wilkins; 2000.  
 
 
Objectives:   Clearly state the primary and secondary objective(s) of the study.  
Specific Aims  
Primary : 
1. Determine the relative feasibility of switching to VLNC cigarettes vs reducing CPD when all participants are aided by [CONTACT_372982] 
(NRT).  
2. Determine whether switching to VLNC cigarettes or reducing CPD more effectively reduces nicotine depen dence  when all participants are aided by 
[CONTACT_29869]. 
 
Secondary : 
3. Determine whether switching to VLNC cigarettes vs reducing CPD increases quit attempts and 7 -day point -prevalence abstinence  more  when all 
participants are aided by [CONTACT_29869].  
4. Determine the relative effectiveness of  switching to VLNC cigarettes and  reducing CPD when all participants are aided by [CONTACT_372983] a) 
craving, b) withdrawal, c) perceived harm from smoking and d) parti cipants’ enjoyment from smoking .  
 
 
 
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_466838], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], (802) 656 -5040  
Human Subjects Research Protocol  Form 07/01/15   6 of 17  
METHODS AND PROCEDURES  
 
Study Design:  Describe the research design, including a description of any new methodology and its advantage over existing 
methodologies.   
We will not begin any study procedures  until after IRB approval has been obtained. Consenting p articipants will be 
randomly assigned to 1)  switch to VLNC cigarettes with NRT  or 2) reduce full nicotine CPD with NRT  during the 5 -
week study period  (Table 1). All participants will complete baseline measures and receive full nicotine or VLNC 
study cigarettes as well as week ly supplies of [ADDRESS_466839] nicotine as they reduce their nicotine from cigarettes. However, we will also offer all p articipants the 
option to take nicotine patches with less nicotine (14 mg and 7 mg). All participants will call a study telephone 
number nightly throughout the study to report  CPD and adherence to study cigarettes and NRT.    
Procedures:   Describe all procedures (sequentially) to which human participants will be subjected. Identify all procedures that 
are considered experimental and/or procedures performed exclusively for research purposes. Describe the types, frequency and 
duration of te sts, study visits, interviews, questionnaires, etc.   Include required screening procedures performed before 
enrollment and while on study. Please provide in table, list or outline format for ease of review.  (describe and attach all 
instruments)  
 
Note:  A clinical research protocol may involve interventions that are strictly experimental or it may involve some aspect of 
research (e.g., randomization among standard treatments for collection and analysis  of routine clinical data for research 
purposes). It is i mportant for this section to distinguish between interventions that are experimental and/or carried out for 
research purposes versus those procedures that are considered standard therapy. In addition, routine procedures performed 
solely for research purpos es (e.g., additional diagnostic/follow -up tests) should be identified.  
Procedures  
Individuals who are interested in this study will be instructed to call a  toll free  study telephone number. Potential 
participants will be screened on an initial phone call  or online survey  (approximately 10 minutes) with a series of 
questions about their smoking to determine eligibility  (see Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria) . Eligible participants will 
be prompted to schedule a study visit. The first study visit will last approx imately one hour. Potential participants 
will be provided with a consent form and information regarding the study during their first study visit. They will be 
encouraged to ask questions and required to answer a short test to ensure they understand study p rocedures 
prior to consenting to participate. Consenting participants will then be randomized to 1) the VLNC  or 2) the  CPD 
group. All participants  will answer a series of demographic questions and self -report measures regarding their 
smoking behavior (described below).  Finally, participants will receive instructions regarding use of the study 
cigarettes.  
During their first study visit, we will provide all  participants with a one-week supply of full nicotine study 
cigarettes (16.5 ± 0.17 mg/g)  that totals 150% of their normal number of CPD in order to establish a baseline CPD 
with novel study cigarettes that are being provided free of charge. The 16.5 mg/g nicotine content NIDA r esearch 
cigarette is estimated to have a nicotine yield (0.8 mg) similar to many commercial cigarettes. Participants will be 
instructed to smoke only research cigarettes, but to smo ke as usual during the first week  of the study. Self -
reported CPD during we ek 1 will serve as the baseline CPD from which we  will calculate the number of research 
cigarettes to pro vide participants during weeks 2 through 5  (see Table 1 ).  
Switching to VLNC cigarettes  
Participants who are randomized to switch to VLNC cigarettes will  receive a supply of 1 00% of their baseline 
number of CPD during study visits (determined during week 1) throughout weeks 2 to 5  and instructed to smoke 
as usual (e.g., not to attempt to reduce CPD). They will receive study cigarettes with p rogressively lower nicotine 
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_466840], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], (802) 656 -5040  
Human Subjects Research Protocol  Form 07/01/15   7 of 17 content (mg/g tobacco) beginning with 11.26 ± 0.11 mg/g during week  2, 5.54 ± 0.27 mg/g during week  3, 2.54 ± 
0.05 mg/g during week  4, and 0.44 ± 0.01  mg/g  during week 5 . We will also provide participants with an 
additional 2 -day supply of study cigarettes for the beginning of the subsequent week with instructions to only 
smoke these cigarettes if the participant’s next study visit is delayed. For example, at a participant’s week 2 study 
visit, s/he will receive a 7 -day supply of  11.26 mg/g study cigarettes and an additional 2 -day supply of 5.54 mg/g 
study cigarettes. Participants will be instructed to return all unused study cigarettes at each study visit.  
Participants will also receive a supply of NRT patches with instructions to wear one patch per day every day 
throughout weeks 2 through 5. This schedule was selected based on available VLNC cigarettes and findings that 
indicate that a gradual transition to cigarettes with a nicotine content of approximately 1 mg/g or less with the 
NRT patch is safe, effective and feasible.12,27,[ADDRESS_466841] consistent qualities (e.g., filter type and tippi[INVESTIGATOR_372967]) 
across nicotine contents that allow for a gradual transition to VLNC cigarettes are all mentholated.  Therefore all 
participants will receive menthol study cigarettes  and we will limit recruitment to participants who currently 
smoke or have a history of smoking menthol cigarettes . A minority of smokers use menthol cigarettes and most 
are African Americans ;[ADDRESS_466842] to the novel flavor of study cigarettes, regardless of 
their current or prior experience with menthol cigarettes.   
 
Reducing CPD  
We will provide participants who are randomized to reduce CPD with full nicotine study cigarettes (16.5 ± 0.17 
mg/g)  during each study  visit throughout the 5-week study period and instruct them to only smoke cigarettes 
provided by [CONTACT_1758]. Participants in this condition will also be current or past menthol smokers and will receive 
menthol study cigarettes in order to be consistent with  participants who are randomized to switch to VLNC 
cigarettes. After establishing a baseline CPD during  week 1 , participants will receive progressively fewer cigarettes 
beginning with 70% of their baseline CPD during  week 2, 35% during  week  3, 15% during  week  4, and 3% during 
week 5 . Participants will receive a minimu m of 1 CPD during week 5 . We will also provide participants with an 
additional 2 -day supply of study cigarettes for the beginning of the subsequent week with instructions to only 
smoke these cigarettes if the participant’s next study visit is delayed. Participants will be instructed to return all 
unused study cigarettes at each study visit.  Participants will also receive a supply of NRT patches with instructions 
to wear one patch per day  every day throughout weeks 2 through 5. This schedule was selected to match the 
percent reduction in nicotine content of cigarettes for smokers randomized to switch to VLNC cigarettes.  Further, 
this schedule of NRT aided reductions in CPD appears to be  safe, feasible and effective.29 We will estimate 
reduction s in CPD, compliance with study cigarettes, and NRT use with daily and weekly self -report.  
All participants  
Importantly, all participants will receive study cigarettes that are not commercially available and thus novel. 
Further, because participants who r educe CPD cannot be blinded,  we will inform participants  in the  VLNC 
cigarette  condition  of the nicotine content of their cigarettes each week .  
All study cigarettes will be distributed in re -sealable plastic containers . Each container will be labeled  with text 
from the original Spectrum packaging. Specifically the labels will include the phrases: 1) “Not for resale,” 2) “For 
research purposes only,” 3) “Not to be sold,” and 4) “Surgeon General’s Warning: Smoking Causes Lung Cancer, 
Heart Diseas e, Emphysema, and May Complicate Pregnancy.” Participants will be instructed  to return all unused 
study cigarettes to the researchers  in the  re-sealed  plastic containers  during study visits.  
In order to increase the validity of participants’ s elf-report a bout adherence to study  cigarettes, we will 1) inform 
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_466843], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], (802) 656 -5040  
Human Subjects Research Protocol  Form 07/01/15   8 of 17 participants that self -reported noncompliance will not influence their payment or future participation and 2) 
employ a bogus pi[INVESTIGATOR_372968].32 Specifically, we will (falsely) tell 
participants that breath and urine tests will detect any non -study cigarettes that are smoked. In fact, the breath 
and urine tests will be used to measure CO and cotinine but cannot detect the difference between study and non -
study cigarettes. This deception is intended to increase participants’ self -report of any non -study cigarettes that 
they smoke. Knowing the extent to which participants smoke non -study cigaret tes is integral to our primary 
specific aim (determine the relative feasibility of switching to VLNC vs reducing CPD). Participants will be 
debriefed about this deception and its rationale  during their final study visit  after the conclusion of the  5-week 
study period.  
Final study visit and follow -up 
After the 5 -week study period participants in both conditions will attend a final study visit . During this final study 
visit we will provide all participants  with usual care for smokers who are not ready to quit :  information ( NIH 
brochure ) regarding the dangers of smoking, information regarding treatment options, and brief advice to quit. 
We will provide participants who decide to quit with a  4 week  supply of  21 mg  NRT-patches  and instructions 
regarding how to use them . Also, all participants will be debriefed reg arding the use of deception and provided 
with the Debriefing Form during the final study visit. We will not provide participants with study cigarettes after 
the 5-week  study period. We will mail information regarding the dangers of smoking, information regarding 
treatment options, a letter with brief advice to quit, and the Debriefing Form to any participant who misses their 
final study visit. Participants will complete  a final online survey at week 9  (4 week s after the conclusion of the 5 -
week study period)  to assess for quit attempts and point -prevalence abstinence.  
 
 
For research involving survey, questionnaires, etc.:   Describe the setting and the mode of administering the instrument and 
the provisions for maintaining privacy and confidentiality.  Include the duration, intervals of administration, and overall l ength of 
participation.  (describe and attach all instrument s) 
 Not applicable   
Schedule of Study Visits (Table 1)  
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_466844], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], (802) 656 -5040  
Human Subjects Research Protocol  Form 07/01/[ADDRESS_466845] of self-report measures, 
distribution of NRT-patches and study cigarettes, and  breath and  urine samples.  If a participant misses a study 
visit, a research assistant will  1) email the participant that week’s questionnaire to complete online and  2) drive to 
the participant’s house to deliver the week’s supply of NRT patches and study cigarettes and require a signature 
[CONTACT_372996].  If participants miss two consecutive weeks of study visits and nightly 
questionnaires we will withdraw them from the trial. If participants quit smoking and report abstinence during 
their study visit, we will provide them  with  self-help material a nd NRT -patches, but not research cigarettes for the 
subsequent  week . We will ask participants who quit to continue to complete nightly questionnaires and attend 
weekly study visits for the duration of the study. If a participant quits and then relapses and  requests more 
research cigarettes during the study period we will provide  them with the appropriate study cigaret tes to 
continue with the study.  
Nightly questionnaire:  All participants’ will call a toll free study telephone number on an interactive voice 
response (IVR) system or complete an online questionnaire nightly to  answer a series of questions about their 
smoking including the  number of study and non -study CPD and whether they used the NRT patch.  The option to 
use either the IVR or the online questi onnaire is designed for the convenience of participants in order to increase 
compliance. The IVR and online questionnaire will have the same content.  The IVR is a system in which 
participants call a number which directs them to enter data using the phone keypad. The IVR has many of the 
assets of computer -assisted telephone interviewing (CATI); e.g., automatic skips, branching options, prohibition of 
illogical responses and outliers, standardized questioning, and direct data entry.  IVR’s major assets are the 
increased confidentiality, the ability to prompt participants to call, and the ability of partici pants to determine 
when to call . The IVR system re quires a touch -tone land -line or cell phone. However, most (> 95%) of the general 
population has a touch -tone phone. Those that do not will have the option to answer the same questions in an 
online questionnaire format.  
Participants will begin calling the IVR or completing online questionnaires the same evening after their initial 
study visit. They will receive instructions for IVR or online questionnaire participation during their first study visit. 
We will ask the participants what their normal bedtime is . The participant will be able to record one day’s answers 
as late as noon of the day after. To prevent missed calls, the IVR system will make a call or send a text message to 
the participant at ½ hour before the usual bedtime if the participant has not ye t completed the call or online 
questionnaire  for the day. If no response has been received in spi[INVESTIGATOR_372969] , 
the system will call  or text  the participant the next day. The reminder s are not requi red and we will ask 
participant s’ permission to use reminder s. If they decide to use reminders , we will give them the option to receive 
calls or text messages . The IVR will allow late data entry until 12 noon the next day but not thereafter. In our prior 
studies, < 5% of complet ed calls have been on the next day.  
Biomarkers:  Urine samples will be collected once per week and analyzed for cotinine in our laboratory. Cotinine 
will be collected as an exploratory measure and used to monitor compliance with NRT as well as transitions t o 
VLNC cigarettes and reductions in CPD. Urine samples  from participants’ baseline and final study visit  will be 
labeled with participants ’ ID numbers and stored in a locked freezer in a locked office for future analysis  of 
biomarkers of disease (e.g., NNAL) when more funding is available . Breath samples will be collected once per 
week in our laboratory and used to measure carbon monoxide  (CO)  levels.   
Follow -up question naires:  All participants will complete  a single  online follow up survey during week [ADDRESS_466846] of self -report measures  similar to those  completed during study visits  
(described  below ). Participants will not be provided with study cigarettes after week [ADDRESS_466847], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], (802) 656 -5040  
Human Subjects Research Protocol  Form 07/01/15   10 of 17 Self-report measures:  Participants will compl ete the following measures  on a study computer  during study visits 
once per week , at the conclusion of the 5 -week study period,  and on the Internet during the follow -up at week 9 . 
1) Nicotine Dependence Syndrome Scale (NDSS)34 to measure ni cotine dependence without CPD as an 
indicator of dependence.  
2) The Glover -Nilsson Behavioral Smoking Questionnaire43 to measure  behavioral dependence.  
3) Questionnaire of Smoking Urges – brief scale (QSU)35 to measure craving and urges to smoke.  
4) Minnesota Withdrawal Scale (MNWS)36 to measure nicotine withdrawal.  
5) Perceived Health Risks Rating6 to measure perceived risk o f addiction and harm from smoking.  
6) Cigarette Evaluation Scale (CES)37 to measure responses to cigarette (e.g., reward satisfaction).  
7) Cigarette Purchase Task (CPT)[ADDRESS_466848] of cigarettes by [CONTACT_372984].  
8) Velicer ’s self-efficacy scale44 to measure self -efficacy to quit smoking.  
9) DSM 5 Tobacco Use Disorder self -report form to measure whether the participant meets criteria for 
Tobacco Use Disorder.  
10) The quit l adder45 to measure intention to quit smoking.  
Quit attempts will be defined as a self -reported attempt to stop smoking. We will include quit attempts lasting ≥ 
24 hours and quit attempts lasting any length of time that are reported on nightly, weekly or follow -up 
questionnaires as secondary outcomes o f this study.  
Statistical Considerations:  Delineate the precise outcomes to be measured and analyzed. Describe how these results will be 
measured and statistically analyzed. Delineate methods used to estimate the required number of subjects. Describe power 
calculations if the study involves compa risons.  Perform this analysis  on each of the primary and secondary objectives, if 
possible.   
Data Analysis  Plan  
If there is substantial missing data (>10%), then as recommended by [CONTACT_372985], we will conduct 
additional sensitivity tests using mis sing data procedures .46, 47 If participants are missing a single data point (e.g. 
one nightly  call), we will explore imputing this missing data based on the scores before and after the missing data.  
Our major hypotheses call for comparisons between two conditions and we will only include those participants 
who have complete data (perhaps includin g imputations) for both conditions.   
Traditionally, “intention -to-treat” analyses in which all participants are included have been thought to produce 
the more valid results than “per -protocol” analyses that retain only compliant participants.  Thus we will  use 
“intention -to-treat” for our primary analyses.  
This study is exploratory and is intended to assess feasibility and effectiveness of switching to VLNC cigarettes and 
reducing CPD . Descriptive statistics and visual representation of the data will be ex amined for trends that indicate 
differences in feasibility as well as the relative risks (e.g., craving, withdrawal, and perceived risks) and benefits 
(e.g., reduced dependence) of switching  to VLNC cigarettes with NRT and reducing CPD with NRT. To compare  
feasibility we will graph retention (e.g., the number of study visits over time) and adherence to study cigarettes 
(e.g., the number of self -reported non -study cigarettes smoked). Our major dependent variable to assess 
effectiveness is dependence . NDSS sc ores will be graphed over time and c ompared between the two groups.  After 
visual inspection of the data we will run linear and logistic regressions to compare the VLNC vs the CPD group. 
Outcomes will include number of non -study cigarettes smoked (i.e., compliance), change in dependence scores, 
number of participants who make a QA, 7 -day point -prevalence abstinence at 9 weeks, changes in cotinine, as 
well as changes in participants’ self -report measures. We wil l begin by [CONTACT_372986] (i.e., number of study 
visits and number of non -study cigarettes) as an indication of the acceptability of switching to VLNC cigarettes vs 
reducing CPD. Then, if it is possible (i.e., if enough participants attended enough study visits) we will assess 
changes in dependence as well as our secondary outcomes.  
 
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_466849], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], (802) 656 -5040  
Human Subjects Research Protocol  Form 07/01/15   11 of 17 Risks/Benefits:   Describe any potential or known risks.  This includes physical, psychological, social, legal or other risks.  
Estimate the probability that given risk may occur, its severity and potential reversibility.  If the study involves a placeb o or 
washout period , the risks related to these must be addressed in both the protocol and consent.  Describe the planned 
procedures for protecting against or minimizing potential risks and assess their likely effectiveness.  Where appropriate, di scuss 
plans for ensuring nec essary medical or professional intervention in the event of adverse effects to the subjects.   Discuss the 
potential benefits of the research to the subjects and others.  Discuss why the risks to the subjects are reasonable in relat ion to 
the anticipated b enefits to subjects and others.  Discuss the importance of the knowledge gained or to be gained as a result of 
the proposed research and why the risks are reasonable in relation to the knowledge that reasonably may result.  If there are  no 
benefits state s o. 
Switching to VLNC  Cigarette s 
VLNC  cigarettes have been obtained  through the National Institute on Drug Abuse.  The study cigarettes are  
investigational tobacco products. They are  for investigational purposes only and are not available or intended 
for commercial use.  The study cigarettes are not authorized by [CONTACT_6905] . The study cigarettes will 
be used for experimental purposes only.  The study  cigarettes are manufactur ed in the same way as usual brand 
cigarette s, but they may contain genetically modified tobacco to reduce the levels of nicotine. There does not 
appear to be any additional risks associated with genetically modified tobacco.  
All cigarettes are detrimental to a person's health and ca n lead to cardiovascular disease, respi[INVESTIGATOR_3765], 
cancer and other health problems. In addition, due to the altered nicotine levels, there could be a change in use 
of cigarettes including the manner in which  the participant  inhale s the smoke. Smoking the study cigarette does 
not necessarily provide any less risk than a usual brand of cigarette and cou ld pose increased health risks. For 
example, using study cigarettes could result in smoking more vigorously , which would increase the healt h risks 
associated with study cigarettes. However, recent research suggests switching to VLNC cigarettes could increa se 
the likelihood of quitting smoking.  
Reduction in C PD 
Participants who reduce CPD may experience w ithdrawal symptoms; i.e. anxiety, depr ession, difficulty 
concentrating , hunger/weight gain, insomnia, irritability and restlessness. NRT patches will decrease nicotine 
withdrawal for most smokers. There is a small risk that if a participant  had a psychiatric problem, it might become 
worse or return after they  reduce CPD. Participants will be encouraged  to contact [CONTACT_372987]. A study physician (John Hughes) w ill be available by [CONTACT_372988] . A potential benefit may includ e smoking reduction and/or the 
initiation of a quit attempt.  Participants who reduce CPD will also be provided with study cigarettes that are  
investigational tobacco products  and will be used for experimental  purposes only . The study cigarettes  are not 
authorized by [CONTACT_372989].  
NRT Patch  
Nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) patch  may  produce  several minor AEs , most of which  are skin rash and 
insomnia . Approximately  10% or less of smokers have to stop NRT patch due to AEs.  FDA -defined serious AEs 
have been very rare  and d ependence on  the NRT  patch is very rare.  The current labeling on  the NRT patch 
explains that  pregnant and breast feeding women, those less than [ADDRESS_466850] not found greater AEs than when the patch is used for 
cessation.  Further , the recommended use for the NRT patch has recently been changed to incorporate use while 
smoking because  “the FDA has determined that there are no significant concerns with using NRT products at the 
same time as another nicotine -containing product  like a cigarette ( https://www.nicodermcq.com/faq.html) .” A 
potential benefit from using the NRT patch is an increased likelihood of quitting smoking. If a participant would 
like to use an NRT patch with less nicotine we will provide them with a [ADDRESS_466851], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], (802) 656 -5040  
Human Subjects Research Protocol  Form 07/01/[ADDRESS_466852] on 
our primary study outcomes.  
Deception  
In order to increase the validity of participants’ self -report about adherence to study cigarettes, we will 1) inform 
participants that self -reported noncompliance will not influence their payment or future participation and 2) 
employ a bogus pi[INVESTIGATOR_372968].32 Specifically, we will (falsely) tell 
participants that breath and urine tests will detect any non -study cigarettes that are smoked. In fact, the  breath 
and urine tests will be used to measure  CO and  cotinine but cannot detect the difference between study and non -
study cigarettes. This deception is intended to increase participants’ self -report of any non -study cigarettes that 
they smoke. Knowing t he extent to which participants smoke non -study cigarettes is integral to our primary 
specific aim (determine the relative feasibility of switching to VLNC vs reducing CPD). Participants will be 
debriefed about this deception and its rationale during the final study  visit after  the conclusion of the 5 -week 
study period .  
Ethical Issues   
This study will only include  smokers who report that they are not ready to quit in the next month.  All participants 
will be (falsely) told that breath and urine tests will detect non -study cigarettes in order to increase the validity of 
self-reported noncompliance. Participants will be debriefed about this deception and its rationale at the 
conclusion o f the study.   
Therapeutic Alternatives :  List the therapeutic alternatives that are reasonably available that may be of benefit to the potential 
subject and include in the consent form as well.  
 Not Applicable  
 
Usual care for smokers who are not ready to quit is brief advice to quit and educa tion about  the dangers of 
smoking and  treatment options.  Thus, w e will undertake  this at the conclusion of the  5 week study period .  
 
Data Safety and Monitoring:   The specific design of a Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) for a protocol may vary 
extensively depending on the potential risks, size, and complexity of the research study.  For a minimal risk study, a DSMP 
could be as simple as a description of the  Principal Investigator’s plan for monitoring the data and performance of safety reviews 
or it could be as complex as the initiation of an external, independent Data Safety and Monit oring Board (DSMB). The 
UVM/UVM Medical Center  process for review of adver se events should be included in the DSMP.   
Safety  
The study will be managed from the Vermont Center on Behavior & Health at the University of Vermont. At each 
study visit  participants will be asked to report any AEs using the standard open -ended question: “have you had 
any problems that might be related to your use of NRT or the study cigarettes?”48 We will consider a marked 
increase in smoking an AE . A marked increase in smoking will be defined as the combination of a self -report 100% 
increase in CPD and a 100% increase in expi[INVESTIGATOR_372970]. If we 
determine that a participant has had an AE or if  a participant reports that they have ha d an AE, an RA will ask the 
participant about  the specific problem, date of its onset and offset, severity ( mild, moderate or severe), judg ment 
of its relation to NRT or study cigarettes (not related, unlikely, possibly, probably and likely related), wheth er it 
caused discontinuation of NRT  or study cigarettes , dropout, and whether it met FDA definition of  a “serious 
event.” The RA will pass this information to the physician on call (John Hughes)  to make a decision on further 
action.  If the physician agrees  it is safe to let the participant continue,  we will monitor severe AEs during study 
visits until it resolves or the study ends. All unexpected, FDA -defined “serious” and possibly -related AEs will be 
reported within [ADDRESS_466853] will be reported using the SRNT rules for disclosure ( www.srnt.org ).  
 
Participants will be informed about possible AEs in the consent.  At study onset, participants will b e provided with 
a phone number and email to report AEs that are urgent. We will withdraw participants who have a n FDA-defined 
serious AE  that are likely or probably related to the study products  as well as  participants who become pregnant 
or begin breast feeding .   
 
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_466854], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], (802) 656 -5040  
Human Subjects Research Protocol  Form 07/01/15   13 of 17 The above traditional methods of collecting AEs can be insensitive; thus, we will in addition, have participants 
complete a 0 -3 Likert scale (none, mild, moderate and severe) of the typi[INVESTIGATOR_372971], dizziness, headache, and stomachache once per week at study visits during the study period .  Participants 
will be encouraged to contact [CONTACT_372990] -up with their physician if they experience an AE during the 4 week  
follow -up period.  
 
Data Monitoring  
Results from the computerized surveys and nightly questionnaires will be sent  directly into study database 
spreadsheets.  Carbon monoxide and cotinine levels  will be entered by [CONTACT_372991].  
The PI (EK) will have weekly meetings with RAs to discuss qualitative comments received during data collection 
and any problems with data collection. Further the statistician ( PC) will periodically examine the database to look 
for irregularities. The statistic ian will have no contact [CONTACT_372992]. Consensus of 
the PI (EK), the statistician ( PC), and the faculty sponsor  (JH) are necessary to break the randomization code; e.g., 
in the event of an FDA defined serious AE.  
 
All data w ill be stored in an encrypted datab ase on a password -protected computer in a locked office in the 
Vermont Center on Behavior & Health in the University Health Center building .  
 
Confidentiality  
We will use the participant’s name [CONTACT_372997] a sheet 
describing each participant’s ID number will be kept in a locked room in a locked file. No other data sets will have 
identifying information.  Data will be entered directly from computerized surveys  and the IVR system  into our 
password -protected database. Access to the database , urine samples  and paper files will be  granted  only to those 
approved by [CONTACT_978].  We will instruct the RAs that they cannot  reveal if the participant is in the study without the 
participant’s permission, except in emergency situations.  We will instruct RAs that they cannot use names in 
discussing participants, but must use participant numbers.   
 
Adverse Event and Unanticipa ted Problem (UAP) Reporting:  Describe how events and UAPs will be evaluated and 
reported to the IRB.  All protocols should specify that, in the absence of more stringent reporting requirements, the guidelines 
established in the Committees on Human Research “ Adverse Event and Unanticipated Problems Reporting Policy ” will be 
followed.  The UVM/ UVM Medical Center  process for review of adverse events and UAPs to subjects or others should be 
included in the DSMP.   
The guidelines established in the Committees on Human Research “Adverse Event and Unanticipated Problems 
Reporting Policy” will be followed.   
 
Withdrawal Procedures:   Define the precise criteria for withdrawing subjects from the study.   Include a descrip tion of study 
requirements for when a subject withdraws him or herself from the study (if applicable).  
Participants who miss several visits such that their data will not be useful may be terminated.  
Sources of Materials:   Identify sources of research material obtained from individually identifiable human subjects in the form 
of specimens, records or data.  Indicate whether the material or data will be obtained specifically for research purposes or 
whether use will be made  of existing specimens, records or data.  
Computerized surveys , paper forms and data from the nightly phone calls  will be obtained specifically for research 
purposes.   
 
 
 
 
DRUG AND DEVICE INFORMATION   
 
The FDA has stated that an IND is not necessary for the very low nicotine content (VLNC) cigarettes in this study. 
However, VLNC cigarettes are an Investigational Tobacco Product (ITP). An ITP is a tobacco product that is a new 
or modified -risk tobacco pro duct that is not legally marketed, or a tobacco product that is required to comply 
with a tobacco product standard that does not conform in all respects to the marketed standard s and is intended 
for investigational use. Our Program Project Grant (1  P50 DA 036114) currently has an approved ITP plan that 
includes the VLNC cigarettes that will be used in this study  (see the included Letter of Acknowledgement from the 
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_466855], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], (802) 656 -5040  
Human Subjects Research Protocol  Form 07/01/15   14 of 17 FDA) . All research cigarettes will be ordered via NIDA and will be stored in UHC in a locked o ffice in a locked 
freezer between -25 and -15 degrees Celsius.  
 
Investigators are encouraged to consult the UVM Medical Center  Investigational Pharmacy Drug Service (847 -4863) prior to 
finalizing study drug/substance procedures.  
 
Drug (s)  X Not applicable  
Drug name – generic followed by [CONTACT_100099]. Availability – Source and pharmacology; vial or 
product sizes and supplier.  If a placebo will be used, identify its contents and source.  (attach investigational drug brochure)  
 
Preparation:  Reconstitution instructions; preparation of a sterile product, compounded dosage form; mixing guidelines, inclu ding 
fluid and volume required.  Identify who will prepare.  
 
Storage and stability – for both intact and mixed products.   
 
Administration – Describe acceptable routes and methods of administration  and any associated risks of administration.  
 
Toxicity – Accurate but concise listings of major toxicities.  Rare toxicities, which may be severe, should be included by [CONTACT_372993].  Also adverse interactions with other drugs used in the protocol regimen as well as specific foods should be not ed.  
Address significant drug or drug/food interactions in the consent form as well.  List all with above details.  
 
Is it FDA approved:  (include FDA IND Number)  
1.  in the dosage form specified?  If no, provide justification for proposed use and source of the study drug in that form . 
 
2.  for the route of administration specified?  If no, provide justification for route and describe the method to accomplish.  
 
3.  for the intended action?  
 
 
Device (s)  X Not applicable  
Device name [CONTACT_100102]  (attach investigational device brochure)  
 
Is it FDA approved:  (include FDA IDE Number)  
1.  for  indication  specified ? If no, provide justification for proposed use and source of the device.  
 
Risk assessment (no n-significant/significant risk)  - PI [INVESTIGATOR_100053] a device based upon the use of the 
device with human subjects in a research environment.   
 
 
 
SUBJECT CHARACTERISTICS, IDENTIFICATION AND RECRUITMENT   
 
Subject Selection:   Provide rationale for subject selection in terms of the scientific objectives and proposed study design.  
Participants will be current smokers who do not plan to quit in the near future; i.e., about 70% of all smokers, because the 
purpose of our study is  to examine methods to reduce dependence among ambivalent smokers.  
 
 
X Not applicable   
 
 
Number of Subjects:   What is the anticipated number of subjects to be enrolled at UVM/ UVM Medical Center  and in the case 
of a multi -center study , with UVM/ UVM Medical Center  as the lead , the total number of subjects for the entire study.  
We have selected a sample size of [ADDRESS_466856] 80% power with a two sided alpha of 0.[ADDRESS_466857] a 
group by [CONTACT_372994] 5 week study duration if the final difference in NDSS scores is 0.5 units  
(i.e., 10% change). Thus we will enroll a total of [ADDRESS_466858] two weeks of the 
study . 
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria:   Eligibility and ineligibility criteria should be specific. Describe how eligibility will be determined 
and by [CONTACT_20898].  Changes to the eligibility criteria at a later phase of the research have the potential to invalidate the resea rch. 
Participants will be asked all of the inclusion criteria over the phone  or on an online survey . Those who are eligible 
after the screen ing process  will be inv ited in for the baseline visit.  This study will consent 74 smokers who are not 
ready to quit in the near future. Inclusion criteria will be a ) ≥ 18 years old, b) smoke ≥10 CPD seven days per week 
c) have no plans to stop smoking in the next 30 days d) is willing to use NRT -patch  and has no contraindications to 
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_466859], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], (802) 656 -5040  
Human Subjects Research Protocol  Form 07/01/15   15 of 17 patch use  (see below ), e) have not used non -tobacco nicotine products (e.g., electronic cigarettes) or non -
cigarette tobacco (e.g., smokeless) regularly in the past month, f) has not used nicotine replacement medications, 
varenicline, or bupropi[INVESTIGATOR_372972] d smoking cessation counseling in the last month, g) has not reduced CPD by ≥ 
25% in the last month,  h) meets DSM 5 criteria for Tobacco Use Disorder , i) is currently or has previously been a 
menthol smoker,  j) is not prescribed or currently taking methad one or buprenorphine, k ) lives within a 1.[ADDRESS_466860] of the University of Vermont , l) has been smoking cigarettes daily for ≥ 1 year,  m) has access to a telephone 
on a daily basis, o) typi[INVESTIGATOR_372973] 8 :00 PM and 2:00 AM (to maintain a consistent schedule for 
nightly phone calls) p) is a US citizen or a permanent resident alien with a green card, q) is comfortable reading 
and writing in English  and demonstrates comfort speaking in English , r) is not currently participating in another 
study that affects the way they smoke cigarettes, and s) is not currently breast feeding  or planning to breastfeed in 
the next [ADDRESS_466861] any of the following health conditions will be excluded 
from the study: a) recent heart attack; b) heart disease that is untreated; c) arrhythmia o r irregular heartbeat; d) 
high blood pressure not controlled by [CONTACT_6589]; e) an allergy to adhesive tape; f) skin problems that require 
treatment.  
 
Inclusion of Minorities and Women:   Describe  efforts to include minorities and women.  If either minorit ies or women are 
excluded, include a justification for the exclusion.  
We will not exclude minorities or women  from this study . However, we  will use a convenience sample that is 
likely to not be representative of minority smokers  because Burlington, VT has few minorities (<3%) . Two of our 
lab’s recent studies that recruited smokers from the Burlington area had 71% and 54% women. Although both  
genders are included and we plan post -hoc analyses of gender differences, we will likely not have sufficient power 
to detect statistically significant differences.  The data from this study will be used to design a future trial with a 
nationally representa tive sample including minority populations who smoke cigarettes.  
Inclusion of Children:  Describe efforts to include children.  Inclusion is required unless a clear and compelling rationale shows 
that inclusion is inappropriate with respect to the health o f the subjects or that inclusion is inappropriate for the purpose of the 
study.  If children are included, the description of the plan should include a rationale for selecting or excluding a specifi c age 
range of children.  When included, the plan must als o describe the expertise of the investigative team in working with children, 
the appropriateness of the available facilities to accommodate children, and the inclusion of a sufficient number of children  to 
contribute to a meaningful analysis  relative to th e purpose of the study.  If children are excluded  then provide appropriate 
justification. Provide target accrual for this population.  
Children under the age of [ADDRESS_466862] of women’s health services and inform her that she is not eligible for 
this study. If the first pregnancy test yields a positive result but the second test yields a negative result, t he study 
personnel will inform the individual that our pregnancy tests were inconclusive, provide her with a list of women’s 
health services and inform her that she is not eligible for this study.  
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_466863], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], (802) 656 -5040  
Human Subjects Research Protocol  Form 07/01/[ADDRESS_466864] results.  If yes, include the process and provision for c ounseling.  
If no, a rationale for not informing the subjec ts should be included.   
X Not applicable   
 
Recruitment :  Describe plans for identifying and recruitment of subjects .  All recruitment materials (flyers, ads, letters, etc) need 
to be IRB approved prior to use.   
Recruitment will occur at the University of Vermont in Burlington, VT via a) Facebook ads posted to relevant groups and 
conversations, b) Craigslist ads, c) flyers posted in the Burlington area, d) study participants who refer others to the stud y, e) 
tables/booths in indoor and outdoor  malls , and f) emailing and calling individuals who screen for other smoking studies in our 
center and consent to have their information shared with other studies for which they may be eligible . 
 
 
 
FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
Expense to Subject:  If the investigation involves the possibility of added expense to the subject (longer hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], extra 
studies, etc.) indicate in detail how this will be handled. In cases where the FDA has authorized the drug or device company to 
charge the patient for the experimental drug or device, a copy of the authorization letter from the FDA or sponsor must 
accompany the application. Final approval will not be granted until the IRB receives this documentation.  
There are very limited circum stances under which study participants may be responsible (either directly or via their insurance) 
for covering some study -related expenses. If the study participant or their insurer(s) will be billed for any portion of the research 
study, provide a justif ication as to why this is appropriate and acceptable. For example, if the  study involves treatment that is 
documented standard of care and not investigational, state so. In these cases, the protocol and the consent should clearly 
define what is standard of  care and what is research.  
 
None.  
 
Payment for participation:  Describe all plans to pay subjects, either in cash, a gift or gift certificate. Please note that all 
payments must be prorated throughout the life of the study. The IRB will not approve a study where there is only a lump sum 
payment at the end of the study because this can be considered coercive. The amount of payment must be justified. Clarify if 
subjects will be reimbursed for travel or other expenses.  
 Not applicable   
 
Participants will earn $ 15 for each study visit, $5 for completing each weekly questionnaire, $2 per nightly call, 
and a n additional  $20 weekly bonus for completing all calls and visits. Participants will also earn $10 for 
completing the  follow -up survey  at week 9 of the study . Thus the total  compensation  for the study  and follow -ups 
for a fu lly compliant participant is $300. Participants will be paid at weekly  study visits in cash  and/or gift cards  
during the study period . Participants will be  mailed a $[ADDRESS_466865] at collaborating sites or other performance sites 
when UVM/ UVM Medical Center  is the lead site, the principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_100057] a list of the collaborating 
sites and their Federalwide Assurance numbers when applicable.  (agreements may be necessary)  
X Not applicable   
 
 
  
 
INFORMED CONSENT  
 
Consent Procedures :  Describe the consent procedures to be followed, including the circumstances under which consent will 
be obtained, who will seek it, and the methods of documenting consent.   Specify the form(s) that will be used e.g. consent (if 
multiple forms explain and place identifier on each form), assent form and/or HIPAA authorization (if PHI is included).  Thes e 
form(s) must accompany the protocol as an appendix or attachment.   
 
Note :  Only those individuals authorized to solicit consent may sign the consent form confirming that the prospective subject was 
provided the necessary information and that any questions asked were answered.  
 
Potential participants will give verbal  or written  consent to initial screening. If eligible and interested the study will 
be described to potential participants by [CONTACT_372995]. If they 
remain interested in the study, they will be asked to come to our l aboratory to provide written consent. The 
consent will emphasize that this is not a treatment study  and that all study cigarettes are for investigational 
purposes only and are not available or intended for commercial use . Potential participants will be enc ouraged to 
Research Protections Office, [ADDRESS_466866], Burlington, VT [ZIP_CODE], (802) 656 -5040  
Human Subjects Research Protocol  Form 07/01/[ADDRESS_466867] misperceptions. Participants will then be asked to sign the consent 
if they are interes ted in being in the study.  
 
Information Withheld From Subjects:  Will any information about the research purpose and design be withheld from potenti al 
or participating subjects?  I f so, explain and justify the non -disclosure and describe plans for post-study debriefing .   
 Not applicable   
 
In order to increase the validity of participants’ self -report about adherence to  study cigarettes , we will 1) inform 
participants that self -reported noncompliance will not influence their payment or future participation and 2) 
employ a bogus pi[INVESTIGATOR_372968].32 Specifically, we will (falsely) tell 
participants that  breath and  urine tests will detect any non -study cigarettes that are smoked. In fact, the breath 
and urine tests will be used to measure CO and cotinine but cannot detect the difference between study and non -
study cigarettes. This deception is intended to increase p articipants’ self -report of any non -study cigarettes that 
they smoke. Knowing the extent to which participants smoke non -study cigarettes is integral to our primary 
specific aim (determine the relative feasibility of switching to VLNC vs reducing CPD). Participants will be 
debriefed about this deception and its rationale at the  final  study  visit after  the conclusion of the 5 -week study 
period .  
 
 
 
 
Attach full grant application, including budget information and/or any contract or draft 
contract associated with this application.  