 
 CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN A CLINICAL RESEARCH STUDY  
   MEDICAL RECORD                 •  Adult Patient or     •  Parent, for Minor Patient 
 
 INSTITUTE:   National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases  
  STUDY NUM BER: 11-I-0057 PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS:  Frank Maldarelli, M.D.  
  STUDY TITLE:  Effect of Interferon Alpha 2b Intensification on HIV -1 Residual Viremia in Individ uals Suppressed 
on Antiretroviral Therapy 
  Continuing Review  Approved by [CONTACT_33861] 06/15/15 
Amendment Approved by [CONTACT_33861] 05/18/15 (D )    Date Posted to Web:  06/24/15 
Screening   
 
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN A CLINICAL  
 RESEARCH STUDY  
 •   Adult Patient or    •   Parent, for Minor Patient 
 NIH-2514-1 (07-09) 
 P.A.: 09-25-0099 
 File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent (2) 
 
 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
We invite you to take part in a research study at the National Institutes of Health (NIH).  
 First, we want you to know that:  
  Taking part in NIH research is entirely voluntary.  
  You may choose not to take part, or you may withdraw from the study at any time. In either case, you will not 
lose any benefits to which you are otherwise entitled. However, to receive care at the NIH, you must be taking part in a study or be under evaluation for study participation.  
  You may receive no benefit from  taking part. The research may give us knowledge that may help people in the 
future. 
 Second, some people have personal, religious , or ethical beliefs that may limit the kinds of medical or research treatments 
they would want to receive (such as blood tran sfusions). If you have such beliefs, please discuss them with your NIH 
doctors or research team before you agree to the study.  
 Now we will describe this research study. Before you decide to take part, please take as much time as you need to ask any questi ons and discuss this study with anyone at NIH, or with family, friends, or your personal physician or other 
health professional.  
 Purpose of this Study  
You are invited to participate in this study because you have HIV infection and have viral loads that are suppressed below the limit of detection on antiretroviral therapy (ARVs). The therapy you are taking for HIV is effective in controlling but not curing the HIV infection. Low levels of HIV are present even when the viral load is measured below the limit of detection for virus (<50 copi[INVESTIGATOR_268720]/mL plasma). The source of the small amount of HIV is unknown. It may 
come from a low -level infection, where new cells are continually infected with HIV. It is also possible that the virus is 
coming from cells that live for a long time after infection. We would like to learn more about the origin of residual HIV, because it will help us to understand the virus infection. We are interested in finding out whether antiviral agents other than the ARVs can affect the level of residual HIV in the blood. In this study we are investigating whether interferon 
alpha (Interferon, PEGINTRON, pegylated interferon alpha 2b) will affect the level of HIV viremia in individuals 
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDICAL RECORD  NIH 2514- 1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514- 2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER: 11-I-0057 CONTINUATION:  p age  2  of  6  pages 
  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514-1 (10-84) 
 NIH-2514-2 (10-84) 
 P.A.: 09-25-0099 
  
 suppressed on antiretroviral therapy. Interferon is a natural substance made by [CONTACT_268721]. Interferon can also be made as an injectable drug, called pegylated interferon alpha 2b (PEGINTRON®), which has been approved by [CONTACT_268722] C infection including in patients with H IV infection. In several earlier 
studies of HIV infected individuals who were not on any antiretroviral therapy, PEGINTRON® was shown to reduce the level of HIV in the blood. We are doing the present study to learn whether PEGINTRON® therapy will also redu ce the 
residual low levels of HIV in patients who are already taking antiretroviral therapy. In this study participants will receive  
weekly PEGINTRON injections for [ADDRESS_326988] 
as little as 1 copy of HIV RNA in 3 milliliters of blood (about 6/10 of a teaspoon). After the 4 weeks of PEGINTRON®, we will obtain additional blo od samples for a total of [ADDRESS_326989] dose of PEGINTRON; apheresis is a procedure in which we obtain white blood cells.  We plan to 
study [ADDRESS_326990] of  
• A visit to our clinic  
• A history and physical examination 
• Routine laboratory studies; pregnancy test if you are a woman of  child-bearing potential  
• Blood to measure the amount of HIV virus in the blood using standard testing and ultralow viral load test  
• Blood specimens for storage  
• Participants considering getting a vaccine, including the seasonal influenza (flu) shot, should d iscuss this 
with the study team prior to getting vaccinated.  
Women of childbearing age will have a pregnancy test within [ADDRESS_326991] also not be breastfeeding while taking PEGINTRON® .  
 This initial screening visit will take about [ADDRESS_326992] results will help to determine if you’re likely to b e 
eligible to continue in the screening  process. Some people may not be able to join the study because of scientific or health 
reasons found during the screening visit(s). The final eligibility for the study will be determined after a complete assessment by a doctor that is usually done after t he screening visit, and after we have spent enough time with you 
discussing the protocol that you understand the risks and possible benefits. If you should not become eligible, we will inform you and explain to you why you are not eligible for this study.  
 If the results of your evaluation indicate that you are eligible for PEGINTRON therapy we will discuss the full protocol and provide an additional consent form for your consideration. At that time, we will describe the study procedures in detail.  
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDICAL RECORD  NIH 2514- 1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514- 2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER: 11-I-0057 CONTINUATION:  p age  3  of  6  pages 
  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514-1 (10-84) 
 NIH-2514-2 (10-84) 
 P.A.: 09-25-[ADDRESS_326993] benefit to participation in the screening or in participating in the study itself. You will receive information about your health from the screening tests and physical examination. In the future, your participation may help us learn more about the causes, treatment, or prevention of HIV disease, immune dysfunction and/or related 
diseases. The information we obtain may help us to improve our understanding of HIV infection. We will perform the standard HIV viral load test, and also perf orm a sensitive research test for HIV. Although the research test can detect at 
low levels (1 copy/mL), this new viral load test is not approved by [CONTACT_1622], and the information we obtain will not be used in making any clinical decisions regarding your care . 
 Risks 
The risks from screening for this study are from the risks of blood drawing. Blood drawing is generally very well tolerated. Occasionally, pain from needle stick, bruising, or bleeding may take place; rarely fainting may occur. The amount of blood  
drawn will be within the limits allowed for adult subjects by [CONTACT_4517] (Medical Administrative Policy 95 -9: 
Guidelines for Limits of Blood Drawn for Research Purposes in the Clinical Center). If you are eligible and choose to enroll in the study, there are additional risks from apheresis, from the PEGINTRON therapy, and from the combination of 
PEGINTRON with antiretrovirals and other therapy. We will describe those additional risks in detail if you elect to enroll.  
Blood samples obtained from the screening process will be stored and studied, whether you are eligible and elect to participate in the study or not. The potential risks of maintaining your specimens and of the studies we will perform with them are described below.  
 REASONS FOR REMO VING YOU FROM THE STUDY WITHOUT YOUR CONSENT  
You may be removed from the study without your consent for the following reasons:  
• The NIH doctor feels that staying in the study is harmful to you  
• You don't keep your appointments  
• The study is cancelled or stopped  
 Cost 
There will be no charge to you or your health insurance company for any of the costs which are directly related to this study. However, the costs of any other medical care outside of this study during this period will be your responsibility.  
 Alternatives  
This study provides no benefit and the alternative to participating is not participating  
 New Findings  
The results of the screening tests will be discussed with you and you will be told of any new information learned during the screening that may influence your general care  
 Remuneration  You will be reimbursed for your time and inconvenience in participating in the screening process according to standard NIH guidelines, $40.[ADDRESS_326994]. However, if you wish, 
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDICAL RECORD  NIH 2514- 1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514- 2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER: 11-I-0057 CONTINUATION:  p age  4  of  6  pages 
  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514-1 (10-84) 
 NIH-2514-2 (10-84) 
 P.A.: 09-25-[ADDRESS_326995]. Maldarelli (PI) at 301 -435-8019. 
 Labeling of Stored Samples  
We will label your stored samples with a code that only the study team can link to you. We will keep any information that can be traced back to you private to the extent permitted by [CONTACT_2371].  
 Future Studies  
Other investigators may want to study your stored samples. If so, the NIH study team may send your samples to them, (along with the coded label). The study team may also share information such as your gender, age, health history, or ethnicity. In some cases, an Institutional Review Board (IRB) will review new research proposals that would like to use your samples. The IRB is a committee that oversees medical research studies to protect volunteers’ rights and welfare. Investigators will use your samples only for research. We will not sell them. Future research that uses your samples may lead to new products, but you will not receive payment for these products. Some future studies may need health information (such as smoking history or present health status) that we don’t already have. If so, the NIH study team will contact [CONTACT_268723].  
 Risks 
The greatest risk of allowing us to store your samples will be an unplanned release of your identification from the samples due to release of this information from the stored sample database. The chances of this happe ning are very low.  
 
 Benefits  
In general, future research that uses your samples will not help you, but it may help us learn what causes HIV or related immunodeficiency conditions. This research may also help us learn how to prevent or treat the condition.  
 Making Your Choice  
If you agree to participate in this study, you agree to let us store your samples for future research. You also agree that we can contact [CONTACT_268724]. No matter what you decide, you may still participate in other studies at  NIH. 
However, your refusal to let us store your samples may lead to your withdrawal from this specific study. Even if you agree now to let us store your samples, you can change your mind later. If you do, please contact [CONTACT_268725].  
 Genetic Testing Some of the blood drawn from you as part of this study will be used for genetic tests, including HLA tests, which is a genetic test of markers of the immune system. Genetic tests can help researcher s study how health or illness is passed on 
to you by [CONTACT_268726]. HLA is usually used to match bone marrow or organ transplants. For research, HLA testing might be used to try to identify factors associated with the progression of disease or related conditions. In addition, determining HLA type is necessary to be able to perform certain research studies. Some HLA types have been associated with an increased risk of certain diseases like arthritis and other rheumatologic problem s. However, 
simply having those HLA types doesn’t mean you will develop these diseases.  
 Some things to consider in thinking about whether or not to participate in these genetic studies include the possible effects on your emotional well being. In other wo rds, how might you feel about yourself and your life if you learn 
information about risks that could affect your own health or that of your children? There may be no treatment for certain 
 
  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
  MEDICAL RECORD  NIH 2514- 1, Consent to Participate in A Clinical Research Study  
 NIH 2514- 2, Minor Patient’s Assent to Participate In A Clinical Research Study  
 
STUDY NUMBER: 11-I-0057 CONTINUATION:  p age  5  of  6  pages 
  
 
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONTINUATION SHEET for either:  
 NIH-2514-1 (10-84) 
 NIH-2514-2 (10-84) 
 P.A.: 09-25-[ADDRESS_326996] risks for health problems because of information found out about you.  
 Genetic testing can also be used to det ermine if people are directly related. These tests can reveal that a person’s 
biological parents are someone other than their legal parents. If these facts were not known previously they could be troubling to learn.   It is our policy to not discuss such information unless it has direct medical or reproductive implications for you or your family. By [CONTACT_88233], you do not waive any rights that you may have regarding access to and disclosure of your records. For further information  on those rights, please contact [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Maldarelli, principal 
investigator.  Any genetic information collected or discovered about you or your family will be confidential. Records containing this information will be kept on password -protected computer systems and in locked and secured quarters within the Clinical 
Center. We will not release any information about you or your family to relatives, any insurance company, employer, or your primary care physician without your written permission. Some genetic informa tion, such as the name [CONTACT_268727], will be in your medical record. An insurance company or an employer could interpret this to be a pre -existing 
condition to deny benefits or coverage. 
Although we are committed to confidentiality, a court could still subpoena your 
medical records. All of these issues should be carefully considered before joining the study. Genetic counselors are 
available to discuss these issues in greater detail to help you and your family think about the possible effects. There may  
be a risk that genetic information obtained as a result of participation in research could be misused for discriminatory purposes. However, state and federal laws provide some protections against genetic discrimination. Researchers who will have access to  genetic information about you will take measures to maintain the confidentiality of your genetic 
information.  
 HIV Testing  
As part of this study, we will test you for infection with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), the virus that causes AIDS. If yo u are infected with HIV you will
 be able to participate in this study. We will tell you what the results mean, how 
to find care, how to avoid infecting others, how we report newly diagnosed HIV infection, and the importance of informing your partners at po ssible risk because of your HIV infection.  
 
Conflicts of Interest  
The National Institutes of Health reviews NIH staff researchers at least yearly for conflicts of interest. The following link  
contains details on this process 
http://ethics.od.nih.gov/forms/Protocol -Review-Guide.pdf . You may ask your research 
team for additional information or a copy of the Protocol Review Guide. This protocol may have investigators who are not NIH empl oyees. Non -NIH investigators are expected to adhere to the principles of the Protocol Review Guide but are not 
required to report their personal financial holdings to the NIH.  
    
 
  CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN A CLINICAL RESEARCH STUDY  
   MEDICAL RECORD  •  Adult Patient or    •  Parent, for Minor Patient  
 
STUDY NUMBER: 11-I-0057 CONTINUATION:  p age  6  of  6  pages 
  
PATIENT IDENTIFICATION  CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN A CLINICAL  
 RESEARCH STUDY (Continuation Sheet)  
 •  Adult Patient or   •  Parent, fo r Minor Patient  
 NIH-2514-1 (07-09) 
 P.A.: 09-25-0099   
 File in Section 4:  Protocol Consent  
 
 OTHER PERTINENT INFORMATION  
1. Confidentiality. When results of an NIH re search study are reported in medical journals or at scientific meetings, the 
people who take part are not named and identified. In most cases, the NIH will not release any information about your research involvement without your written permission. However , if you sign a release of information form, for example, 
for an insurance company, the NIH will give the insurance company information from your medical record. This information might affect (either favorably or unfavorably) the willingness of the insuran ce company to sell you insurance.  
 
The Federal Privacy Act protects the confidentiality of your NIH medical records. However, you should know that the Act allows release of some information from your medical record without your permission, for example, if it is required by [CONTACT_2165] (FDA), members of Congress, law enforcement officials, or authorized hospi[INVESTIGATOR_181364]. 
 
2. Policy Regarding Research -Related Injuries. The Clinical Center will provide short -term medica l care for any 
injury resulting from your participation in research here. In general, no long -term medical care or financial compensation 
for research -related injuries will be provided by [CONTACT_7681], the Clinical Center, or the Feder al 
Government. However, you have the right to pursue legal remedy if you believe that your injury justifies such action.  
 
3. Payments. The amount of payment to research volunteers is guided by [CONTACT_33878]. In 
general, patient s are not paid for taking part in research studies at the National Institutes of Health. Reimbursement of 
travel and subsistence will be offered consistent with NIH guidelines.  
 
4. Problems or Questions. If you have any problems or questions about this stu dy, or about your rights as a research 
participant, or about any research -related injury, contact [CONTACT_079], [CONTACT_268730], Building 10, 
Room, 5A06, Telephone301.435.8019. You may also call the Clinical Center Patient Representative  at (301) 496- 2626.    
 
5. Consent Document. Please keep a copy of this document in case you want to read it again.  
 
COMPLETE APPROPRIATE ITEM(S) BELOW:   
A. Adult Patient’s Consent  B. Parent’s Permission for Minor Patient.  
I have read the explanation abo ut this study and have been given the 
opportunity to discuss it and to ask questions.  I hereby [CONTACT_33883]. I have read the explanation about this study and have been given the 
opportunity to discuss it and to ask questions.  I here by [CONTACT_33880].   
(Attach NIH 2514- 2, Minor’s Assent, if applicable.)  
        
Signature [CONTACT_33885]/Legal Representative  Date 
 
  
Print Name  [CONTACT_33886](s)/Guardian  Date 
 
  
Print Name  
C. Child’s Ve rbal Assent (If Applicable)  
The information in the above consent was described to my child and my child agrees to participate in the study .  
 
     
  
Signature [CONTACT_2387](s)/Guardian  Date 
 Print Name  
[CONTACT_268728] 15, 2015 THROUGH  JUNE 14, 2016.  
  
        
Signature [CONTACT_268729]  
 