CONFIDENTIAL DOCUMENT 
Statistical Analysis Plan (SAP) 
VERSION 2  
Efficacy of Intravenous Levetiracetam in Neonatal Seizures 
(NEOLEV2)  
September 14, 2018 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_787156], MD Lead Biostatistician:  Rema Raman, PhD 
Author: Karin Ernstrom, MS 

NEOLEV2 SAP VERSION 2  
 2 
CONFIDENTIALITY STATEMENT: This report from the USC Alzheimer’s Therapeutic Research Institute (ATRI) is for the sole use of the intended recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841](s)  and  contains  
confidential  and privileged  information.  Any unauthorized  review,  use, disclosure,  copying  or distribution  is strictly  prohibited.   
  
Contents  
1	Introduction  3	
2	Abbreviations  3	
3	Study  Design /Summary  3	
3.1 	Overview  3	
3.2 	Specific  Aims  4	
3.3 	Study  Population  4	
3.4 	Power and Sample Size Determination  5	
3.5 	Treatment  Allocation  5	
4	Study Outcome  Variables  5	
4.1 	Primary  Outcome  5	
4.2 	Key Se condary  Outcome  5	
4.3 	Other Secondary Outcomes  6	
4.4 	Safety  Outcomes  6	
5	Sequence of Planned  Analysis  6	
5.1 	Interim  Analysis  6	
5.2 	Final Analyses and Reporting  6	
6	Statistical  Methods  6	
6.1 	Analysis  Populations  6	
6.2 	Multiple Comparisons and  Multiplicity  6	
6.3 	Covariates  6	
6.4 	Data Management and Analysis Software  7	
7	Statistical  Analysis  7	
7.1 	Study  Flow  7	
7.2 	Patient characteristics and baseline variables  7	
7.3 	Analysis of Primary and Key Secondary Outcomes  7	
7.4 	Analysis of Remaining Secondary Outcomes  8	
7.5 	Analysis of Safety Outcomes  8	
7.6 	Pharmacokinetic Analysis  8	
8	Appendix  9	
8.1 	Study Flow Chart  9	
8.2 	Approval  10	
 
NEOLEV2 SAP VERSION 2  
 3 
CONFIDENTIALITY STATEMENT: This report from the USC Alzheimer’s Therapeutic Research Institute (ATRI) is for the sole use of the intended recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841](s)  and  contains  
confidential  and privileged  information.  Any unauthorized  review,  use, disclosure,  copying  or distribution  is strictly  prohibited.   
  
1 Introduction  
This document is the second version of the Statistic al Analysis Plan (SAP) describing  the planned analyses and reporting for 
the NEOLEV2 trial. The SAP was updated due to a change in primary outcome from seizure termination at [ADDRESS_1083095] -hoc or unplanned analyses not specified in 
this SAP will be clearly identified as such in th e manuscripts for publication.  
 
The following documents were reviewed when preparing this SAP:  
 
• NEOLEV2 Clinical Research Plan  (111361 NEOLEV2 Research Plan Clean 20180413 .docx ) 
 
• ATRI Statistical Analysis Plan SOP  
 
Readers  of this SAP should  read the Clinical  Research  Plan for details on the conduct  of this study  and the operational  aspects 
of clinical  assessments  and timing  for completing a patient  in this study.  
 
2 Abbreviations  
 
ABBREVIATION DEFINITION 
 
AE Adverse  Event  
ATRI  Alzheimer’s Therapeutic Research  Institute  
CRF Case Report  Form  
DSMC Data and Safety Monitoring  Committee  
LEV Levetiracetam  
PB Phenobarbital  
PK Pharmacokinetic  
PP Per-Protocol  
SAE Serious Adverse  Event  
SAP Statistical Analysis  Plan 
SOP Standard Operating  Procedure  
 
3 Study  Design/Summary  
3.1 Overview  
This section is from the NEOLEV2 Clinical Research Plan ( 111361 NEOLEV2 Research Plan Clean 20180413 .docx ). 
 
This study will be a phase II preliminary efficacy, dose escalation and safety study. The study design will be a randomized 
blinded controlled treatment study. Infants recognized as having neonatal seizures or as being at risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_787157] b e recruited and started on continuous video EEG monitoring. The EEG data will then be reviewed continuously for 
electrographic seizures by [CONTACT_2792], along with remote continuous EEG monitoring by [CONTACT_787161]. A 
novel seizure detection algorithm operating in near -real time will be compared to the real -time continuous EEG reading. 
Once  eligibility  and consent  are confirmed,  patients  will be randomly  assigned to the LEV or control  treatment group in a 60:40 
allocation ratio, stratified by [CONTACT_3725]. 
 
Blinding  will be maintained  by [CONTACT_787162] (ml/kg) loads  are given 
to both treatment groups.  
 
Subjects randomi zed to receive LEV will, at the onset of electrographically confirmed seizure activity, receive an intravenous 
loading dose of LEV of 40mg/kg given over [ADDRESS_1083096] or recur more than 
NEOLEV2 SAP VERSION 2  
 4 
CONFIDENTIALITY STATEMENT: This report from the USC Alzheimer’s Therapeutic Research Institute (ATRI) is for the sole use of the intended recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841](s)  and  contains  
confidential  and privileged  information.  Any unauthorized  review,  use, disclosure,  copying  or distribution  is strictly  prohibited.   
 [ADDRESS_1083097] infusion is complete, a further 20mg/kg load of LEV will be administered IV over 15 minutes. 
Maintenance  LEV at 10 mg/kg/dose  will be given IV q8 hours  and continued for at least  [ADDRESS_1083098]  or recur  
more  than 15  minutes  after the second LEV infusion  is complete,  a PB loading  dose of 20 mg/kg  will be administered IV over 
[ADDRESS_1083099] loading dose of PB is comple te, a second 20mg/kg 
load will be administered IV over 15 minutes. This will result in PB being started within 1 hour of the onset of seizures if and 
when loading with LEV is ineffective. Patients given any PB loading doses will be started on maintenance PB with 1.5 
mg/kg/dose given IV q8 hours and continued at l east until the end of the study. Subjects randomized to the control group will, 
at the onset of  electrographically confirmed seizure  activity, receive  an intravenous loading  dose of PB of 20 mg/kg  given over 
[ADDRESS_1083100] infusion is 
complete, a further 20mg/kg load of PB will be administered IV over 15 minutes. Maintenance PB at 1.5 mg/kg/dose will be 
given IV q8 hour s and continued for at least [ADDRESS_1083101] or recur more than 15 minutes following the second 
PB infusion, a 40 mg/kg load of LEV will be administered IV over [ADDRESS_1083102] loadi ng dose of LEV is complete, a second 20mg/kg load of LEV will be administered IV over 15 minutes. 
Patients given an LEV loading doses will be started on maintenance LEV with 10 mg/kg/dose given IV q8 hours and continued 
at least until the end of the  study.  
 
If electrographic  seizures  are still apparent  following  treatment with both LEV and PB, or if they recur  during the [ADDRESS_1083103] received  40mg/kg  Phenobarbital  and 60mg/kg  of LEV at this stage.  
 
For study flow, see appendix.  
 
3.2 Specific  Aims  
This section is from the NEOLEV2 Clinical Research Plan ( 111361 NEOLEV2 Research Plan Clean 20180413 .docx ) 
 
Aim 1: To study the preliminary efficacy of intravenous LEV as first line treatment for neonatal seiz ures. The primary endpoint 
will be the percentage of neonates whose seizures are terminated with LEV for 48 hours, and do not go on to require 
a second anticonvulsant agent. A secondary endpoint will be seizure cessation for 1 hour after treatment with LEV.  
Aim 2: Dose  escalation:  To determine  whether  there  is additional  efficacy  at higher  doses  of LEV than 40mg/kg.  The 
percentage of  neonates  whose  seizures  stop following  60mg/kg  LEV, having not responded  to 40mg/kg  LEV, will be 
calculated.  
Aim 3: To study the pharmacokinetics of intravenous LEV at high dosage. The hypothesis is that the pharmacokinetics of 
high dose intravenous LEV will follow predictions based upon previous lower dosage PK studies.  
Aim 4: To obtain further safety data regarding the use of high dose Levetiracetam in this population.  
Aim 5: 5A: To prove the feasibility of centralized remote monitoring of continuous EEG monitoring in the NICU via the 
internet, thereby [CONTACT_12780][INVESTIGATOR_787158].  
5B: To test the sensitivity and specificity of a promising neonatal  seizure detection algorithm  in comparison with 
readings of each record  by 2 electroe ncephalographers  skilled  in neonatal  EEG  analysis.  
ANALYSIS  OF AIMS  5A AND 5B WILL  NOT  BE A PART  OF THE PRIMARY ANALYSIS  DUE  TO MONITORING  CHANGES 
IN THE  STUDY.  
 
3.3 Study  Population  
Inclusion Criteria:  
Term  newborns  admitted to the UCSD,  Children’s  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_787159],  Auckland  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307],  Rady  Children’s 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] , Loma Linda University Medical Center  or Sharp Mary Birch NICUs with seizures or at risk for  seizures:  
• Term infants (gestational age greater than or equal to 36  weeks  and less than or equal to 44 weeks ). 
• Postnatal age < 14  days.  
NEOLEV2 SAP VERSION 2  
 5 
CONFIDENTIALITY STATEMENT: This report from the USC Alzheimer’s Therapeutic Research Institute (ATRI) is for the sole use of the intended recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841](s)  and  contains  
confidential  and privileged  information.  Any unauthorized  review,  use, disclosure,  copying  or distribution  is strictly  prohibited.   
 • Serum creatinine equal to or less than 1.6 mg/dL at time of  enrollment.  
• Are still experiencing  either  clinical  or electroencephalographic  seizures  or are at risk for neonatal  seizures.  
• For whom parental consent to participate in the study is  obtained.  
Exclusion criteria:  
• Biochemical  abnormality  - hypoglycemia,  hypocalcemia - that when  treated  result  in seizure  cessation.  
• Severe  hypoxic  ischemic  injury  likely  to result  in imminent  death.  
• Infants with a birth weight less than 2200 g would be excluded the study. This is the new recommended 10th percentile 
for 36 weeks’  gestation. The blood drawn at any one time will be <3 mls/kg which remains within the NIH guidelines for 
pediatric blood  draws.  
Patients of all ethnic groups will be included in the study. Based on the patient population our group treats, most patients will 
be European or Hispanic. Both male and female infants will be recruited to the study.  
 
The only significant  exclusions that will be made  in recruitment  and enrollment  will be the exclusion  of infants who are judged  by 
[CONTACT_787163]. 
No rule -based criteria, (using lab or clinical parameters) adequately capture the complete nature of this clinical assessment. 
In general any child receiving active treatment with head cooling will not be excluded. Mechanical ventilation and/ or the use 
of inotropic agents to support blood pressure will not be exclusion  criteria.  
 
3.[ADDRESS_1083104] and assuming a seizure cessation rate of  50% 
in the control arm, we have 80% power to detect a seizure cessation rate as low as 22% (an absolute difference in seizure 
outcome  rates  of 28% or greater)  in the LEV group.  
 
3.5 Treatment  Allocation  
The two interventions are as follows:  
 
• Group 1 (active): Levetiracetam  treatment 
 
• Group 2 (control): Standard treatment with  Phenobarbital  
 
3.6 Modification of Primary Aim  
Aim 1 was changed from seizure termination at 48 hours after  treatment to seizure termination at 24 hours after treatment. This 
change was approved by [CONTACT_103620] 4, 2018 (see appendix for e -mail confirmation ). The updated aim 1 reads as 
follows: 
Aim 1: To study the preliminary efficacy of in travenous LEV as first line treatment for neonatal seizures. The primary endpoint 
will be the percentage of neonates whose seizures are terminated with LEV for 24 hours, and do not go on to require 
a second anticonvulsant agent. A secondary endpoint will b e seizure cessation for 48 hours and 1 hour after treatment 
with LEV.  
 
4 Study Outcome  Variables  
4.1 Primary  Outcome  
• Seizure termination at 24  hours after  treatment. 
 
4.2 Key Secondary  Outcome  
NEOLEV2 SAP VERSION 2  
 6 
CONFIDENTIALITY STATEMENT: This report from the USC Alzheimer’s Therapeutic Research Institute (ATRI) is for the sole use of the intended recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841](s)  and  contains  
confidential  and privileged  information.  Any unauthorized  review,  use, disclosure,  copying  or distribution  is strictly  prohibited.   
 • Seizure termination  at 48 hours after  treatment. 
 
4.3 Other  Secondary Outcomes  
 
• Seizure termination at 1 hour after treatment.  
• Dose escala tion -  Seizure termination at 24  hours following 60mg/kg LEV, having not responded to 40mg/kg.  
• Length of seizure freedom.  
• Phenobarbital d ose 
 
4.4 Safety  Outcomes  
• Rate of Adverse Events  (AEs)  
 
• Rate of  Serious Adverse Events  (SAE)  
 
• Discontinuation  Rate  
 
• Laboratory  data 
 
• PK analysis of  LEV 
5 Sequence of Planned  Analysis  
5.1 Interim  Analysis  
AEs and SAEs are being monitored on a regular basis by a Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSMC). No interim futility  
or efficacy analyses are planned.  
 
5.[ADDRESS_1083105]- 
hoc exploratory analyses performed to provide support for planned analyses but not identified in this SAP will be documented 
and clearly identified as unplanned analysis in the  manuscript.  
6 Statistical  Methods 
6.1 Analysis  Populations  
• Intent- To-Treat [ITT] population: All randomized  participants.  
 
• Per-Protocol  (PP) population:  Excluding  babies  not following  the protocol.  
 
• Subset  Populations:  Hypoxic -Ischemic  Encephalopathy  (HIE);  Cooled/not  coole d 
 
6.2 Multiple Comparisons and Multiplicity  
Tests of group differences (active LEV compared to the control PB group) for the primary outcome will be conducted at a  two- 
sided  alpha level of 0.05.  Similarly,  other  secondary  outcomes  will also be conducted using a two-sided  alpha level of 0.05.  No 
adjustment for multiple comparisons will be used in this study; however, all results will be reported using point estimates with 
the corresponding 95% confidence  intervals.  
 
6.3 Covariates  
Covariate adjustment will be specified for each analysis  in their respective sections in this SAP, as applicable.  
NEOLEV2 SAP VERSION 2  
 7 
CONFIDENTIALITY STATEMENT: This report from the USC Alzheimer’s Therapeutic Research Institute (ATRI) is for the sole use of the intended recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841](s)  and  contains  
confidential  and privileged  information.  Any unauthorized  review,  use, disclosure,  copying  or distribution  is strictly  prohibited.   
  
6.4 Data Management and Analysis Software  
All analyses  will be performed  using R statistical  software (http://www.r -project.org).  The R version used will be specified  in the 
analysis reports and will be reported in all  manuscripts.  
7 Statistical  Analysis  
7.1 Study  Flow  
A CONSORT style flow diagram will illustrate patient progression through the trial from enrollment to completion of the final  
primary outcome assessment. Number (perc entage) will be included for neonates enrolled, randomized, study discontinued 
(with reasons), analyzed, excluded from analysis (with reasons). The diagram will be separated by [CONTACT_787164].  
 
7.[ADDRESS_1083106] for continuous  variables.  Fisher’s  Exact  test will be used for categorical  data.  
The following  baseline  demographic  and clinical  characteristics  will be presented:  
• Demographics  
 
– Gender  
– Race  
– Ethnicity  
– Family Medical History of Seizures or Neurological  Abnormality  
– Pregnancy  (Normal/Abnormal) 
– Delivery  Situation  
– Mode of  Delivery  
– Did Mother Have  Anesthesia?  
– Delivery  Presentation  
– Birth Weight  
– Head Circumference at  Birth 
– Gestational Age at  Birth 
 
• Clinical  
– Cord PH  
– APGAR Scores at 1, 5 and 10  min 
– Seizures etiology  
 
7.3 Analysis of Primary and Key Secondary Outcomes  
Primary Hypothesis  
Hypothesis: Treatment with LEV improves the rate of seizure termination at [ADDRESS_1083107] PB 
treatment.  
 
Analysis Plan: A Fisher’s exact t est will be used to test the 24 hours seizure termination rate between the two treatment groups. 
As a secondary analysis, multivariate logistic regression (if there are sufficient number of events), will be performed  to study 
the association between termination rates and treatment. Pre -specified covariates, including seizure etiology (HIE vs Other) 
NEOLEV2 SAP VERSION 2  
 8 
CONFIDENTIALITY STATEMENT: This report from the USC Alzheimer’s Therapeutic Research Institute (ATRI) is for the sole use of the intended recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841](s)  and  contains  
confidential  and privileged  information.  Any unauthorized  review,  use, disclosure,  copying  or distribution  is strictly  prohibited.   
 and hypothermia treatment (yes, no), will be included in the multivariable model as observed confounders.  
 
Key Secondary Hypothesis  
Hypothesis: Treatment with LEV improves the rat e of seizure cessation at [ADDRESS_1083108] PB 
treatment.  
 
Analysis Plan:  A similar approach as used for the primary outcome wil l be utilized to analyze the 48 hours seizure 
cessa tion rates. 
 
7.4 Analysis of Remaining Secondary Outcomes  
• Hypothesis 1: Treatment with LEV improves the r ate of seizure cessation at [ADDRESS_1083109] 
PB treatment.  
 
 Analysis  Plan:  A similar  approach as used for the primary  outcome  will be utilized  to analyze the 1-hour seizure cessation 
rates. 
• Hypothesis  2: Length of seizure  freedom  will be longer  in the LEV group than in the PB group.  
 
Analysis  Plan:  Actual  length  of seizure freedom  will be summarized  by [CONTACT_787165]. 
Comparison between randomization group s will  be performed  using Wilcoxon -rank sum test. 
• Hypothesis 3: Additional LEV treatment in neonates who didn’t respond to 40mg/kg LEV will be effective (additional 
seizure terminations).  
 
 Analysis Plan: The percentage of neonates whose seizures stop following 60mg/kg LEV, having not responded to 40mg/kg 
LEV will be calculated with the corresponding 95% confidence interval.  
• Hypothesis 4:  LEV treatment will result in a lower dose of phenobarbital being needed as compared to the PB treatment 
alone.  
 
Analysis Plan: Phenobarbital  dose will  be summarized  by [CONTACT_787165]. Comparison 
between randomization groups  will be performed  using Wilcoxon -rank sum test. 
 
7.[ADDRESS_1083110] awal due to event and outcome will be summarized by 
[CONTACT_787166] . Fisher’s  exact  tests  will be used to compare rates  
of adverse events,  serious  adverse events,  study  discontinuation  and deaths between randomization group  and by [CONTACT_787167], respectively.  
 
Findings will be tabulated by [CONTACT_787168], respectively.  
 
Safety Labs (using DAIDS guidelines) will be presented with shift table s (hour 48 vs baseline) by [CONTACT_787169], respectively . 
 
7.[ADDRESS_1083111]. Capparelli at the time 
of analysis.  
The actual  individual  concentration data,  collection  times  and dosing histories will be used to create graphs of plasma LEV 
concentration vs. time for each infant. Median plasma drug concentration vs. time curves will also  be generated.  Summary  
statistics (i.e., n, mean,  standard deviation,  median,  minimum,  maximum,  and coefficient  of variation) will be calculated for 
NEOLEV2 SAP VERSION 2  
 9 
CONFIDENTIALITY STATEMENT: This report from the USC Alzheimer’s Therapeutic Research Institute (ATRI) is for the sole use of the intended recipi[INVESTIGATOR_841](s)  and  contains  
confidential  and privileged  information.  Any unauthorized  review,  use, disclosure,  copying  or distribution  is strictly  prohibited.   
 plasma concentrations for each time point and each dose level. LEV population pharmacokinetic parameters will be determined 
using the computer program NONMEM (ver. 6 or later). The data will be nested with existing raw infant  LEV pharmacokinetic  
data generated  in the preliminary  LEV study.  Assuming  linear pharmacokinetics  as suggested by [CONTACT_787170], studying 12 subjects at each dosage level will result in 90% confidence intervals for the pharmacokinetic parameters (CL, 
V and t1/2) of +/ - 15%. The 90% confidence interval s for the exposure parameters (Cmax, AUC) will be approximately +/ - 20%. 
The pharmacokinetics will be modeled recognizing the two stages of a nonlinear hierarchical  model  development.  The first stage 
introduces  the structural  model  (e.g. one compartment  open model),  the population parameters, individual effects and the within -
patient variation. The second portion of the model development recognizes that variation  between patients  in the 
pharmacokinetic  parameters  exists  and will attempt  to determine  covariates  that may identify different pharmacokinetic 
subpopulations. A one- compartment model with first order elimination will be utilized. Alternative structural models will be 
explored if indicated by [CONTACT_26739]. The impact of clinical factors and demographic factors (including weight, sex, age, race, serum 
creatinine, hypothermia and dosing regimen) will be assessed as fixed effects in the model. Nested  models  will be compared  
graphically and with a likelihood  ratio test. 
8 Appendix  
 
8.1 Study Flow Cha rt 
     
 
HIE	and	at	risk		neonates	
(prospective	enrollment)Suspi[INVESTIGATOR_787160]
200	subjects	consented	and	
continuous	EEG	initiated
100	subjects	begin	
treatment	with	randomized	
study	drug
IV	LEV	Load	40mg/kg		
(60	subjects)IV	PB	Load	20mg/kg	
(40	subjects)
Additional	LEV	load	20	
mg/kg
IV	PB	Load	20	mg/kg
Additional	PB	load	20	
mg/kg
Defer	to	institutional	
protocolAdditional	load	PB	20	
mg/kg
IV	LEV	Load	40	mg/kg
Additional	LEV	load	20	
mg/kgElectrographic	seizures	detected
If	seizures	persist
If	seizures	persist
If	seizures	persist
If	seizures	persistIf	seizures	persist
If	seizures	persist
If	seizures	persist
If	seizures	persist
9/14/2018