Official Title:  Vascular Impairment in Type II Diabetes Mellitus with Co -morbid Obstructive Sleep Apnea  
ClinicalTrials.gov ID (NCT number:  [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Statistical Analysis Plan Date:  01/05 /[ADDRESS_246343] of sleep apnea and diabetes 
on our primary outcome (flow mediated dilation) as well as the three secondary outcomes 
(nitroglycerin -induced dilation, acetylcholine -induced skin blood flow, and sodium nitroprusside -induced 
skin blood flow) after controlling for age, sex, and body mass index (BMI) .  If a significant interac tion is 
identified, the main effects of diabetes, sleep apnea, and their interaction will be reported using 
multivariable linear regression adjusting for age, sex, and BMI.  If the interactive effect of sleep apnea 
and diabetes is not significant (α=0.05) , we will ignore any interaction and examine the additive effects 
of diabetes and sleep apnea on each outcome using multivariable linear regression adjusting for age, 
sex, and BMI.   Using post -hoc contrasts, we will then further test for differences between  those having 
both diabetes and sleep apnea alone versus those with diabetes alone and those with sleep apnea 
alone .  All tertiary outcomes will be assessed in a similar fashion.  
For the randomized clinical trial analysis , the primary outcome is percent ch ange in flow mediated 
dilation (post -treatment minus pre -treatment divided by [CONTACT_094] -treatment) with percent change in 
nitroglycerin induced dilation, acetylcholine induced skin blood flow and sodium nitroprusside induced 
skin blood flow as secondary outcomes .  The primary analysis will be based on the use of unpaired t -
tests to compare each outcome in those randomized to CPAP versus sham -CPAP using an intention to 
treat principle and α =0.05.  All tertiary outcomes will be assessed in a similar fashion.  If s ignificant 
differences (α =0.05) are identified in key covariates (age, sex, BMI ) between those randomized to CPAP 
and sham CPAP, secondary analyses will adjust for those covariates that significantly differ.  
For all analyses, we will also report  effect sizes with 95% confidence intervals to establish the size of our 
effects of interest.  