The impact of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 1 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  INSTRUCTIONS:  
● Use this “TEMPLATE PROTOCOL (HRP -503)” to prepare a study protocol 
outlining your research plan .  
● Depending on the nature of your study, some major sections might not be 
applicable to your research. If so , simply  mark as “N/A.” For example, a simple 
survey  might have many sections with “N/A.”  For subsections  (e.g., 1.x or 8.x ) 
you can mark as “N/A” if you are certain that the subsection is not applicable . 
● Once the IRB/HRPP approves your submission, your latest approved version of 
the protocol  will be stored  in the IRB Protocol Management  online system .  
● If your research plan changes and you need to modify the protocol, please submit 
an amendment to Protocol  Management with the requested modifications. 
Download your current  protocol from Protocol Management and indicate  the 
changes /revisions  using  the track changes  feature in order  to make review of the 
modifications easier to follow. If you are unable to use  track changes , please 
create a new paragraph wherever you need to make a change, and  indicate 
“Amendment: Date” before making a change to any section. Protocol 
management will store the  older versions  of your protocol  if the  IRB or HRPP 
staff need to comp are them during the review.  
 
PROTOCOL TITLE:   
Include the full protocol title .  
The impact of physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior  
 
PROTOCOL NUMBER:   #23-297 
Include the number assigned in Protocol Management  (verify this has been added 
before submitting protocol to HRPP ).  
 
Click here to provide a response.  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR:  
[INVESTIGATOR_42598] : Alexandra Gold DiFeliceantonio, PhD  
Department : Human Nutrition, Foods and Exercise  
Telephone Number : [PHONE_16831]  
Email Address : [EMAIL_9671]  
 
FUNDING:  
 Sponsor (s): HNFE Pi[INVESTIGATOR_103762]: SJ Ritchey Research Award, SJ Ritchey Resch -
DiFeliceantonio  
 Funded already or in the proposal phase? : funded  
Is Virginia Tech the primary awardee or the coordinating center of this grant or 
contract? If not, list the primary institution : VT 
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114535] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 2 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019   
VERSION NUMBER/DATE:   
Include the version number and date of this protocol. Versions should start at 1.0.  
 
1.0 
 
REVISION HISTORY:  
Use this table to keep track of changes.  Add more rows as needed.  
 
Revision 
# Version Date  Brief Summary of Changes  
(i.e., the different sections)  Consent 
Change?  
1 4/3/[ADDRESS_1114536] in Study Emails (supporting 
docs)  
5. added participant results materials 
(supporting docs)  yes 
2 4/7/23  1. finished sentence in 17.2  no 
3 4/10/[ADDRESS_1114537] supporting documents  no 
4 12/13/23 1. Updated recruitment information for pi[INVESTIGATOR_807177] 
(section 6.0)  
2. Provided more general ingredients used in 
drink stimuli since we don’t know which non -
nutritive sweeteners will be used yet (that is 
the purpose of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]), but all 
ingredients being tested are regularly available 
in the US food supply and have likely been 
consumed by [CONTACT_807195]. (section 
7.1) 
3. Removed blood pressure and BIA 
measurements since we no longer have this 
equipment available to use (section 8.2)  
4. Changed timing of when dietary, physical 
activity, and health behavior questionnaires 
occur; also removed information about 
contact[CONTACT_807196], as this this is not needed 
or necessary when participants complete the 
questionnaires at a session in which they are yes 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114538] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 3 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  already interacting with study staff. (Section 
8.2) 
6. Changed language describing blood  
collection tubes, as we are experiencing 
challenges in types/sizes available for 
procurement at different times (section 8.2)  
Added perceptual ratings to at -home/online 
session (section 8.2)  
7. Added information about checking in with 
participant before r emoving from MRI 
environment after a squeeze bulb activation 
(section 8.3)  
8. Removed “blood will not be drawn from the 
same site during any 1 session” as this is not in 
line with IV catheter placement (section 8.3)  
9. Removed information about providing 
participants with separate, single -use blood 
collecting devices, as these are performed in 
our blood collection laboratory by [CONTACT_165401] (section 8.3)  
10. Added general “other blood metabolites” to 
data collected during study (section 8.4)  
11. Changed “energy expenditure” to 
“metabolic” to be more accurate when 
describing location of data storage (section 9.1)  
12. Removed excess and unnecessary 
information about Ripple storage of personally 
identifiable information being separate from 
research data  (since we use a completely 
separate software and process for research data 
storage) (section 9.4)  
13. Changed inclusion/exclusion criteria: BMI 
up to 27, removed birth control as exclusion, 
removed contraindications for BIA (section 
12.2)  
14. Added 1/2 ho ur to time involvement of 
consent session in all relevant places  (protocol, 
session reminder emails, consent from)  
15. Changed MRI risk to include other ear 
protection instead of headphones, as the head 
coil system used for this study is not large 
enough to fit headphones for most participants; 
also noise reduction rating of the ear plugs, as 
we are able to procure differe nt ones at 
different times based on supply (section 8.2, 
8.3, 17.1)  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114539] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 4 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019   
5 4/1/24  1. Removed personnel: Amber Burns, Ryann 
Kolb  
2. Added personnel: Rhianna Sullivan, Abby 
[CONTACT_807197] , Han Lee, Lara Tablieh  
3. Section 8.2: Changed pi[INVESTIGATOR_807178] ~2 hours; changed protocol to allow 
participants to complete as many pi[INVESTIGATOR_807179].  
4. Section 11.1: Changed pi[INVESTIGATOR_807180] 
~2 hours  
5. Section 15.4: Changed pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] l ength to 
~[ADDRESS_1114540] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 5 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  Table of Contents  
1.0 Study Summary  6 
2.0 Objectives  6 
3.0 Background  7 
4.0 Study Endpoints  8 
5.0 Study Design and Statistical Analysis Plan  9 
6.0 Setting  9 
7.0 Study Intervention(s)/Invest igational Agent(s)  [ADDRESS_1114541] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 6 of 51 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_1114542] of physiological response to sugar on brain 
activity and behavior  
 
Study Design  This is a within -subjects study design. Results will be 
analyzed using linear regression and linear mixed effects 
models.  
Primary Objective  The primary objective of this study is to study the effects of 
different types of sugars/carbohydrates commonly and 
abundantly found in the US food supply on metabolic rate, 
blood metabolites, and food reward.  
Secondary 
Objective(s)  There are no seconda ry aims for this study.  
Study Population  The general US population  
Sample Size  20 for the pi[INVESTIGATOR_807181]; 200 for the full study  
Research 
Intervention(s)/ 
Investigational 
Agent(s)  Blood measurements, resting and post-consumption energy 
expenditure, questionnaires  and ratings , fMRI  
Study Duration for 
Individual 
Participants  Screening session:  2 hours  
In-Person  Sessions : 3 sessions of 4 hours each, 12 hours 
total 
Online  Sessions: 3 sessions of 15 minutes each, 45  minutes 
total 
Take -Home Drinks: [ADDRESS_1114543] session:  3 hours  
Acronyms and 
Definitions  fMRI, functional magnetic resonance imaging; FBRI, Fralin 
Biomedical Research Institute; CHBR, Center for Health 
Behaviors Research; SSB, sugar sweetened beverage; HNL, 
Human Neuroimaging Lab; ELISA, Enzyme linked 
immunosorbent assay  
 
 
2.0 Objectives  
2.1 Descri be the purpose, specific aims, or objectives  of this study : 
 
The purpose of this study is to test the influence of different types of 
carbohydrates on metabolic response and food reward.  
 
2.2 State the hypotheses to be tested :  
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114544] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 7 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  For aim one, our hypothesis is that sucrose conditions greater appetitive 
effects than either fructose or glucose, its constituents, alone. For aim 2, 
our hypothesis is that fructose, incorporated into high fructose corn syrup, 
enhances the reinforcing pro perties of glucose, leading to more appetitive 
responses than sucrose paired with a non -nutritive sweetener, or sucrose 
alone.  
 
3.0 Background  
3.1 Summarize the relevant prior research on  this topic and gaps in current 
knowledge within the field of study : 
 
On any single day, 63 -80% of people consume a sugar sweetened 
beverage (SSB), and in the US, adults consume ~46% of total added 
sugars in the form of SSBs. Beyond the established links with weight gain 
and increased adiposity deposition, excessive sugar in take is associated 
with reduced insulin sensitivity and may increase risk for type 2 diabetes. 
Fructose has independently been associated with increased intrahepatic 
lipid content and increased risk of non -alcoholic fatty liver disease. So, 
reducing SSB co nsumption could be an effective tool to reduce rates of 
obesity, type 2 diabetes, an nonalcoholic fatty liver disease. The 
assumption has been that oral sweet tastes drives SSB consumption; 
however, if sweetness alone drive consumption, the advent of "diet " 
drinks, which contain artificial sweeteners, would have driven 
substantially reduced SSB intake. This is not the case, and the exact 
reasons are unclear. We propose a potential underexplored mechanisms" 
engagement of post -oral/postingestive metabolic pat hways that support 
behavior and preference that are not engaged by [CONTACT_627969].  
Recent data indicated that post -ingestive signals of sugar availability may 
contribute to food reward and choice, and nutrients in the gut are able to 
rapi[INVESTIGATOR_807182]. 
These gut -brain circuits, however, are not well -understood. Furthermore, 
most of this work in understanding gut -brain connections has been 
performed in animal models; translating these findings to human s is 
necessary.  
 
3.2 Describe any relevant preliminary data : 
 
This is a new project without preliminary data collected.  
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114545] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 8 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  3.3 Based on the existing literature, p rovide the scientific or scholarly 
rationale for and significance of your research and how will it add to 
existing knowledge : 
 
Prior studies in humans indicate  that while energy expenditure response is 
similar after consumption of equal amounts of fructose, glucose, and 
sucrose (a dimer of glucose + fructose), carbohydrate oxidation and blood 
glucose responses differ.  Elevated carbohydrate oxidation responses 
appear to be driven by [CONTACT_807198], and elevated blood 
glucose responses appear to be driven by [CONTACT_807199].  Prior 
work also suggests that post -ingestive signals of glucose availability, 
measure specifically as blood glucose levels,  intestinal glucose transporter 
activity, and carbohydrate oxidation rate, are all associated with  elevated 
brain response to calorie -predictive flavor cues and reward learning of 
these flavor cues. However, in animal models, glucose has been shown to 
repeatedly and reliably condition these calorie -predictive learning 
responses, but fructose does not. Human work has indicated that oxidation 
of glucose is critical for these responses. Thus, it is unclear what roles 
fructose and glucose each play in condition ing reward responses and 
flavor -calorie learning. We hypothesize that fructose plays a synergistic 
role in enhancing flavor -calorie learning without itself conditioning the 
reward response. We will test this hypothesis through this protocol.  
 
4.[ADDRESS_1114546] common in clinical trials but are sometimes 
applicable to other types of biomedical  research , as well as social, 
behavioral, or educational research.  See link below for a discussion.  
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Wocz7K7a0hCQJPPO_khh5l1
SQQjhGDDGHzcOPRHR5Tw/edit?usp=sharing   
 
Primary study endpoints are indirect calo rimetry measurements, 
blood glucose measurements, beverage condition ratings and 
preferences  (behavioral measures) , and brain activation measured by 
[CONTACT_40394].  
 
4.2 Describe any primary or secondary safety  endpoints. These should be 
included for all studies that are greater  than minimal risk . (Minimal risk: 
The probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the 
research that are not greater in and of themselves than those ordinarily 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114547] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 9 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  encounte red in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or 
psychological examinations or tests.) : 
 
There are no safety endpoints.  
 
5.0 Study Design and Statistical Analysis Plan  
5.1 Describe the basic study design/approach (e.g., qualitative study using five 
focus groups of first year students to describe assimilatio n into the 
university community;  randomized controlled trial of a behavioral change 
intervention to increase  dietary  intake of whole grains ; pre- post-test 
evaluation of new pedagogical techniques to improve adult literacy) : 
 
The pi[INVESTIGATOR_102191] a within -subjects design used to compare ratings of  
beverages with different levels of sweetness provided by [CONTACT_807200] -nutritive sweeteners (see 7.0:Investigational Agents: Beverage 
Solutions, below, for ingredients).   
 
The overall study will be a within -subjects (crossover) design used to 
compare behavioral (beverage ratings and preferences), metabolic (blood 
glucose & metabolites,  indirect calorimetry measures), and brain activation 
responses (fMRI) to glucose -, fructose -, and sucrose -containing beverages 
(Aim 1); and sucrose -, high fructose corn syrup (HFCS) -, and non-nutritive 
sweetener  + sucrose - containing beverages (Aim 2).  
 
 
 
5.2 Describe corresponding data analysis plan/approach (e.g., content analysis 
of focus group transcripts ; descriptive analysis followed by [CONTACT_40190] ; nonparametric analysis of pre - and post -test 
measures) : 
 
Linear mixed effects models wi ll be used to assess the following outcome 
variables: change in indirect calorimetry measures, change in blood glucose 
and insulin, change in beverage liking. Linear regression will be used to 
relate blood and indirect calorimetry measures to liking and ot her subjective 
ratings.  
 
6.[ADDRESS_1114548] the 
research.  Consider each of the items listed below:  
● Identify where your research team will identify and recruit potential 
subjects.  
● Identify where the team will perform the research procedures.  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114549] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 10 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  ● Describe the composition and involvement of any community 
advisory board (s). 
● For research conducted in other locations, describe:  
o Site-specific regulations or customs affecting the research at 
those locations.  
o Local scientific and ethical review structure at those locations.  
Examples include work in other cultures or ethnic groups 
(within or outside of the U.S.)  and work with churches. The 
HRPP will provide additional guidance for i nternational 
research.  
 
 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]:  
A convenience sample of individuals will be recruited through word -of-mouth , posted 
flyers, social media, and other recruitment avenues . Individuals who are willing and able 
to come to the Center for Health Behaviors Research (CHBR) at the Fralin Biomedical 
Research Institute (FBRI) will be invited to participate.  All study procedures for the pi[INVESTIGATOR_807183].  
 
Full Study:  
Recruitment will be done through flyers posted in the local community  and social media 
posts. Both avenues of participant recruitment will include information about the study as 
well as contact [CONTACT_3031] (i.e. email and phone number) for the study and instructions 
to access  the screening survey. Individuals within our Ripple (HIPAA -compliant, see 
information below in section 9.4 ) database who have previously indicated they would 
like to be considered for future studies will also be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530].  
 
The study procedures for the i n-person visits  will all take place at the Fralin Biomedical 
Research Institute (FBRI) at VTC in Roanoke, VA. The consent session will occur at the 
Center for Health Behavior Research (CHBR) at the FBRI or in metabolic core space in 
Riverside [ADDRESS_1114550] in the Human 
Neuroimaging Lab (HNL) at the FBRI.  
 
 
 
7.0 Study Intervention(s)/Investigational Agent(s)  
7.1 Describe the study interventions (including behavioral interventions) and/or 
investigational agents (e.g., drug s or device s) to be used in this study .  Consider 
each of the items listed below:   
● Drug/Device Handling: If the research involves drugs or devices, 
describe your plans to store, handle, and administer the drugs or 
devices so that they will be used only on subjects , and only by 
[CONTACT_10733].  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114551] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 11 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  ● Describe whether any of the following will be used: microwaves, X -
rays, DEXA scans, general  anesthesia, or sedation  
● If control of the drugs or devices used in this protocol will be 
accomplished by [CONTACT_10734], approved organizational 
SOP (e.g., Research Pharmacy SOP for the Control of 
Investigational Drugs, etc.), please reference the SOP in this section.  
 
 
Beverage Solutions :  
Participants will consume different beverages and "tasteless" solutions at different times 
throughout the study. Ingredients used in the solutions include: food -grade table sugar, 
high fructose corn syrup, dextrose, fructose, -non-nutritive sweeteners that  are commonly 
found in the US food supply , citric acid, potassium chloride (a common salt), and sodium 
bicarbonate (baking soda).  Beverages will also include flavor s and food coloring 
commonly used in commercial food products.   
 
All ingredients are common  food additives that nearly every participant would have 
consumed previously in their normal diet.  
 
Device Handling:  
This research involves the use of a metabolic chamber which is located in a restricted 
space requiring proxy access. The MRI scanner involv ed in this work is located in a 
restricted, proxy access behind biometrically secure doors   
 
 
 
7.[ADDRESS_1114552] the name [CONTACT_40232]  (including any vitamins, supplements, herbs, or 
nicotine ) to be used in the study.  Indicate  whether  they have FDA 
approval, and list any limitations for their use :  
 
No drugs or supplements will be used in the study.  
 
7.[ADDRESS_1114553] all devices, how they will be used, their purpose in the study, and if 
they will be used in a manner consistent with their approved uses. If they 
will be used in ways that are not yet FDA approved , indicate whether they 
need  an IDE or a determination that they are exempt from the IDE 
Determination. If a determination of significant risk or non -significant risk 
is needed for any of the devices, include the researcher’s recommendation 
for each of those devices :  
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114554] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 12 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  Magnetic Resonance Imaging: Participants will receive an MRI scan. The Siemens 3T 
scanner has been approved by [CONTACT_42626] a manner consistent with 
approval.  
 
Metabolic Chamber: Participants will undergo metabolic measurements in a metabolic 
chamber in a manner consis tent with approved uses.  
 
7.4 If the drug is investigational (has an IND) or the device has an IDE or a 
claim of abbreviated IDE (non -significant risk device), include the 
following information:  
● Identify the holder of the IND/IDE/ abbreviated IDE.  
● Explain procedures followed to comply with sponsor requirements 
for FDA regulated research for the following:  
 Applicable to:  
FDA Regulation  IND Studies  IDE studies  Abbreviated 
IDE studies  
21 CFR 11  X X  
21 CFR 54  X X  
21 CFR 210  X   
21 CFR 211  X   
21 CFR 312  X   
21 CFR 812   X X 
21 CFR 820   X  
 
 
N/A 
 
 
8.0 Procedures Involved  
8.1 Describe and explain the study design : 
This is a within -subject analysis plan where participants receive at least [ADDRESS_1114555] calorimetry measurements, 
and an MRI scan.  
 
8.2 Provide a description of:  
● All research procedures being performed  
● If the study has more than one procedure, session, and/or subject 
population, descri be each procedure, session, and/or  study 
population separately. For complex studies, you are encouraged to  
include a figure or chart.  
 
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114556] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 13 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  PI[INVESTIGATOR_72001] : 
Overview  
The sugars and non -nutritive sweeteners will be using in our full study all have 
different levels of sweetness due to their chemical structures. To decide what 
amounts of each of these to use, we will conduct a ) pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], in which a 
convenience sample of participants (~20) will taste and rate a variety of mixtures 
of sugars and non -nutritive sweeteners.  To reduce the potential for "tasting 
fatigue, " only a limited number of mixtures will be tasted during a single [ADDRESS_1114557] -of-
mouth or email from our lab's Ripple database (see section 9.4 for information 
about Ripple).  Emails will be generated for individuals who opted -in to contact 
[CONTACT_807201] a screening 
survey. See supporting documents for email wording.  
 
Informed Consent  
Participants will be sent via email the consent form for the study at least [ADDRESS_1114558] perceptual rating scales used in 
the study. Then, they will taste, rate, and rank each m ixture using these scales. All 
mixtures will be within common sweetness concentrations found in commercially 
available beverages (i.e., we will not provide sugar or non -nutritive sweetener 
amounts that would commonly cause gastrointestinal discomfort in mo st people). 
Data from this pi[INVESTIGATOR_807184] -nutritive sweeteners to be used in the full study.  
 
 
 
FULL STUDY : 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114559] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 14 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019   
 
OVERVIEW:  
Approximately [ADDRESS_1114560] same  for Aims 1 and 2, but the 
beverages selected for conditions "CS1, CS2, and CS3" are different, depending on aim. 
For Aim 1 , conditions will include fructose, glucose, and sucrose. For Aim 2, conditions 
will include sucrose, high fructose corn syrup (HFCS), and non -nutritive 
sweetener+sucrose. Each CS drink will be consumed over a 1 -week period in sequential 
weeks wit hout "washout" weeks in between.  
 
Recruitment and Screening:  
Approved study recruitment materials will be distributed in the follow ways . Flyers will 
be posted on bulletin boards and approved posting sites throughout Roanoke, Blacksburg, 
and surrounding a reas. Digital advertisements will be displa yed on DiFeliceantonio lab 
and CHBR social media, VT News, and in list serves with permission.  All advertisements 
will include a link to the lab website where there will be approved language describing 
the researc h study. Interested participants will fill out a general screening survey. All 
screening surveys will be delivered through Ripple  (a HIPAA -compliant, secure database 
software; see section 9.4 for description) . This screening survey will be used to determin e 
study eligibility. Once the general screening survey has been completed, participants who 
may be eligible for this study will be contact[CONTACT_24211] (see attachment 'Screening 
email'). If participants choose to complete the study -specific screening form and are 
eligible for this study, they will be contact[CONTACT_23097] a consent session.  
 
CONSENT SESSION  (Called "p retest " in study design figure above)  (~2.5 hours):  
Informed Consent  
Participants will be sent via email the consent form for the study at lea st [ADDRESS_1114561] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 15 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019   
Anthropometrics and Clinical Measures  
Participants' height , weight , hip circumference, and waist circumferences will be 
measured. Height will be measured usi ng a stadiometer, weight using a body weight 
scale, and waist and hip circumference using a standard Gulick tape measure. A 
fingerstick blood sample will be collected for point -of-care hemoglobin A1C assessment 
to ensure eligibility. A lancing device and s ingle -use lancet will be used to obtain a finger 
stick. A point -of-care A1C analyzer and appropriate cartridges will be used to assess 
hemoglobin A1C.  
 
Flavor Ratings  
The participants will first be trained by [CONTACT_807202]. Then participants will taste and make ratings of beverages using 
the standard rating scales. After the participant has completed the tasting protocol, the 
researcher will determine three  flavors  to be  used in the beverages the partic ipants will 
consume during the behavioral conditioning sessions.   
 
Mock MRI Training  
Participants will also complete a "mock" MRI training, in which they learn to swallow 
small amounts of liquids while lying supi[INVESTIGATOR_050]. (Note: most people have no difficulty 
learning to swallow small quantities of liquid while lying down). This training will be 
performed in an MRI simulator that is the same bore size and similar environment to the 
real scanner, but does not contain a magnetic field. Participants who have difficu lty with 
supi[INVESTIGATOR_509628].  If not completed during the consent session, participants will be  asked  to 
complete this training as part of another conditioning session. Compensation for this 
"mock" scan is built into the compensation for the consent session.  
 
Dietary Intake  
Participants will be instructed to consume the same breakfast meal the morni ng of each 
conditioning  session  and lunch beverage exposure (described below, see In -Person 
Conditioning Sessions and At -Home Conditioning Sessions) . The breakfast meal will be 
approximately 20% of their estimated total daily energy needs and composed of ~ 15% of 
calories from protein, 30% from fat, and 55% from carbohydrate. Estimated energy needs 
will be calculated using a validated equation that uses the participant's height, weight, 
sex, and age. Participants will work with research personnel to develop the appropriate 
meal choice to meet the specified nutrient composition and fit their individual 
preferences. Participants will be responsible for preparing these meals at home. They will 
be instructed to consume only plain water after finishing this meal u ntil their scheduled 
conditioning session.  
 
Dietary, Physical Activity, and Health Behavior Questionnaires  
After the training session, participants will receive an email containing links to dietary - 
physical activity - and behavior -related questionnaires in REDCap to complete. It is 
estimated that it will take the participant approximately [ADDRESS_1114562] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 16 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  questionnaires. These questionnaires will be sent using the automated invitation function 
in REDCap, which will generate an email containing unique links for each survey for 
each participant. Only participant email addresses will be stored as p articipant identifiers 
to track survey responses for data collection.  
 
IN-PERSON CONDITIONING SESSIONS (~4 hours each, ~12 hours total):  
These sessions will occur in sequential weeks with at least [ADDRESS_1114563] planned this meal with research personnel during 
the consent session. They will be responsible for procuring and/or preparing  these meals 
at home. They will be instructed to consume only plain water after finishing this meal 
until their scheduled conditioning  session or take-home lunch beverage consumption 
time.  
 
Internal State Ratings  
Participants will rate their hunger, thirst, and f ullness on standard visual analog scales  
while fasted and after consumption of the beverage, along with perceptual ratings about 
the beverages consumed during the session.  
 
IV Blood Draws   
An IV catheter will be inserted into the participant's arm for venous blood draws 
throughout the session. This catheter will remain in the participant's arm for the duration 
of the session (~4 hours). A fasting baseline draw will be made, and then six additional 
blood draws after the participant consumes the conditioning  beverage will be conducted  
throughout the remaining session . Two tubes of no more than 5 ml each  will be collected 
at each blood draw  (14 tubes total) . This is approximately 126 ml of blood in total  (~8-9 
tablespoons).  This is roughly equivalent to 1/4 the amount of blood given during a typi[INVESTIGATOR_729565]. All blood draws will occur while the participant is reclining on a bed 
inside a metabolic chamber (see Metabolic Chamber Indirect Calorimetry below) . For the 
draws, the researcher performing the bloo d draws will reach their arms into the chamber 
via ports on the side of the chamber walls. Participants will be able to communicate with 
research personnel using a [ADDRESS_1114564] intercom system, and the walls of the metabolic 
chamber are clear plexiglass that allo w researchers and participants to see each other 
throughout the measurement.  IV blood draws occur concurrently with metabolic chamber 
measurements (see below). The IV catheter line will be flushed with normal saline 
between each blood draw to prevent coagu lation in the catheter tubing.  After the final 
blood draw, the catheter will be removed and the venipuncture site secured with sterile 
tape or bandage. Should the IV catheter placement fail or become unusable during the 
session , the catheter will be remove d and participants will continue with the metabolic 
chamber indirect calorimetry portion of the session.  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114565] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 17 of 51 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_1114566] reclined on a bed inside the metabolic chamber for the duration of 
the measurement.  The chamber is an open -circuit system in which fresh air is pumped 
into the room at a specified flow rate. Metabolic chamber measurements involve non -
invasive collection and measurement of oxygen and carbon dioxide concentrations 
expi[INVESTIGATOR_807185]. Metabolic chamber measurements occur concurrently with 
IV blood draws (see above ). Participants will be able to communicate with research 
personnel using a [ADDRESS_1114567] intercom system, and the walls of the metabolic chamber are 
clear plexiglass t hat allow researchers and participants to see each other throughout the 
measurement.  A fasting measurement will be collected for approximately 30 -60 minutes; 
during this time a fasting blood draw will also be collected (see IV Blood Draws above). 
After the  fasting measurement, participants will consume the conditioning beverage, and 
a post -beverage measurement will be collected for approximately 3 hours.  
 
Beverage C onsumption  
Participants will consume the single 355 ml, 110 kcal conditioning beverage withi n 5 
minutes. The conditioning beverage contains flavoring, citric acid (commonly used in 
sugar -sweetened beverages [e.g., Gatorade]), deionized water, and the sugar or sugar + 
non-nutritive sweetener stimuli being tested.  Participants will rate their hunge r, thirst, and 
fullness on standard visual analog scales after consumption of the beverage, along with 
perceptual ratings about the beverages consumed during the session.  
 
Take -Home Beverages  
At the end of the session, participants will be provided 5 bott les of the same conditioning 
beverage to be consumed at home. One bottle will be used for the at -home conditioning 
session (see below), and the remaining 4 total bottles will be consumed at the following 
times: 1 hour before dinner the same day as the in -person and at -home conditioning 
sessions (1 bottle for each conditioning session) , and  1 hour before lunch the day 
following the in -person and at -home conditioning session (1 bottle for each session).  
 
AT-HOME CONDITIONING SESSIONS (~15 minutes each, 45 minutes total):  
Fast and Refrain from Exercise  
Participants will be asked to refrain from exercise for at least [ADDRESS_1114568] planned this meal with research personnel 
during the consent session. They will be responsible for procuring and/or preparin g these 
meals at home. They will be instructed to consume only plain water after finishing this 
meal until their scheduled conditioning session time.  
 
Zoom Monitoring of Consumption  
A Zoom link will be sent to the participant prior to the scheduled at -home  conditioning 
session time.  During the session, participants will turn their camera on to allow the 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114569] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 18 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  researcher to watch them drink the conditioning beverage. This session will NOT be 
recorded. At the end of the session, participants will be reminded to con sume the take -
home beverages at the appropriate specified times: [ADDRESS_1114570] visual analog scales before and after consumption of the beverage, along with 
perceptual ratings about the beverages consumed during the session  on this survey.  
 
TAKE -HOME BEVERAGE CONSUMPTION (~5 minutes each, 60 minutes total):  
Consumption of Planned Breakfast Meal  
Participants will be instructed to consume the same breakfast meal the morning of  each 
lunch beverage consumption time. They will have planned this m eal with research 
personnel during the consent session. They will be responsible for procuring and/or 
preparing these meals at home. They will be instructed to consume only plain water after 
finishing this meal until their scheduled lunch beverage consumpt ion time.  
 
Consumption of Take -Home Beverages  
Participants will be instructed to consume the take -home beverages 1 hour before dinner 
the same day as their conditioning session (either in -person or at -home; see above)  and 1 
hour before lunch the day follow ing their conditioning session (either in -person or at -
home). Participants will be sent surveys to verify beverage consumption times and 
amounts via REDCap. These surveys  will be sent using the automated invitation function 
in REDCap, which will generate a n email containing unique links for each survey for 
each participant. Only participant email addresses will be stored as participant identifiers 
to track survey responses for data collection.  
 
POST -TEST SESSION (~3 hours):  
Fast and Refrain from Exercise  
Participants will be asked to refrain from exercise for at least [ADDRESS_1114571] rating 
scales . These are the same beverages and flavors used throughout the study.  
 
MRI Scan  
The MRI scan will occur at the Human Neuroimaging Laboratory at FBRI. MRI safety 
will be reviewed with the participant by [CONTACT_807203] -approved scanner operator prior to 
entering the scanner room containing the magnet. Participants and experimenters will 
remove  metal from their bodies and clothing (e.g., jewelry, cell phones, coins, etc.). 
Participants will also complete an MRI safety form to ensure they qualify to have an MRI 
performed (included in supporting documents). Prior to entering the scanner room with 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114572] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 19 of 51 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_1114573] to the magnet's pull is detected (e.g., zippers or 
grommets on clothing cannot be pulled off by [CONTACT_40427]). Inside the scanner room, 
participants will lie on a table that slides into the bore of the scanner. Using a head coil, 
functional images will be acquired using an EPI [INVESTIGATOR_509631]. Participants will wear 
disposable earplugs and other ear protection to minimize the amount of  noise heard 
during the scan (magnetic field gradient changes during the scan can be loud). 
Participants are able to communicate with the experimenter via either a speaker and 
microphone system  (between scanning segments) or with an emergency squeeze ball 
(during scan acquisition) . Participants will be instructed to talk with experimenters 
between scanning segments via microphone -and-speaker system and to use the squeeze 
ball during scan acquisition for emergencies (e.g., they begin to feel claustrophobic 
during the scan). The experimenters will check in with participants periodically between 
scanning segments to ensure participant comfort.  
 
Scanner Taste Tasks  
Participants  will taste small amounts of liquid stimuli that will be  presented according to 
a standard paradigm we have successfully used before in taste  MRI . In brief, hydraulic 
pumps will be used to pump solutions through plastic beverage  tubing attached to a 
mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_807186]. The mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_807187] . The mouthpi[INVESTIGATOR_807188], just  inside the  
participant's  mouth. This will not interfere with breathing through the mouth , and 
participants  will always be able to breathe through their noses. The solutions will be 
dispensed through one tube at a time. The overall flow rate of solution into the mouth 
will be very slow ( ~0.5ml of a liquid over ~3-5 seconds).   
 
Ad Libitum Intake  
Participants will be given access to bottles containing the conditioning beverages used 
during their study sessions for 30 minutes. They will be allowed to drink as much or as 
little of the beverages as they would like. Amounts of beverages consumed  will be 
recorded as data.  
 
Forced Choice  
Participants will be offered the conditioning beverages used during their study and asked 
to choose one to take home with them. This is a measure of "forced choice " and will be 
recorded as data.  
 
 
8.3 Describe:  
● Procedures or safeguards intended  to reduce the probability and 
magnitude of risks . (For example: Reducing the risk of injury in a 
virtual reality study either by [CONTACT_40200] -free space for walking. ) 
● Be sure to describe a ll drugs and devices used in the research , when 
they will be administered or used,  and their purpose.   
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114574] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 20 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  ● Methods used to collect data about subjects. Please upload all data 
collection forms to Protocol Management. Som e common e xamples 
are: 
● Screening questionnaires  
● Survey(s) , including online surveys  
● Demographic questionnaire(s)  
● Intervie w guide(s) , e.g., questions or pool of questions for semi -
structured interviews  
● Focus group guide(s)  
● Other document s used to collect data   
 
 
Procedures or safeguards intended to reduce the probability and magnitude of risks:  
MRI. Every effort will be made to ensure the subject's comfort and to reduce any 
minimal risk. First and foremost, subjects will be thoroughly s creened to make sure that 
MRI contraindications are not present. If, at any time, subjects experience discomfort, 
dizziness, or claustrophobia during the scan, they will have access to an emergency 
squeeze bulb which they can squeeze to get the attention o f the experimenters. 
Experimenters will then check in with the subject, and if requested, subjects will  be 
immediately removed from the MRI machine. Additionally, the staff operating the MRI 
will have completed Advanced MRI/Operator Training which is requi red for those 
persons wishing to conduct research on the Human Neuroimaging Lab (HNL) MRIs. 
Training consists of a safety training, full -day advanced user training, scanning 
observation, and hands -on practice, supervised scanning. Topi[INVESTIGATOR_807189], subject preparation and screening, scanner set -up and operation, 
and troubleshooting.  Each person must also complete at least 4 hours of observation (to 
include 2 different studies) and at least 16 hours of supervised scanning (to i nclude 4 
different studies). Certification is granted upon completion of the training and passing of 
a competency exam.  
 
An MRI Safety Screening Form will Be completed by [CONTACT_807204].  
 
Venous Blood Draw. The potential risks associated with the blood draw procedure 
include hematoma from failure to use proper blood drawing techniques and infection if 
proper infection and control practices are not observe d and used (WHO). These may be 
associated with some discomfort, but present very little danger to subjects’ welfare. To 
reduce this risk, all blood draws will be performed by a trained and skilled medical 
technologist, phlebotomist, or nurse in the appropr iate laboratory setting. In addition, a 
maximum of three attempts will be made to obtain blood during each individual blood 
draw. Rarely, a blood clot will form or infection, inflammation, or bleeding can occur at 
the site. If inflammation at the site does  occur, we will apply a warm compress to the site 
and elevate the arm to reduce it.  
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114575] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 21 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  Fingerstick Blood Draw. The potential risks associated with performing a fingerstick 
blood draw are minimal. The likely risks involve pain and bleeding in the fingertip a t the 
collection site. Rarely, an infection may occur at the puncture site. To minimize these 
risks, participants and study staff will be trained on the proper technique for performing a 
capi[INVESTIGATOR_807190].  
 
Catheter Blood Draw: Some pain or discomfort may be experienced when the catheter is 
inserted in the vein, but this should persist for only a short time. During the blood draws, 
there may be pain and/or bruising at the site where the IV cath eter is inserted. In about 1 
in 10 or 10% of the cases, a small amount of bleeding under the skin will cause bruising. 
The risk of a blood clot forming in the vein is about 1 in 200, while the risk of infection 
or significant blood loss is 1 in 1000. There  is a small risk of the vein becoming inflamed 
and/or painful in the hours or days after the needle is removed. To reduce this risk, all 
catheter placements and blood draws will be performed by a trained and skilled medical 
technologist, phlebotomist, or n urse. In addition, a maximum of three attempts will be 
made to insert the IV catheter at different sites. If the participant feels faint during or after 
a blood draw, research personnel will immediately have the participant lie back on the 
bed inside the m etabolic chamber.  
 
Metabolic Chamber Indirect Calorimetry:  There are no known risks associated with the 
method of indirect calorimetry. However, some people may feel uncomfortable or 
anxious while inside the metabolic chamber.  Participants  will be able to breathe 
normally during the entirety of the testing proce dure. They will also be able to see and 
communicate with the experimenter and will be able to tell the experimenter if they 
would like to terminate the measurement.  
 
 
 
8.[ADDRESS_1114576] during the study and how you will  obtain  them ? 
Please i nclude descriptions of electronic data collection, database 
matching, and app-based data collection : 
 
Ripple (see section 9.4 for Ripple description) will be used to collect screening 
information. Information about the beverages participants will be consuming at home as 
well as dietary, physical activity, and behavior information will be collected through 
REDCap. MRI safety information will be collected  via paper form ( included in 
supporting documents ). Perceptual ratings will be collected using a laptop or tablet and 
custom scripts written in R or Python (PsychoPy) . Blood glucose will be measured using 
a Hemocue point -of-care system, and insulin will be  measured using the Immunolite 
1000 Immunoassay System or ELISA. Other blood metabolites will be measured from 
stored samples using ELISAs or other appropriate wet lab equipment and techniques. 
Brain images will be acquired during fMRI scans. Metabolic mea surements will be 
collected using a metabolic chamber from MEI Research, Ltd.  All data collected during 
the study will be stored on FBRI's instance of RED cap and/or FBRI's secured server.  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114577] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 22 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019   
 
 
8.5 Who will transcribe or code audio and/or video recordings? : 
 
There will be no audio or video recordings.  
 
8.6 Include a description of any deception to be used in the study.  Include 
justification for the use of deception ( why the deception is necessary ), 
describe the debriefing process, and describe  how the study meets all the 
following criteria  for  alteration of consent  (deception is considered an 
alteration of informed consent) : 
• The research involves no more th an minimal risk to the subjects  
• The alter ation will not adversely affect the rights  and welfare of the 
subjects  
• The research could not practicably be car ried out without the 
alteration /deception  
• (Optional  but encouraged in most cases ) Subjects will be provided with 
additional pertinent informatio n after participation (i.e., debriefing f or 
studies involving deception)   
 
 
There will be no deception.  
 
8.7 If the study involves  long-term follow -up (once all research related 
procedures are complete), describe what data will be collected during the 
follow up period and when it will occur :  
 
There are no long -term follow -ups. 
 
9.0 Data and Specimen Long Term Storage and Use  
9.1 If you will store data or specimens for future use, describe where you will 
store the data or specimens, how long they will be stored, and how and by 
[CONTACT_40207] : 
 
Indirect calorimetry data will be stored on a secure netwo rk drive provided 
by [CONTACT_509652]. Behavioral (e.g., last time food eaten before measurement, last 
bout of exercise before measurement, etc.), anthropometric, responses to 
questionnaires, and pertinent metabolic  variables will be stored in FBRI's 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114578] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 23 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  instance of REDCap.  Data will be stored indefinitely for future analysis 
and use in developi[INVESTIGATOR_807191]. Only individuals with FBRI access 
to secure network drives and FBRI's instance of REDCap will have access 
to stored data. Plasma and/or serum a liquot samples will be frozen and 
stored for future analysis of insulin  and other metabolites . Additional 
aliquots of plasma and/or serum will be stored indefinitely after the 
completion of data analysis to allow for replicate testing to ensure data 
qualit y and for additional analyses as the field moves forward . 
 
9.[ADDRESS_1114579] the data to be stored or associated with each 
specimen : 
 
Serum and plasma blood samples for storage will be labeled with the 
participant's [ADDRESS_1114580] a release, approvals 
required for release, who can obtain data or speci mens, and what data 
will be provided with specimens : 
 
No specimens will be released.  
 
9.[ADDRESS_1114581] access to it, and 
when it will be destroyed : 
 
Data will be coded using a 4 -digit sequentially -generated ID number 
unique to each participant. The ke y linking the participant name [CONTACT_807212] . 
Ripple is a secure web application designed for storing and managing 
personal identifiable information of research participants. Ripple was 
initially dev eloped at the University of Michigan to provide a user -
friendly, web -based secure interface where research teams can centralize 
the storage and management of research participants’ personal 
information . Information stored in Ripple is kept in fully encrypt ed format 
inside dedicated databases that are segregated from other Ripple accounts 
and thus only authorized study staff will have access to the study data. 
Likewise, Ripple infrastructure complies with the privacy and security 
guidelines of the Health Ins urance Portability and Accountability Act 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114582] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 24 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  (HIPAA), including [ADDRESS_1114583] on this secure 
platform.  
All study data will be encrypted and kept on either a server or FBRI's 
instance of REDCap, both managed by [CONTACT_509652]'s Information Technology 
(IT). Only authorized research team members, who have authorized FBRI 
IT-assigned credentials, will be able to access the network drive server and 
REDCap.   
Any paper documents, such as signed consent forms and MRI safety 
forms, will be stored in a locking fili ng cabinet accessible only by 
[CONTACT_807205].  
Per Virginia Tech policy in order to compensate participants , social 
security number (or Taxpayer ID) and mailing a ddress will be collected 
via a W -[ADDRESS_1114584] the identifiers you will obtain  (whether directly from 
participants or from another source) , including but not limited to:  
 
☒ Name  
☒ Geographical subdivisions smaller than a state, including street address, 
city, county, precinct, zip code, and equivalent geocodes (note,  the initial 
three digits of a zip code  are not considered identifiable)  
☒ Elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an individual, 
including birth date, admission date, discharge date, date of death, and 
single year of age  over 89 and all elements of dates (including year) 
indicative of such age  (note,  such a ges and elements may be aggregated 
into a single category of age 90 +) 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114585] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 25 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  ☒ Phone numbers  
☐ Fax numbers  
☒ Electronic mail addresses (e -mail)  
☒ Social Security numbers  
☐ Medical record numbers  
☐ Health plan beneficiary numbers  
☐ Account numbers  
☐ Certificate/license numbers  
☐ Vehicle identifiers and serial numbers, including license plate numbers  
☐ Device identifiers and serial numbers  
☐ Web Universal Resource Locators (URLs)  
☐ Internet protocol (IP) address numbers  
☐ Biometric identifiers, including finger and voice prints (audio recording)  
☐ Full face photographic images and any comparable images  (including 
video recording)  
☐ Student record number or identification  number   
☐ User name [CONTACT_40233]  
☐ Any other unique identifying number, characteristic, or code (note this 
does not mean the unique code assigned by [CONTACT_40209]) : Click here to explain.    
 
10.0 Sharing of Results with Subjects  
10.1 Describe whether you will share results (study results or individual subject 
results, such as results of investigational diagnostic tests, genetic tests, or 
incidental findings) with subjects or others (e.g., the subject’s primary care 
physician). If so, describe how  you will share  the results and include this 
information as part of the consent document. Upload materials you will use 
to explain the results  to subjects : 
 
Participants will be give n the option to receive  their clinical lab results  
collected during the study, including fasting blood glucose value, 
hemoglobin A1C value, resting metabolic rate, BMI, and wai st-to-hip ratio. 
Along with these individual results, participants will receive general health 
information about clinical 'norms' and general interpretation of values;  
research personnel will not provide specific health interpretation of 
individual results. Participants will be directed to contact [CONTACT_807206].  See the supporting documents for 
participant individual result documents and materials. Participants will also 
be given the option to receive a pic ture of their brain, taken during the MRI 
scan.  If there are incidental findings potentially consistent with an 
undiagnosed condition (e.g., hemoglobin A1C measured >6.5%), 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114586] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 26 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  participants will be encouraged to follow -up with their primary care 
physician for clinical evaluation and testing.  
 
11.0 Study Timelines  
11.1 Describe:  
● The duration of an individual subject’s participation in the study  (for 
example, 1 hour, 2 -4 weeks, 3 -5 years) . 
● The amount of time expected to enroll all study subjects ( weeks, 
months, years, etc .) 
● The amount of time expected  for the investigators to complete this 
study  including  primary data analyses . 
 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]:  ~2 hours per session (participants can choose how many sessions 
they would like to complete)  
Full Study:  ~19 hours total (over a ~5 -week period)  
 Consent Session:  ~2.5 hours  
 In-Person Conditioning Sessions: ~4 hours each, 12 hours total  
 At-Home Conditioning Sessions: ~15 minutes each, 45 minutes total  
 Take -Home Beverage Consumption: ~[ADDRESS_1114587] Session: ~[ADDRESS_1114588] 6 
years.  
 
12.0 Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
12.1 Describe how  you will screen  individuals for eligibility.  When will 
screening occur and what procedures will you use ? Upload any screening 
scripts or surveys to Protocol Management :  
 
Screening surveys will be delivered through Ripple  (see information about 
Ripple in section 9.4)  via web address links and QR codes posted on flyers 
and social media . Individuals interested in a study will complete 2 
surveys; one serves as a first -round general survey screening for exclusion 
criteria pert inent to all our lab's studies, and the second contains questions 
to screen eligibility for this study specifically. If individuals  choose to 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114589] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 27 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  complete the study -specific screening form and are eligible for this study, 
they will be contact[CONTACT_23097] a c onsent session . Individuals may also 
be contact[CONTACT_807207] -up questions to ensure eligibility. If 
follow -up questions involve potentially sensitive information, a phone call 
will be used rather than an email. Once enrolled in the study, partic ipants 
will also complete an MRI safety screening form to ensure they are 
eligible to complete the MRI.  
 
12.2 Describe the eligibility criteria that define who will be included and who 
will be  excluded from enrollment for each p rocedure  of your  study. 
Include any ge ographic criteria (e.g., Virginia Tech undergraduate 
students, a national sample of adults with engineering degrees, minors 
aged 8 -12 in the New River Valley, university faculty in Virginia and 
Paris, [LOCATION_009]) : 
Inclusion Criteria:  
1. Age 18 -45 years  
2. BMI between 18.5 -27 kg/m2  
3. Not pregnant or planning to become pregnant during study participation  
4. Residing in the Roanoke area and/or willing/able to attend sessions at FBRI  
5. Weigh at least 110 lbs  
 
Exclus ion Criteria:  
1. Current inhaled nicotine use  
2. History of alcohol dependence.  
3. Current or past diagnosis of cardiometabolic disease or problems, including 
diabetes, endocrine, heart, or thyroid problems, that may influence study 
outcomes  
4. Hemoglobin A1C >5.7%  
5. Taking medications known to influence study measures (including ADHD, 
allergy, antidepressant, antipsychotic, anxiolytic, , blood pressure, blood glucose, 
cholesterol, thyroid, sleep, or weight loss medications)  
6. Active medical or neurologi c disorder , including cardiometabolic conditions or 
gastrointestional conditions that may influence study outcomes  
7. Recent change in body weight (gain or loss of > [ADDRESS_1114590] 3 months)  
8. Current shift work (typi[INVESTIGATOR_509639]/activity o vernight)  
9. Previous weight loss surgery  
10. Adherence to a special diet within the past 3 months (e.g., low -carb or 
ketogenic diet, exclusion of food groups/specific macronutrients, intermittent 
fasting, etc.)  
11. Allergy to any food or ingredient inclu ded in the study diets, meals, or 
beverages  
12. Currently pregnant or planning to become pregnant during study participation  
13. Claustrophobia  
14. Contraindications for MRI, including pacemaker, aneurysm clips, 
neurostimulators, cochlear or other implants , metal in eyes, regular work with 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114591] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 28 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  steel, etc. (Note: This is an fMRI -specific exclusion criterion. Participants may be 
allowed to participate in all other study sessions and measures that do not involve 
fMRI.)  
16. Use of substances (or combinations of su bstances) in doses and frequencies 
that could influence neural outcomes of study.  
 
 
12.3 Indicate specifically whether you will include or exclude each of the 
following special populations: (You may not include members of these 
populations as subjects in your research unless you indicate them in the 
description of your subject population.)  
● Minors , as defined by [CONTACT_40211] 
(infants, children, teenagers)  
● Pregnant women  (can be included in minimal risk studies by 
[CONTACT_40212] 13.1) 
● Prisoners  (including all incarcerated individuals)  
● Adults not capable to consent on their own behalf  
 
 
We will exclude minors, prisoners, pregnant women and adults not able to consent on 
their own behalf.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13.[ADDRESS_1114592] their rights and welfare.  Consider the applicable items listed 
below:  
● If the research involves Virgini a Tech students, indicate whether 
these are students of any of the investigator s. If so, describe whether 
the activities will take place during  class time as part of the 
curriculum and the steps  you will  take to reduce the possibility that 
student s feel obliged  to participate in order to improve their course 
grade. The HRPP can provide further guidance as needed.  Describe 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114593] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 29 of 51 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_1114594] access to student records (e.g., SAT, GPA, 
GRE scores).  
● If the r esearch involves employees of Virginia Tech or the research 
sponsor, describe steps you will take to ensure that the employees 
are freely participating and describe how their data will be 
protected from inspection by [CONTACT_40213].  
● If the research inv olves Virginia Tech NCAA athletes, you must 
obtain approval from the athletic department.  
● For research involving Montgomery County Public Schools, you 
must obtain county approval (after obtaining contingent Virginia 
Tech approval). Other locales have different requirements ; please 
check on these and describe here.  Approval is typi[INVESTIGATOR_40170], principal, and classroom teacher (in that order). 
Approval by [CONTACT_40214]. School approval, in 
the form of a let ter or a memorandum should be uploaded as a 
supporting document . 
● If the research involves pregnant women, review “CHECKLIST: 
Pregnant Women (HRP -412)” to ensure that you have provided 
sufficient information  in this protocol . 
● If the research involves prisoners, review “CHECKLIST: Prisoners 
(HRP -415)” to ensure that you have provided sufficient information 
in this protocol.  
● If the research involves persons who have not attained the legal age 
for consent to treatments or proced ures involved in the research 
(minors ), review the “CHECKLIST: Minors  (HRP -416)” to ensure 
that you have provided sufficient information in this protocol.  
● If the research involves cognitively impaired adults, review 
“CHECKLIST: Cognitively Impaired Adults (H RP-417)” to ensure 
that you have provided sufficient information in this protocol.  
 
 
All subjects will be informed of the purpose of the study, the potential value of the study 
to society, the lack of value to the subject personally, and all potential risks to the subject.  
Study staff will explain to the participants that they are  under no obligation whatsoever to 
participate, and that if they  wish to discontinue their involvement at any time during the 
study, they are  free to do so without pe nalty. Employees will be told that their 
employment status es and evaluation s will in no way be affected by [CONTACT_807208]. Students will be advised that their decision s to 
participate will not affect their stu dent status es, grades, coursework, or extra -curricular 
activities . 
 
 
 
14.[ADDRESS_1114595] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 30 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  14.1 Indicate the total number of subjects to be enrolled  and how this number 
was determined (e.g., sample size calculation [show], number of available 
subjects in a finite pool, number of tests funding award would allow) :  
 
For the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], we plan to consent 25 participants with the intent of 
having 20 complete the pi[INVESTIGATOR_807192].  
For the full study, we  plan to consent approximately 200 participants with 
the intent of having 70 participants complete Aim 1 and 70 pa rticipants 
complete Aim 2. These numbers were determined using power 
calculations based on other studies with similar designs conducted by [CONTACT_807209]. We anticipate ~30% rate of either drop-out or exclusion after 
enrollment (e.g., unable to determine flavors equally liked and unfamiliar 
for the conditioning paradigm, hemoglobin A1C outside of the inclusion 
range, scheduling challenges, etc.).  
 
14.2 If this is a multi -site study, indicate the number of subjects to be enrolled 
at this site and the total to be enro lled from all sites : 
 
Single site  
 
14.[ADDRESS_1114596] to 
screen  for enrollment , and the number of subjects you will need to 
complete the research procedures : 
 
For the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], we anticipate screening via the online screening 
process approximately [ADDRESS_1114597] 70 participants complete A im 1 and 70 participants 
complete Aim 2. We anticipate that a majority of these participants will 
complete only 1 aim; however, it is possible and allowable for participants 
to complete both aims if they qualify for both (i.e., at least 6 flavors are 
rated  as equally liked and equally unfamiliar in the Consent Session).   
 
14.4 If the study has more than one procedure, indicate the total number of 
subjects to undergo  each procedure separately : 
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114598] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 31 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116] (single session  for each sweet mixture ): 20 participants  
Full-Study  
Consent Session  (flavor tasting/rating, anthropometrics, fingerstick sample 
for HbA1C) : 200 participants  
In-Person Conditioning Session (IV catheter blood draws, metabolic 
chamber indirect calorimetry): Aim 1: 70 participants; Aim 2: 70 
participants  
At-Home Conditioning Session (drink beverages on Zoom): Aim 1: 70 
participants; Aim 2: 70 participants  
Take -Hom e Beverage Consumption (drink beverages and complete 
surveys) : Aim 1: 70 participants; Aim 2: [ADDRESS_1114599] (flavor tasting/rating, MRI scan) : Aim 1: 70 participants; Aim 2: 
70 participants  
 
15.0 Recruitment Methods  
15.1 Describe when, where, and how you will recruit potential subjects : 
 
Approved study recruitment materials will be distributed in the follow ways. Flyers will 
be posted on bulletin boards and approved posting sites throughout Roanoke, Blacksburg, 
and surrounding areas. Digital advertisements will be displayed on social media , VT 
News, and in listserves with permission.  
 
All advertisements will include a link to the lab website where there will be approved 
language describing the research study. Interested participants will fill out a general 
screening survey. All screening s urveys will be delivered through Ripple. This screening 
survey will be used to determine study eligibility. Once the general screening survey has 
been completed, participants who may be eligible for this study will be contact[CONTACT_509649] (see attachment 'S creening email'). If participants choose to complete the study -
specific screening form and are eligible for this study, they will be contact[CONTACT_23097] 
a consent session.  
 
Opt-In Database  
Individuals who complete the screening survey in response to othe r studies in the lab will 
have the opportunity to opt -in to being notified of future studies our lab is conducting. 
One question on the screening survey asks if individuals would like to be contact[CONTACT_509654]. Indi viduals who have opted -in to being 
notified of future studies receive an email containing information about the study and an 
email address for contact[CONTACT_807210]. The email will be sent through 
Ripple, the secure web application we are usin g for storage and management of 
personally identifying information of research participants. Individuals who are interested 
in scheduling a consent session will undergo a brief screening to ensure they have had no 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114600] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 32 of 51 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_1114601] 
completed the survey that would preclude them from participating.  
 
Carilion Clinic Recruitment  
Flyers will be posted throughout Carilion Clinic waiting rooms and offices. Physicians 
and other providers will also be notified of this study and asked to encourage 
individuals who may qualify to complete the screening survey . 
 
15.2 Describe the source of subjects  (for example, clinic patients with specific 
conditions, students in the library, community members at a g athering, or 
members of a local gym) : 
 
Participants will be recruited from the general public.  
 
15.3 Describe the methods that you will use to identify potential subjects : 
 
Responses on the online screening form will be used to identify potential subjects.  
 
15.4 Describe materials that you will be use to recruit subjects. Attach copi[INVESTIGATOR_314739] n umber on each document .  
● For flyers, attach the final copy of printed flyers.  
● For Virginia Tech News, Facebook postings and ads, newspaper ads, 
websites, MTurk/SONA/online survey systems , etc., attach the final 
wording and graphics to be used.  
● For e mail recruitments, please include the subject line.  
● For advertisements meant for  audio  broadcast, please  submit the 
wording of the advertisement prior to tapi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (to avoid having to re-
record with approved  language) and submit the final recorded version 
for IRB review before use.   
● Describe any compensation to subjects. Separate compensation in to 
appropriate categories, such as: reimbursement for expenses, time and 
effort, and additional incentives for study participation.  For each 
category, specify the amount (including any pro -rated amount), schedule, 
and method of payment.  
 
See above in 15.[ADDRESS_1114602] of recruitment materials and methods that will be used.  
 
Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116] (~ 2 hours) - $[ADDRESS_1114603] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 33 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  Consent and Training Session ( ~2.5 hrs) - $40 
Conditioning Sessions  (+Take -Home Beverages)  (~4.5 hours each week, 3 weeks total ) - 
$90 each week ; up to $ [ADDRESS_1114604] Session ( ~3 hours) - $60 
Full Study Completion Bonus - $50 
 
Total for each Aim - $420 
Total for both Aims - $800 
The remuneration amounts described for sessions in the Full Study above pertain to both 
Aim 1 and Aim 2. If a participant completes both Aims, they will still only complete 1 
Consent Session. In other  words, if a participant completes all of Aim 1 and all of Aim 2, 
they will complete only 1 Consent Session and be paid $ 800.  
 
Participants will be paid via ClinCard, a prepaid Mastercard that we will provide them at 
the end of the first session. Particip ants will be compensated at the end of each session 
week  using the ClinCard system.  
 
 
 
 
16.0 Withdrawal of Subjects  
16.1 Describe circumstances under which  you anticipate  subjects could be 
withdrawn from the research without their consent : 
 
As is standard with MRI research, if subjects experience unusual sensations, they will be 
withdrawn. In some cases, due to the magnetic field (as described in risks below) subjects 
may experience peripheral nerve stimulation, e.g. tingling or twitching. Th ey will be 
withdrawn from the study if this occurs.  
 
Other potential reasons for withdrawal without participant consent include information on 
the screening questionnaire that would make participating unsafe for the participant, 
failure to follow the stud y protocol as instructed (e.g., not fasting for measurements, 
failure to consume beverages at home at the appropriate times, consuming foods or 
beverages outside of those provided by [CONTACT_509655], etc).  
 
 
16.2 If applicable, describe any procedures for orderly termination  (e.g., 
discontinuation of a study drug or debriefing after a behavioral 
intervention) : 
 
There are no study drugs or behavioral interventions.  
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114605] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 34 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  16.3 Describe procedures that you will follow  when subjects withdraw from the 
research, including partial withdrawal from procedures with continued 
data collection (e.g., participant declines to continue with regular blood 
draws,  but continues with periodic behavioral questionnaires) : 
 
The followin g steps will be taken in the event a participant withdraws from the study and 
informs us they want their information destroyed:  
1. The participant database will be updated that the participant withdrew (for all 
withdrawals).  
2. Participant will be compensated for their time and sessions completed up to time of 
withdrawal.  
3. If the participant requests, a ll participant identifying information and data collected up 
to time of withdrawal will be removed from study database( s).  
4. If the participant requests, a ll stored blood samples collected on the participant will be 
removed from the storage freezer and discarded.  
5. If the participant requests, a ll paperwork associated with the participant will be 
shredded.  
 
 
17.[ADDRESS_1114606] the reasonably foreseeable risks, discomforts, hazards, or 
inconveniences to the subjects related the subjects’ participation in the 
research. Include for the IRB’s consideration a description of the 
probability, magnitude, duratio n, and reversibility of the risks. Consider 
physical, psychological, social, legal, privacy, and economic risks. Do not 
indicate  “No risk” or “N /A.” Instead, for studies with very low risk (e.g., 
anonymous online questionnaire on a mundane topic) indicate  “The 
investigators are not aware of any risks from participation in this study.” 
or “No more than risks than are found in everyday life.”  The example 
consent form presents a tabular method for risk information , which you 
can also use here . Common risk types include:  
● Physical (e.g., potential for pain, discomfort, infection)  
● Psychological (e.g., potential for stress, discomfort, and/or 
embarrassment)  
● Social (e.g., potential for discrimination or stigmatization and 
disruption of personal and family relationships)  
● Legal (e.g., potential for disclosure of illegal activity, negligence)  
● Privacy (e.g., potential for personal information being accessed, used, 
or disclosed without the subjects’ knowledge or consent, breach of 
confidentiality/security)  
● Econo mic (e.g., potential for individuals to lose access to economic 
services, employment, insurability)  
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114607] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 35 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  MRI data collection: The risks associated with collecting fMRI are the same as regular 
MRI. Movement or heating of metallic implants is a potential risk, therefore those with 
metallic pacemakers, fragments, or implants will be excluded from the study durin g 
screening. Some participants may experience claustrophobia in the scanner; any 
participant experiencing claustrophobia will be removed from the scanner immediately. 
fMRI scanners also produce loud noises while running which could be harmful to the 
subjec t. Participants will be required to wear earplugs and other ear protection  during 
scans to minimize the noise generated by [CONTACT_218862].  
The Siemens 3 T scanner has been approved by [CONTACT_1622]. However, there may be 
additional risks associated with scanning at 3.0 T compared to the conventional clinical 
scanners in the 1.5 -2.0 T range. These include:  
1. Effect of the static field. There is no conclusive evidence for irreversible or hazardous 
bioeffects to acute, short -term exposures of humans up to 2.0 T (She llock and Kanal, 
1996). Studies have indicated some side -effects at 4.0 T, namely unusual sensations 
including nausea, vertigo, and metallic taste (Schenck, 1991). However, there is no 
evidence that this is either irreversible or harmful. If subjects exper ience unusual 
sensations, they will be withdrawn.  
 
2. Effect of the gradient field. MRI operates by [CONTACT_28423][INVESTIGATOR_42612], 
called gradients. This will induce small electrical currents in any conductor, and thus 
could theoretically induce  mild peripheral nerve stimulation. However, this is not 
substantially different at higher magnetic fields since the gradients are separate from the 
main magnet. There is no evidence that the effect of the gradients is any different at [ADDRESS_1114608]'s brain. The 
limits of RF energy that can be safely given to humans has been clearly defined by [CONTACT_1556]: a). The exposure to RF energy below the level of concern is an SAR of 0.4 W/kg or 
less averaged over the body, and 8.0 W/kg or l ess spatial peak in any 1 g of tissue, and 
3.2 W/kg or less average over the head; or b). The exposure to RF energy that is 
sufficient to produce a core temperature increase of 1 degree C and localized heating to 
no greater extent than 38 degrees C in the head, 39 degrees C in the trunk, and 40 degrees 
C in the extremities, except for patients with impaired systemic blood flow and/or 
perspi[INVESTIGATOR_1516]. We will adhere to the recommendations for the head, which is also 
monitored by a Siemens built -in monitor.  
 
4. Acoustic Noise Levels. Rapid changes in the currents in the gradient coils of the MRI 
scanner produce significant levels of acoustic noise. The levels of noise range 
approximately between [ADDRESS_1114609] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 36 of 51 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_1114610] may communicate with the experimenter at any time: 1) before, in between, 
or after a scan via an intercom device between the scanner and control room, and 2) 
during a scan via a pneumatic squeeze bulb located in the scanner that triggers an alarm 
in the control room. Subjects who report discomfort and wish to discont inue their 
participation will be immediately withdrawn from the scanner. Subjects who are 
withdrawn from the study will be compensated for their participation to that point.  
 
IV Catheter Blood Draws:  
All catheter placements and draws will be performed by a trained and skilled medical 
technologist, phlebotomist, or nurse in the appropriate laboratory setting with proper 
antiseptic technique. However, there are still some risks of this procedure. Some pain or 
discomfort may be experienced when t he catheter is inserted in the vein, but this should 
persist for only a short time. During the blood draws, there may be pain and/or bruising 
at the site where the IV catheter is inserted. In rare cases infection or blood clot may 
occur at the IV catheter site. These are the same risks associated with IV catheter 
placement in any medical setting.  Inclusion criteria for this study include non -pregnant 
adults who weigh at least 110 lbs. Blood collection during draws will total ~189 ml 
over a 3 -week period (~6 3 ml per week), well below the minimal risk cutoff of 550 ml 
in an 8 -week period. In this study, blood collection occurs 1 time per week.  Thus, this 
study fits the defined criteria for imposing minimal risk.   
Beverage and food stimuli: All components of th e beverage and food stimuli are readily 
available outside the laboratory (grocery stores, etc.) and are likely already consumed by 
[CONTACT_3038]. There are no known risks associated with these stimuli.  
 
Indirect Calorimetry. There are no known risks ass ociated with the noninvasive indirect 
calorimetry methods. These non -invasive procedures are simple and painless, and normal 
clothes can be worn during the procedures. For the metabolic chamber procedure, 
subjects will be lying back on a bed in a small roo m with plexiglass windows. The 
subjects will then be asked to relax and breathe normally during the entirety of the 
testing. During the testing, the study staff will be able to see and hear participants so 
should they, at any time during the testing, becom e uncomfortable in the chamber, they 
may choose to stop the procedure.  
 
Eating Behavior Questionnaires  
There is a small potential psychological risk associated with some questions that refer to 
frequency of induced vomiting, distress associated with overe ating. The questionnaires 
included in this study are frequently used and validated questionnaires in nutrition 
research, including research in eating disorders and disordered eating. They are important 
in assessing several unique aspects of eating behavior  that could influence our study 
outcomes.  
 
Loss of Confidentiality  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114611] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 37 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  There is a small risk of loss of confidentiality of data during the study.  Please see sections 
9.0, 17.2, and 19.0 for more details about these risks and also steps taken to mitigate risk.   
 
 
17.2  Indicate the measures you will use to minimize risks and monitor subjects 
for safety. (e.g., asking a subject at regular intervals to rate how they are 
feeling from 1 to 10, or to slowly crouch in order to check their balance.)  
 
Indirect calorimetry: Al l indirect calorimetry measurements will be performed by [CONTACT_31809]. Subjects who become uncomfortable over the course of the measurement can 
withdraw at any time.  
 
MRI: In order to minimize noise from the MRI scanner that can be potentially harmfu l 
for the subject, all subjects will be required to wear ear protection while in the scanner. 
The subject may communicate with the experimenter at any time: 1) before, in between, 
or after a scan via an intercom device between the scanner and control room,  and 2) 
during a scan via a pneumatic squeeze bulb located in the scanner that triggers an alarm 
in the control room. Subjects who report discomfort and wish to discontinue their 
participation will be immediately withdrawn from the scanner. Subjects who ar e 
withdrawn from the study will be compensated for their participation to that point.  
 
Advanced MR/Operator Training:  Required for those persons wishing to conduct 
research on the HNL MRIs. Training will consist of presentations, observation, and 
hands -on practice. Topi[INVESTIGATOR_509643], subject 
screening and preparation, scanner set -up and operation, and troubleshooting.  Each 
person must also complete at least 4 hours of observation (to include 2 different studies) 
and at le ast 16 hours of supervised scanning (to include 4 different studies). Certification 
will be granted upon completion of the training and passing of a competency exam. 
Certified operators will conduct each scanning session.  
IV Catheter Blood Draws: To reduc e the risks associated with inserting an IV catheter 
and drawing blood from the catheter, only skilled medical technologists, nurses and/or 
other medical professionals will insert the IV catheters and draw the blood samples. In 
addition, a maximum of three  attempts will be made to insert the catheter in the 
participants' arm during a given session.  
Fingerstick Blood Sample  
The risks associated with performing a fingerstick to collect a capi[INVESTIGATOR_509636]. The likely risks involve pain and bleeding in the fingertip at the collection site. 
Rarely, an infection may occur at the puncture site. To minimize these r isks, research 
team members will be trained on the proper technique for obtaining a capi[INVESTIGATOR_509637].  
 
 
Eating Behavior Questionnaires  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114612] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 38 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  There is a small potential psychological risk associated with s ome questions that refer to 
frequency of induced vomiting, distress associated with overeating. The questionnaires 
included in this study are frequently used and validated questionnaire s in nutrition 
research, including research on eating disorders and disordered eating . They are  
important in assessing several unique aspects of eating behavior  that could influence our 
study outcomes . To mitigate risk, participants will be not be required to answer these 
questions.  
 
 
Loss of Confidentiality  
There is a small risk of loss of confidentiality of data during the study. However, study 
personnel will make every effort to minimize this risk . Please see sections 9.0 and 19.0 
for more detailed inform ation about steps taken to mitigate risk. Briefly:  
All study data will be collected and analyzed by [CONTACT_59856].  
Each participant will be assigned a coded designation and all study data to be used 
in the analysis will be de -identified using  this coded designation. The de -
identified data will not contain any biographical data that can be linked to study 
participants.  
The “key” to the study code will be stored in a separate database which cannot be 
accessed without specific authorization.  
Other screening documents will be stored on site in a locked cabinet that will only 
be accessible to authorized personnel.  
Only personnel who are direct members of the research team will have access to 
personally identifiable information.  
Data acquired duri ng experiments will be collected and stored on a secure server 
managed by [CONTACT_509652].  
 
 
17.[ADDRESS_1114613] risks to the subjects 
that are currently unforeseeable. This will be rare, and usually applicable 
when testing a new drug or device or a new use of an existing drug or 
device : 
 
There are no new devices or drugs used in this study.  
 
17.[ADDRESS_1114614] be or become pregnant : 
 
None of the procedures used in this study have been known to cause risk 
to a fetus or embryo.  
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114615] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 39 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  17.5 If applicable, describe risks to others who are not subjects (e.g., collection 
of sensitive health data that might affect sexual partners if disclosed, 
mandatory reporting of abuse, DNA testing that might affect family 
members or relationships) : 
 
N/A 
 
18.0 Potential Benefits to Subjects  
18.1 Describe the potential benefits that individual subjects might experience 
from participating  in the research. Include the probability, magnitude, and 
duration of the potential benefits , as this will be useful to the IRB’s 
risk:benefit analysis . Do not include benefits to society or others.  Do not 
list monetary or non -monetary compensation  for participation, as this is 
not a benefit  These should be included in section 2 or 3  of this document : 
 
There is no direct benefit from subject participation  in this study.  
 
18.[ADDRESS_1114616] ben efits for 
participants :  
 
There is no anticipated direct benefit to individual participants for 
participation.  
 
19.0 Data Management and Confidentiality  
19.1 Describe procedures that  you will use for quality control  to ensure validity  
of collected data : 
 
All data will be collected and analyzed by [CONTACT_59856]. 
They will be trained via MRI safety training, Human Subjects Populations, 
biohazard safety, and vigorous training in standard laboratory procedures . 
 
19.2 Describe any existing data or biospecimens you will obtain as part of this 
study. Include :  
● Variables or samples to be obtained  
● Source  of the data or specimens  
● Your authorization to access or receive the data or biospecimens  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114617] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 40 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  ● Whether the data or biospecimens are publicly available  
● Whether the  data or specimens  you receive will  contain identifiers  
 
This study collects new data.  
 
19.[ADDRESS_1114618] protection, encryption, physical controls, certificates of 
confidentiality, separation of identifiers and data, etc. : 
 
Each subject will be assigned a coded designation. All study data to be 
used in analysis will be de -identified using this coded designation , which 
will contain no biographical data that can be linked to individuals . 
Personal identifiable information will be stored only in Ripp le, a HIPAA -
compliant database system designed for the purpose of storing and 
managing identifiable participant information (see section 9.4 above for 
full Ripple description). Only personnel who are direct members of the 
research team will have access to personally identifiable information 
stored in Ripple. The link between the coded designation and personal 
information will only exist on this secure platform .  
Coded designations will be used to collect study data on the FBRI instance 
of REDCap, a secure H IPAA -compliant database for data collection. In 
order to collect data via email survey invitation (i.e., health behaviors 
questionnaires and take -home beverage consumption compliance surveys), 
participant email addresses must be stored  in REDCap  in a speci fic Survey 
Distribution Participant List . Once the participant has completed 
participation or withdrawn from the study, their email address will be 
deleted from REDCap, thus completely eliminating any link of identifiable 
information with study data. Email  addresses included on this list are not 
able to be exported or downloaded from REDCap as data; they are only 
held within the Survey Distribution Tools function of REDCap .  
MRI images will be stored on secured FBRI and VT ARC servers , and 
metabolic chamber  measurement data will be stored on secured FBRI 
servers. Behavioral and clinical  data will be collected and recorded using 
FBRI's instance of REDCap  via computer or tablet, which is backed up on 
an FBRI IT -managed secure server.  
All staff are informed  of and trained on  HIPAA Security and Privacy 
rules.  
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114619] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 41 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  19.4 For multi -site studies , describe how data or specimens will be handled 
and secured for each site  (e.g., central or disseminated data storage, data 
coordinating center ): 
 
This is a single site study  
 
19.5 Describe the plan for data disposition following the conclusion of the 
study (e.g., long term maintenance of data, data destruction methods) .  
● What information will be included in the long term storage of data 
or specimens?  
● How long will the data or specimens be stored?  
● Where and how data or specimens will be stored?  
● Who will have access to the data or specimens  during long term 
storage ? 
● Who is responsible for receipt or transmission of the data or 
specimens?  
● How will data or spe cimens be shared or transported?  
● When and how will personal identifiers be destroyed?  
 
 
Data and specimens may be archived indefinitely for future analysis. All data and 
specimens will be de -identified, coded and contain no specific biographical information 
which can be related back to an individual  (see sections 9.2, 9.4, and 19.3 for more 
details) . The 'key' will be stored in a database (i.e., Ripple), which cannot be accessed 
unless specifically authorized. Deidentified data may be  made available publicly upon 
publication or study completion, as required by [CONTACT_807211]. All staff 
are informed of HIPAA Security and Privacy rules.  
 
 
20.[ADDRESS_1114620] subjects’ privacy interests. 
“Privacy interest” refers to a person’s desire to place limits on with whom 
they interact or to whom they provide personal information (e.g., 
collecting the minimal amount of pri vate information required to complete 
the study, protecting the data once it is obtained) :  
 
Only the information required to complete the study, document participation  or 
compensate the participant will be collected. Once obtained, these data will be stored 
securely, accessible only by [CONTACT_4144]. For instance, documents with a 
participant name ( i.e., signed Informed Consent Document, MRI Safety Screening form ) 
will be stored in a separate, locked file cabinet from any files containing participant 
coded identifiers. Keys  will only be accessible to authorized staff requiring access, such 
as trained research coordinators interacting with the participant for the s tudy session.  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114621] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 42 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019   
20.2 Describe steps that you will take  to make subjects feel at ease with the 
research situation in terms of the questions being asked and the 
procedures being performed. “At ease” does not refer to physical 
discomfort, but the sense of intrusiveness a subject might experience in 
response to q uestions, examinations, and procedures (e.g., use of a same 
gender investigator to place sensors on the torso , a private changing area 
if clothing must be changed, sensitivity when discussing  pregnancy test ing 
with subjects , making it clear o n surveys tha t participants  can discontinue 
at any time, not asking questions about private or sensitive issues unless 
necessary for the research ): 
 
Research staff will be trained to check with participants throughout all 
procedures to ensure they are comfortable wit h all proceedings. Before all 
procedures, participants will be reminded they can stop at any time. After 
obtaining written consent for the study, research staff will always ask for 
verbal consent before each procedure . 
 
20.3 Describe how you plan  to access existing sources of information about the 
subjects (e.g., medical records, grades) and how you will protect 
participant privacy through the data security plan : 
 
We will not access existing sources of information.  
 
20.4 Describe any required reporting  that might  occur as a result of your 
research questions, study populations, and data collection methods. 
Examples for Virginia and Virginia Tech include:  
• Any suspi[INVESTIGATOR_40179] (e. g., circumstantial, disclosed) of child abuse (physical, 
emotiona l, sexual) and neglect  
• Sexual discrimination and/or sexual violence that involves a  student  
• Disclosure or signs of intention to harm oneself (i.e., suicidal ideation 
and/or plan)  
• Disclosure or signs of  desire to harm others (i.e. , homicidal ideation 
and/o r plan)  
• Suspected abuse, neglect or exploitation of vulnerable adults (e. g., 
individuals with a disability, elderly persons ) 
 
 
We do not foresee any circumstance where this type of required reporting would come up 
during our study.  
 
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114622] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 43 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019   
21.0 Provisions to Monitor the Data to Ensure the Safety of Subjects  
Safety monitoring  is required  when research involves greater than minimal risk 
and is sometimes appropriate for other studies . 
21.1 Describe:  
● The plan to periodically evaluate the data collected regarding both 
harms and benefits to determine whether subjects remain safe  (e.g.,  
periodic reporting to the IRB , establishing a data moni toring 
committee , reporting data monitoring committee findings to the IRB 
and the sponsor ). 
● What data you will review, including safety data, unexpected  events, 
and data that show the ability to produce the intended results . 
● How the safety information will be collected (e.g., with case report 
forms, at study visits, by [CONTACT_40225] ). 
● The frequency of data collection, including when safety data 
collection starts.  
● Who will review the safety data and with what frequency . 
● The statistical tests for analyzing the safety data to determine 
whether harm is occurring.  
● Any conditions that will trigger an immediate suspension of the 
research (e.g., a serious adverse event).  
 
 
The Principal Investigator (PI) or study staff will be responsible for ensuring 
participants’ safety on a daily basis and for reporting Serious Adverse Events 
and Unanticipated Problems to the Institutional Review Board. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_807193]. 
Safety information will be collected at study visits by [CONTACT_2710]. This 
safety information will be reviewed w eekly by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_74964] a weekly lab 
meeting. A serious adverse event would trigger immediate suspension of the 
research . 
 
 
 
22.0 Compensation for Research  Related Injury  
22.1 If the research involves more than minimal risk to subjects, describe the 
available compensation in the event of research -related injury, if any : 
 
In the event that  a research -related event or injury does occur, participants will be treated 
appropriately according to the nature of the event or injury. Generally, care will be billed 
to the participant, their insurance, or another third party. If participants are no lo nger able 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114623] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 44 of 51 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_1114624] common for 
sponsored research : 
 
This study does not present more than minimal risk to the subjects.  
 
23.0 Economic Burden to Subjects  
23.1 Describe any costs that subjects might be responsible for because of 
participation in the research, including any uncompensated costs for items 
such as transportation, missed work, and childcare : 
 
Participants are compensated for their time. They can plan to participate outside of work 
and ch ild-care needed studies.  
 
24.0 Consent Process  
24.1 Indicate the process by [CONTACT_314759] . Please  upload all consent, parental permission, and assent 
forms, documents, and scripts reference d in this section to Protocol 
Management.  
Describe the following:  
● Where the consent process will take place  (e.g., clinic waiting area, 
classroom, online)  
● The time interval between  sharing the consent information with  the 
prospective subjec t and obtaining consent . For lab, interview, and 
focus group studies, the Virginia Tech IRB prefers that subjects have 
at least 24 hours to review the consent form and study information 
before the appointment  where consent will be obtained . For simple 
online survey studies, you can typi[INVESTIGATOR_272414].  
● If applicable, process es to ensure ongoing consent or assent (e.g., 
for multiple sessions; for research in which a minor will turn 18 
during the study; for longitudinal research with minors who will 
later be asked to provide or affirm their assent ). 
● Please review “SOP: Informed Consent Process for Research (HRP -
090)” for recommended procedure. Describe your process, being 
sure to include:  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114625] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 45 of 51 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_1114626]  the consent proces s 
o The time that will be de voted to the consent discussion  
o Steps that you will take  to minimize the possibility  of coercion 
or undue influence  
o Steps that you will take  to gauge or ensure the subjects’ 
understanding  
 
Consent for the screening questionnaire will be documented by [CONTACT_509656]. Information about the study, instructions for completing the survey, 
next steps for participation, and what will happen with their information if the y are/are 
not (i.e. screen fail) determined to be eligible to participate will be provided in the 
"Introduction" section of the survey (see supporting documents ).   
 
During the pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] (involves a single session) or full study consent session, consent 
for participating in the study will be obtained on -site by [CONTACT_509657] a quiet 
waiting area or private room if the waiting area is in use prior to the study procedures. 
Consent materials will be emailed to the participants for their review at lea st 24hrs in 
advance of their first appointment.  
 
Participants will be given as much time as they request to review the consent documents.  
 
This study involves multiple sessions and a single consent form will be signed that details 
all sessions. Participan ts will provide their consent for all sessions at the first session, but 
will be informed they may withdraw from the study at any time. Verbal consent will be 
obtained before each subsequent session.  
 
Staff will devote as much time as requested to the con sent process. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897], review of 
the consent form takes approximately [ADDRESS_1114627] s 
● Indicate what language(s) other than English are understood by 
[CONTACT_40228].  
● If non-English speakers will be recruited , describe the process  you 
will use  to ensure that the oral and/or written consent information 
provided will be in  a language that they understand.  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114628] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 46 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  ● If you translate consent forms and study materials , please provide a 
certified translation of the form as well as the certification 
document.  
● Indicate the spoken language that study  personnel obtaining consent  
will use . Describe how you will assess fluency  of personnel obtaining 
consent  to ensure that the translation is accurate.  
 
 
We will recruit only English -speaking participants.  
 
 
Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process (consent will not be obtained, 
required information will not be disclosed, or the research involves 
deception)  
● Review the “CHECKLIST: Waiver or Alteration of Consent Process 
(HRP -410)” to ensure you have provided sufficient information for 
the IRB to make these determinations (i.e., that it meets the criteria 
for a waiver or alteration of the consent process).  
 
We do not waive consent.  
 
 
Subjects who are not yet adults (minors: infants, children, teenagers)  
● Describe the criteria that you will use  to determine  legal age for 
consent to treatments or procedures involved in the research under 
the applicable law of the jurisdiction in which the research will be 
conducted (e.g., in Vi rginia, individuals under the age of 18 years).  
o For research conducted in Virginia , review “SOP: Legally 
Authorized Representatives, Minors, and Guardians (HRP -
013)” to determine which individuals in the state meet the 
definition of “minor.”  
o For research conducted outside of the state, please describe 
the legal requirements for the definition of “minor.”   
● Describe the process for obtaining parental permission.  
o Permission from o ne parent  is acceptable for  studies  that 
involve  no greater than m inimal risk OR involve greate r than 
minimal risk but present  the prospect of direct benefit to the 
minor  subject . 
o Permission from both parents is required in all other 
cases (unless one parent is deceased, unknown, 
incompetent, or not reasonably available, or when only 
one parent has legal responsibility for the care and 
custody of the minor ). 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114629] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 47 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  ● Describe whether you will obtain permission from individuals other 
than parents or Legally Authorized Representatives , and if so, who 
will be allowed to provide permission. Describe the process you will 
use to determine these individuals’ authority to consent to the 
minor’s general medical care.  
● Indicate whether you will obtain assent from all, some, or none of 
the minors. If  you will obtain  assent from some minors, indicate 
which minors will be required to assent. Consider  chronological age 
and intellectual capacity  when determining who will be required to 
provide assent (e.g.,  infants are unable to assent.  However,  
teenagers are likely able to read and sign an assent form ). 
● When assent of minors is obtained , describe whether and how you 
will document  it.  Will minors  sign an assent form or give verbal 
assent?  
● Attach parental permission and minor assent forms or scri pts in 
Protocol Management.  
 
 
Only adults 18 years or older will be eligible to participate in the study.  
 
 
Adults  Unable to Consent  
● Describe the process you will use to determine whether an individual 
adult is capable of consent.  
● List the individuals from whom  you will obtain  permission in order 
of priority (e.g., durable power of attorney for health care, court 
appointed guardian for health care decisions, spouse, and non -
minor child).  
o For research conducted in the Virginia , review “SOP: Legally 
Authorized Representatives, Minors , and Guardians (HRP -
013)” to determine  which individuals in the state meet the 
definition of “legally authorized representative.”  
o For research conducted outside  of Virginia , please describe 
the legal requirements for obtaining permission from a legally 
authorized representative in the state where the research will 
occur.  
● Describe the process for assent of the subjects.  
o Indicate whether y ou will require a ssent from  all, some, or 
none of the subjects. If some, indicate which subjects will be 
required to assent and which will not.  
o If you will not obtain assent from some or all subjects, please 
provide justification for not obtaining assent . 
o Describe whether and how you will document assent.  
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114630] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 48 of 51 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_1114631] be able to consent themselves.  
 
25.0 Process to Document Consent in Writing  
25.1 Consult “SOP: Written Documentation of Consent (HRP -091)” for 
recommended procedures , and  describe whether and how consent of the 
subject will be documented in writing : 
 
Written consent will be obtained from the participants during the consent 
session described above. Participants will be emailed the informed consent 
document ahead of time so they may review it. During the consent session, 
two copi[INVESTIGATOR_807194] t will be provided  to the participant to 
sign: one they will be given to keep for their own records and one copy 
will be kept  by [CONTACT_509657] a locked fi ling cabinet.  
 
25.[ADDRESS_1114632] that the 
IRB waive the requirement to obtain written  documentation of consent 
(e.g., consent to participate is indicated by [CONTACT_7326] a button for an online 
questionnaire – after the consent information is presented and before the 
questionnaire begins) : 
 
We do not request to waive written consent.  
 
25.3 If you will document consent in writing, attach a consent document with 
places for signatures. If you will obtain consent, but not document consent 
in writing, please attach the consent script or text. Review “CHECKLIST: 
Waiver of Written Documentation  of Consent (HRP -411)” to ensure that 
you have provided sufficient information. You should use “TEMPLATE 
CONSENT DOCUMENT (HRP -502)”to create the consent document or 
script : 
 
Consents for this project are included in supporting documents.  
 
 
 
26.[ADDRESS_1114633] the research . For example, as 
appropriate:  
● Describe t he PI’s availability to supervise the research.  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114634] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 49 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  ● Justify the feasibility of recruiting the required number of suitable 
subjects within the agreed recruitment period. For example, how 
many potential subjects do you have access to? What percentage of 
those potential subjects do you need to recruit?  
● Describe the time that you will devote to conducting and completing 
the research.  
● Desc ribe your facilities.  
● Describe the availability of medical or psychological resources that 
subjects might need as a result of an anticipated or unanticipated 
consequence of participation in the research.  
● Describe your process to ensure that all persons assisting with the 
research are adequately informed about the protocol, the research 
procedures, and their duties and functions (e.g., training plans, 
detailed study notebooks).  
 
The PI [CONTACT_832] a research -dedicated (100%) Faculty member at Virginia Te ch and the Fralin 
Biomedical Research Institute. The majority of the PI's time is spent supervising and 
analyzing ongoing research.  
 
Fralin Biomedical Research Institute  
 
Dr. DiFeliceantonio’s lab is part of the Fralin Biomedical Research Institute at Vir ginia 
Tech Carilion (FBRI at VTC), located in Roanoke, Virginia. The Research Institute was 
founded approximately eight years ago as part of a commitment to biomedical sciences 
by [CONTACT_42634], and was originally called the Virginia Tech Carilion Research  Institute. 
The name [CONTACT_509662] [ADDRESS_1114635] 
interdisciplinary group working in a variety of areas such as neural computation, 
psychiatric and developmental disorders, genetics, substance abuse and molecular 
virology and biology. The FBRI also provides to the faculty an administrative staff of 
individuals with expertise in grants management, personnel management, supply 
ordering/tracking, web systems management, desktop support, laboratory animal car e, 
IRB support, software development and facilities and operations support and planning as 
well as general administrative support.  
 
The Human Neuroimaging Laboratory serves as the primary human imaging facility of 
the Fralin Biomedical Research Institute (FBRI). The Human Neuroimaging Laboratory 
has two 3T Siemens MRI machines (one a Trio and one a Trio recently upgraded to 
Prisma) within the primary facility, as well as another Trio at an outpost installation near 
the main campus in Blacksburg, VA to take  advantage of the large subject population.  
 
The Fralin Biomedical Research Institute is sited in an approximately 100,000 square feet 
building, divided among:  
 
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114636] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 50 of 51 Revised: March  5, 2019  32 faculty offices  
~ 30,000 sqft of dry -lab space  
~ 46,000 sqft  of wet -lab space  
~ 23,000 sqft of administrative/office space  
30 behavioral testing rooms  
2 observation rooms with video/audio recording  
4 conference rooms with AV / video conferencing capabilities  
1 data center with a 16 rack capacity  
3 MRI scanning suit es (includes 1 offsite location)  
In 2020 a new ~140,000 sqft building will open adjacent to the existing building and will 
house additional faculty, staff, and laboratories.  
 
 
Computing Resources:  
 
The Fralin Biomedical Research Institute (FBRI) at Virgini a Tech Carilion (VTC) houses 
the following shared computing resources available:  
Dell / Intel HPC Cluster ([ADDRESS_1114637]) – 
SLURM; IBM iDataPlexLinux Cluster ([ADDRESS_1114638]) - PBS; 10+ dedicated Linux servers (48 core AMD Opteron -
based, 192GB RAM) are available for image and data analysis; Virtualized infrastructure 
using V mware vSphere, virtual machine environment available for general compute and 
image and data anal ysis; 40Gbit/s storage connectivity for research data; 10 Gbit/s 
Internal Local Area Network between file servers and cluster; 8Gbit/s Fibre Channel 
Storage Area Network; 10 Gbit/s Wide Area Connection for access to Virginia Tech 
main campus / Internet; 1. 4 Petaby[CONTACT_42646]; 250 Teraby[CONTACT_509660] -attached centralized disk storage; 400 Teraby[CONTACT_509661] -based tape backup; Nightly 
backups and snapshots; 2.4Ghz / 5Ghz secure wireless network; 1 Gbit/s commodity 
Ethernet network; Data Ana lysis Tools: MATLAB, SPM12, AFNI, FSL, MRIcro, 
xjView, R, SAS, Prism Graphpad, SPSS; Productivity Tools: Adobe Suite, Microsoft 
Office Suite, vi, vim, emacs  
 
MRI Scanning Resources (FBRI):  
Virginia Tech has three research -dedicated Siemens 3T MR scanners ( 2 Siemens 
Magnetom TIM Trios, and 1 PRISMA -FIT) available. Each scanner bay is equipped with 
the following stimulation and response interfaces:  
behavioral response: two -hand, eight -button optical response pads with USB, serial, and 
TTL output (Current Desi gns, Inc.)  
video stimulation: rear -projection video display (Hitachi CP -SX635)  
corrective lenses for use with video stimulation: MR -compatible frames with insertable 
polycarbonate lenses (prescriptions range from -8.00 to +8.00) (Solo Bambini)  
stimulus del ivery: dedicated computers for experiment presentation (Dell Optiplex 980)  
audio delivery: MRI compatible headphones  or intercom system . 
 
Metabolic Chamber Resources (FBRI):  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-[ADDRESS_1114639] of the physiological response to sugar on brain activity and behavior #23-297 
VT Research Protocol version 1.0. 1 Page 51 of 51 Revised: March  5, [ADDRESS_1114640] calorimetry  
available (MEI Research, Ltd). The larger room is equipped for [ADDRESS_1114641] the HRPP for multi -site research (i nvolving multiple institutions) and 
the details required for this section  will be provided. Otherwise , indi cate N/A. 
 
This is a single site study.  
Virginia Tech Institutional Review Board Protocol No. 23-297 
Approved April 12, 2024 
51 of 51