Title of Study: Exercise Training and Increasing Non- Exercise Physical Activity (I -CAN 
study)  
Clinical Trials ID: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document date: 10/23/[ADDRESS_1082916] 150 
minutes of moderate physical activity per week to maintain and improve health. Based on 
these guidelines, sedentary individuals may adopt a structured aerobic exercise program (e.g. 
30 minutes of treadmill exercise 5 days per week) to meet these recommendations. While this approach is beneficial, the potential exists for aerobic training programs to be optimized by 
[CONTACT_787061] (Non- Ex PA) . Three large randomized controlled trials performed in our laboratory 
suggest that previously sedentary adults participating in aerobic exercise training still exhibit low levels of Non -Ex PA ( e.g. 4,500 to 6,000 s teps/day) . In addition, our group has published 
data suggesting that obese postmenopausal women participating in aerobic exercise training with high levels of Non- Ex PA had greater reductions in waist circumference and body weight 
compared to those with low levels of Non- Ex PA. Our results are supported by [CONTACT_787062][INVESTIGATOR_787048] (lower body weight, waist circumference, and 2- hour fasting glucose) independent of the amount of moderate to vigorous physical 
activity performed. Therefore, a physical activity program composed of 1) aerobic training 
and 2) increasing the amount of Non- Ex PA may represent a more complete and 
clinically effective physical activity intervention compared to a program focused on 
aerobic training only. However, to date, a prospective study examining the effectiveness of 
an intervention of this nature has not been performed.  
The Intervention Composed of A erobic Training and Non-Exercise Physical 
Activity (I-CAN) study will investigate the effects of aerobic exercise training and 
increasing Non- EX PA on waist circumference, weight, and other cardiovascular 
disease risk factors in a prospective pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251].  We will randomize sedentary (<6,500 steps 
per day) obese adults  (N= 45) with at least one additional cardiovascular risk factor to a : (1) 
structured aerobic exercise program with no intervention on Non- Ex PA (AERO group, N=15); 
(2) structured aerobic exercise program with the additional goal of increasing Non- EX PA 
(AERO -PA group, N=15) , or (3) a control group (CON , N=15 ) for 6 months.  Exercise groups 
will participate in the same aerobic training program ( 50 to 75% VO 2 max), designed to be 
consistent with public health recommendations of 150 minutes per week of moderate physical activity. Non -Ex PA in the AERO group will be tracked throughout the entire 6 month 
intervention with pedometers capable of counting steps, but not displaying them to the participant (blind mode capable). The AERO -PA group will progressively increase Non- Ex PA 
(1,000 to 3,000 steps per day above baseline levels)  throughout intervention using 
pedometers. The AERO -PA group will also participate in lifestyle counseling grounded in the 
principles of the social learning and behavioral change theories to determine/ reinforce 
strategies to increase Non- Ex PA. The primary outcome measure will be change in waist 
circumference following the intervention. The study  results  will be used to determine the 
efficacy /feasibility  of the intervention, and power a larger trial as an R01 application.  
 
Specific Aims:  
To test the hypothesis that:  
• Aerobic exercise training and increasing Non -EX PA will reduce waist circumference to 
a greater extent compared to the aerobic exercise training alone and the control group.   
• Aerobic exercise training and increasing Non -EX PA will reduce weight and fat -mass to 
a greater extent than aerobic exercise training alone and the control group.  
 
Additional Aims: We will also evaluate the effect of the intervention on fitness and insulin 
sensitivity  
2 
 Definitions for physical activity terminology used in 
the present proposal:  
Non-Exercise Physical Activity (Non- Ex PA):  Free-living  
physical activity not performed during an aerobic exercise 
training program (pedometer-determined) or below the 
threshold of moderate to vigorous physical activity 
(accelerometer-determined). 
Dose of exercise training:  Amount of kilocalories 
expended during an aerobic exercise training intervention 
relative to body weight. Used to standardize training for 
caloric expenditure across participants. Expressed as 
kilocalories per kg per week (KKW).  
Figure 1. Hamilton et al. Current Cardiovascular Risk Reports  2008. Opportunities for 
sitting during the day for an individual who exercises [ADDRESS_1082917] 150 
minutes/ week of moderate physical activity. 
Substantial evidence exists that physical activity programs consistent with these recommendation have profound health benefits for sedentary adults 
2-6, and a structured aerobic exercise training 
program (e.g.  30 minutes, 5 times a week) 
represents an effective strategy to meet these recommendations 
1, 6. However, there is potential 
for aerobic exercise programs to be optimized. The results of several published studies indicate that the amount of physical activity performed outside training (Non- Ex PA) remains 
low (similar to pre -training levels) in previously sedentary adults participating in aerobic 
exercise training 
4, 5, 7. Therefore, this low amount of Non- Ex PA may represent an 
additional intervention target to use along with aerobic exercise. Hamilton et al. 8 has 
described (in reference to sitting, Figure 1.) that ample opportunities exist for sedentary behavior even individuals who are presumed to be “physically active.” For example, a training session of 45 minutes represents less than 3% of waking hours leaving the remaining 95% at risk for potential sedentary behaviors.  
This relationship, along with the declining levels of occupational, 9-13 transportation-
related 10, and physical activity in the home 10 has led some researchers to question the extent 
to which a bolus of exercise training (i.e. 30- 45 minutes of aerobic exercise) mitigates the risk 
associated with low levels of physical activity or prolonged periods of inactivity throughout the day 
8, 14, 15. Thus, a physical activity program composed of aerobic training only, while 
beneficial, could be optimized by [CONTACT_787063]- Ex PA outside of training 
sessions. However, to date, no prospective studies  exist combining aerobic exercise training 
and increasing Non- Ex PA. If clinically effective, this intervention could represent a more 
complete approach in treating obese sedentary adults compared to aerobic training alone, which may have a greater  overall  effect in reducing central adiposity, weight, and subsequently 
other cardiovascular disease risk factors. The core concepts of this intervention (aerobic exercise training and high Non- Ex PA) are transferable and feasible in clinical, public health, 
and exercise training settings. This may have important clinical implications as the majority of adults in the [LOCATION_002] (58%) do not obtain the recommended amount of physical activity, which is especially prevalent in obese (64%) individuals 
16.  
 
1.1 Non-Ex PA in Aerobic Exercise Training Studies:  Adults participating in aerobic training 
still exhibit low levels of Non -Ex PA (4,500- 6,000 steps /day). Our research team has monitored 
Non-Ex PA in three large randomized controlled exercise training trials 4, 5, 7 . Pedometers were 
used to quantify the amount of Non Ex -PA over the course of the entire training intervention. 
Importantly, pedometers were not worn during exercise training sessions. In the DREW 
(postmenopausal women, N=464) 5, INFLAME (adults with elevated C -reactive protein, 
N=162) 7, and HART -D (adults with type 2 diabetes, N=262)4 studies, we observed no 
significant change in pedometer determined Non Ex -PA compared to the control group (Figure 
2). This finding was consistent across studies despi[INVESTIGATOR_787049] 
3 
 intervention (4 to 9 months), exercise training intensity 
(50% -85% VO 2 max), and aerobic training energy 
expenditure (4 to 16 kilocalories per kg per week [KKW]). In the DREW trial, Non -Ex PA was not 
significantly different compared to control even at an exercise dose as high as 150% public health recommendations. Our findings are supported by [CONTACT_787064] (duration: 8 months) 
17 and the STRIDDE AT/RT 
(duration: 4 months) 18 studies, which report no 
significant change in accelerometer determined Non-Ex PA in overweight and obese middle aged adults.  
 
1.2 Non-EX PA independent of MVPA (moderate to 
vigorous physical activity) on CVD risk factors:  Non-
Ex PA is likely performed for the most part below a moderate to vigorous intensity, but contributes to total energy expenditure. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_787050]- Ex PA has clinical value in promoting lower 
weight, waist circumference and other CVD risk factors.  
 
1.3 Epi[INVESTIGATOR_556324]: Several 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_787051] a beneficial effect on CVD risk factors independent of the amount of MVPA. Specifically, Camhi et al. 
19 using 
NHANES data  observed that accelerometer determined 
lifestyle physica l activity (760- 2,019 counts/  minute) 
decreased the odds of low HDL, high triglycerides, elevated blood pressure, high fasting glucose, waist circumference , and the presence of the metabolic syndrome or type 2 diabetes independent of 
MVPA (>2,020 counts/ minute). Healy et al. 
20 found that higher amounts of accelerometer 
determined “light intensity physical activity” (100- 1,952 counts) was associated with lower 2-
hour plasma glucose levels independent of MVPA (≥ 1,952 counts). Similarly, Healey et al. 21, 
in a different study, found that even in adults meeting physical activity recommendations, significant dose- response associations were observed for higher waist circumference, 2- hour 
plasma glucose and systolic blood pressure with higher television viewing time. The authors hypothesized that the cardiometabolic consequences of high television viewing time could be due to the displacement of light intensity physical activity 
21.  
 
2. Preliminary studies:  
Non-Ex PA and Exercise Training:  Little data exist evaluating the effect of different amounts 
of Non- Ex PA on anthropometric or CVD risk factors  in adults participating in aerobic training. 
Di Blasio et al. [ADDRESS_1082918] beneficial improvements in plasma low density lipoprotein and triglyceride levels compared to those that maintained or increased Non- Ex PA. Our laboratory conducted 
the Dose Response to Exercise in Women (DREW) study , which investigated the effects of 6 
months of aerobic training at levels consistent with public health recommendations, and 50% below or 50% above those recommendations on cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_787052]. The DREW study used pedometers to quantify the amount  of Non- Ex PA outside of 
Figure 2.  Non-Ex PA defined as steps/ day in the 
DREW, INFLAME, and HART-D trials. Step 
counters were not worn during exercise 
sessions. KKW: kilocalories per kg per week. 
Data are expressed as (mean± SD)  
[ADDRESS_1082919] tertile of Non- Ex PA at all three doses of exercise training (4, 8 and 12 
KKW) (Figure 3). Aerobic training with high Non- Ex PA was also associated with modest 
weight loss (when all exercise groups were combined and statistical models were adjusted for exercise training dose)  
24. Higher Non- Ex PA 
with exercise training did not provide additional beneficial effects  for the change in 
fitness,  systolic or diastolic  blood pressure. 
Although, we investigated women who self -
selected to levels of Non- Ex PA outside of 
training sessions, our data does suggest that an intervention composed of aerobic training and increasing levels of Non- Ex PA may 
accelerate the improvements in waist circumference. This may have greater effects on adiposity and other CVD risk factors when Non-Ex PA is increased along with aerobic 
training.  
   
3. Research Design and Methods  
3.1 Innovation:  
The Intervention Composed of A erobic Training and N on-Exercise Physical Activity study (I -
CAN) study will evaluate for the first time a physical activity intervention composed of structured aerobic exercise training along with a strong emphasis on increasing the 
amount of physical activity outside of training on waist circumference, weight and other 
cardiovascular risk factors training against the standard prescription of aerobic training 
alone.  To date, exercise training studies primarily focus on adherence to aerobic exercise and 
instruct participants not to alter Non- Ex PA. While studies following this model have 
established effectiveness in promoting favorable changes in CVD risk factors, the I -CAN study 
will attempt to optimize these benefits by [CONTACT_787065]- Ex PA (defined as 
steps/day outside of training) through the use of pedometers along with structured aerobic training. The design of I -CAN is composed of several innovative features including: strict 
monitoring of Non- Ex PA throughout the entire 6 month intervention, behavioral support (both 
web-based and in- person), goals for progressively increasing Non- Ex PA with aerobic exercise 
training, and an equivalent dose of aerobic exercise training (designed to be consistent with public health recommendations) in the exercise groups. This could represent a practical and clinically effective approach for clinicians and trainers to further increase total energy expenditure in the treatment of obese patients. However, pi[INVESTIGATOR_787053] a large randomized trial.  
 
3.2 Approach:  
The target study population of the I- CAN study  will be sedentary obese men and women (BMI: 
30-40 kg/m2, age 40- 65 yrs). We will randomize participants to aerobic training (AERO, N=15) , 
aerobic training and increasing Non- Ex PA (AERO -PA, N=15) group or a non-exercise control 
group ( CON, N=15)  for 6 months (24 weeks). Participants in the AERO or AERO PA groups 
will participate in the same structured aerobic training program 3 times per week in a laboratory setting, and wear pedometers during the entire 6 month intervention (except during 
structured aerobic training sessions). The AERO -PA group, in addition to aerobic training, will  
increase Non- Ex PA progressively from 1,000 to 3,000 steps /day above baseline from week [ADDRESS_1082920] circumference following the intervention.  Secondary measures include change in 
fitness, body weight, body composition (fat and lean mass), pedometer determined steps/day of Non- Ex PA during the intervention, accelerometer -determined physical activity, fasting 
glucose, fasting insulin and homeostatic model of insulin resistance (HOMA -IR).  
 
3.3 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria : The inclusion/exclusion criteria are summarized in Table 1. 
The goal of the I -CAN study is to recruit adults with moderate to high CVD risk that can safely 
perform the supervised aerobic training in our facility. In addition, all participants must have sufficient health to increase Non- Ex PA in their daily lives , as this will not be directly supervised 
by [CONTACT_464] . Therefore,  we will recruit sedentary obese men and women (age: 40- 65) with 
elevated waist circumference (women: ≥88 cm, men: ≥102 cm), and at least one additional CVD risk factor. Individuals with type 2 diabetes and known cardiovascular disease will be excluded due to the pi[INVESTIGATOR_787054], and the necessity to establish the efficacy of this intervention prior its utilization in a higher risk study population.    
 
Table 1.  Summary of the Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria 
Inclusion Criteria for Study Participation  
Age  40-65 years of age  
Sex Men and women  
Non-exercisers 
and sedentary/low 
active lifestyle  Not currently participating in aerobic or resistance exercise ≥ 20 
minutes on ≥[ADDRESS_1082921] 6 months. Pedometer 
determined objective measurement of physical activity ≤ 6,500 step/day  
One or more of 
the following CVD risk factors  Triglycerides (TG) ≥ 150  mg/dL 25, HDL -C< 50 mg/dL, Blood pressure: 
systolic ≥130 mmHG and diastolic ≥ 85 mmHg or the use of BP medication, Fasting glucose: 100-125 mg/dL (type 2 diabetes is 
exclusionary) , LDL -C≥130 mg/dL, or currently taking cholesterol 
lowering medications  
Abdominal 
obesity/BMI  Waist circumference ≥ 88 cm (women), ≥ 102 cm (men) 25; BMI: 30 -40 
kg/m2 
Informed Consent  The capability and willingness to give written informed consent, to 
understand the exclusion criteria  
Exclusion Criteria  
Significant CVD or 
disorders  Including but not limited to serious arrhythmias,  cardiomyopathy, 
congestive heart failure, stroke or transient ischemic attacks, peripheral vascular disease with intermittent claudication, acute, chronic or 
recurrent thrombophlebitis or myocardial infarction  
Diabetes  Diagnosis or taking medication for type 1 or 2 diabetes and/or fasting 
glucose>125 mg/dL   
Resting blood 
pressure Systolic blood pressure >180 and diastolic blood pressure >100 26.  
Participants currently taking blood pressure medication (except for 
diuretics) can enroll in the present study  
Blood lipi[INVESTIGATOR_787055] ≥ 240 mg/dL, LDL-C ≥ 160 mg/dl or TG levels ≥300 
mg/dl. Cholesterol medications are permitted.  
Other significant 
medical conditions  Including but not limited to chronic or recurrent respi[INVESTIGATOR_696], 
gastrointestinal, neuromuscular, neurological, HIV or psychiatric conditions. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_366163] [ADDRESS_1082922] Circumference:   We have selected waist circumference as the 
primary outcome measure of the I -CAN study for the following reasons:1) Elevated waist 
circumference is associated with CVD risk factors 27, represents one of the components of the 
metabolic syndrome 25, and has incremental value in predicting CVD, diabetes and mortality 
risk over and above BMI. 28 2) Waist circumference can be feasibly evaluated in the clinical 
setting, which has relevance to clinicians (e.g. physicians, personal trainers, nutritionists) 
working with obese adults. We considered visceral fat mass by [CONTACT_787066], however , the increased burden to participants, high costs, and the fact that it is not measured 
in the clinical setting lead us to the decision that it was not appropriate for this pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251], especially since we will obtain measurements of trunk fat mass through DEXA; 3) Our  
retrospective published data 
24, [ADDRESS_1082923] circumference: We will utilize  standard operating procedures (SOPs) 
for assessment measures including waist circumference. Staff are tested and certified annually on the correct measurement technique. Participants will stand in a straight, upright position with the feet together with arms at thier side. Waist circumference will be measured at the natural waist (midway between the inferior border of the rib cage and the superior aspect of the iliac crest) with a Gulick tape measure. Both landmarks (the inferior border of the ribcage and the superior aspect of the iliac crest) will be marked and the distance will be measured to determine the appropriate measurement site. Staff will confirm that: 1) the measurement tape remains horizontal; 2) the tape touches the entire circumference of the participant; 3) abdominal tissue is not compressed; 3) the tape measure is not within abdominal folds; 4) the measurement is taken at the end of normal respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516]. The measurement will be repeated an 
additional time, and the reported value will be the average of these measurements. Both 
measurements must be within 0.[ADDRESS_1082924] measurement is required if values are > 0.[ADDRESS_1082925] circumference will be evaluated at baseline, mid- intervention, and at follow -up.  
3.5 Secondary measures:  Secondary measures include: change in fitness, body weight, body 
composition, pedometer determined Non- Ex PA during the intervention, accelerometer 
determined physical activity levels, fasting glucose, fasting insulin and HOMA -IR.  
 
Anthropometric & Dual Energy X -ray Absorptiometry (DXA): Height will be measured at 
screening. Body weight will be evaluated using a calibrated scale (recorded to the nearest 1/10 
of a kg), with the participant fasted and wearing only a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_105463]. DXA will be used to measure body composition (fat and lean mass).  
 
Accelerometry: At each major assessment point, participants will wear the GT3X+ 
accelerometer (ActiGraph, LLC, Pensacola, [LOCATION_012], [LOCATION_003]) at their waist for seven consecutive days, 24- hrs/day. We have successfully used this 24- hour protocol in adults and find that it 
maximizes wear time. This accelerometer has been validated 
30, [ADDRESS_1082926] from Pi[INVESTIGATOR_787056] 2 weeks in the next 
3 months. Currently or plans to become pregnant. Currently or plans 
to engage in dieting or a weight loss program. No home access to 
internet. Previous bariatric or gastric banding surgery, or weight loss medications.  Non-compliance during screening in wearing 
pedometers or failure to document  physical activity levels in the 
study online database.   
7 
 steps (steps/min, which can be totaled to obtain steps/day) and physical activity intensity using 
previously validated activity count cut points  31. More recently , it has been used to estimate 
time in sedentary behaviors as time spent at < 100 activity counts/min 32. 
 
Maximal Exercise test:  Testing will be performed on a treadmill (Trackmaster 425, 
Carefusion, Newton Kansas) using a modified Balke protocol to determine maximal oxygen consumption (VO
2 max) , and the correct heart rate range for aerobic exercise training ( 50% to 
75% of VO 2 max). Participants will walk at an initial speed of 2.0 mph with 0% grade for the 
first 3 minutes after which the treadmill speed will increase to 3.0 mph for the next 2 minutes. 
The treadmill grade will be increased by 2.5% every 2 minutes until volitional exhaustion. 
Respi[INVESTIGATOR_22324] (VO 2, CO 2) and ventilation will be measured continuously using a True Max 
2400 Metabolic Measurement Cart (Parvomedics, Salt Lake City Utah).  
 
Pedometer : Pedometers will be used to determine sedentary status during screening (over the 
course of 7 days) , and to measure Non- Ex PA during the intervention. We have selected the 
Lifecorder PLUS (New -Lifestyles, Lees Summit, Mo) , which has a feature that does not allow 
the participant to see the amount of steps walked on the pedometer ’s display (blind display 
mode). This feature is ideal for the determination of sedentary status during screening, and monitoring Non Ex -PA in the CON and AERO groups. Non -Ex PA data will be downloaded 
directly from pedometers for data purposes. We elected to use pedometers for monitoring Non-Ex PA because accelerometers are rarely used in clinical practice. In addition,  
pedometers allow direct feed- back (i.e.  steps/day) to participants about Non- Ex PA levels.  
 
Tracking dietary changes: We will utilize the Food Frequency Questionnaire (FFQ) originally developed by [CONTACT_6283]. Gladys Block and Linda Harlan, often referred to as the “Block FFQ” 
33. This 
questionnaire collects information about eating habits over a 12- month period. The FFQ 
contains approximately 105 items grouped by [CONTACT_787067]. The questionnaire, upon completion, provides estimated daily intake values for selected nutrients (kilocalories, macronutrients, and micronutrients) and provides information on food group servings . All 
participants will be instructed and reminded regularly not to alter dietary habits or 
engage in purposeful dieting during the intervention.  
 
Blood sample collection: Trained personnel will obtain  fasting venous blood samples from 
the antecubital site with participants in a seated position.   Either [ADDRESS_1082927] analytic techniques. The remaining 10 mL sample will be centrifuged under refrigerated conditions, and the supernatant will be extracted, and divided into 1 mL portions. Vials of plasma (3- 4), serum (2 -3), and red 
blood cells (2- 3) will be stored at -80°C for future analysis.    
 
3.6 Recruitment and Pre- Screening:  Study  personnel will screen interested individuals over 
the phone based on the inclusion/exclusion criteria. Eligible individuals will be invited to attend an orientation session, during which study personnel will provide a presentation with detailed 
information about the study (structure of the study, study -related procedures, risks, benefits, 
etc.). Individuals interested in I -CAN following this orientation session will be consented at this 
time, and scheduled for run- in visits.  
  
 Run-in visits: The run- in period will last for two weeks in order to: 1) verify sedentary status 
(pedometry) and screen for other inclusion/exclusion criteria (e.g. BMI, waist circumference, blood pressure); and 2) ensure participants are able to make the time commitment to come to 
8 
 Run-in:
Information collected:
• Did you wear the  pedometer today (yes/No)
• Were there any periods of time where pedometer was not 
worn (Yes/No)
• If so, please provide an estimate of the approximate 
time:_____
• Further comments:_____
Figure  4.  Web -based questions to determine 
pedometers compliance.  to training sessions. In our past training studies, this run- in period has helped to obtain 
excellent training adherence by [CONTACT_787068] a study. To simulate participation in the actual I -CAN 
intervention, run- ins will be scheduled 3 sessions per week over the course of two weeks, and 
duration will be similar to that of training sessions (~1 hour). During run- ins, participants will 
wear pedometers for 7 days , and enter information about self -monitoring into the study website 
(using RED Cap, described in detail below) . Participants will confirm they wore the pedometer 
at the beginning of the day, and notate the extent of non -wear time (Figure 4) . Pedometers will 
be worn in “blind display mode”, so the amount of steps accumulated throughout the day will not be seen by [CONTACT_2299]. We will ask participants to employ methods to remember to wear the pedometer at the beginning of the day (placing reminders on calendars or smart phones, placing pedometer on clothes to wear). On the last run- in session, participants will meet with a trained 
interviewer who will use a semi -structured barriers 
interview, to evaluate for any major barriers to study participation or completion.  
 
Pedometer compliance tracking: We will utilize RED Cap ™, a secure online research 
database to: 1) track and monitor participant compliance wearing pedometers ; and 2) record 
Non-Ex PA at run- in and during the intervention. Participants will be provided a unique 
name/password to log on to the study website. The use of RED Cap ™ will allow our staff to 
monitor participant compliance throughout the trial in real -time. Our research team is 
successfully using RED Cap ™ in two on- going prospective physical activity trials.  
 
3.7 Clinical Visits (baseline, mid- intervention, and follow -up): We will obtain primary (waist 
circumference) and secondary outcome measures (DEXA, fitness, blood measures) at both baseline and follow -up (summarized in Figure 5). Pre- menopausal women will be asked to 
take a pregnancy test. A physician or a physician’s assistant will obtain a medical history and perform a brief medical exam.  All clinic staff measuring outcome measures will blinded to 
participant randomization.  
At mid -intervention (week 
12), we will measure waist circumference, weight, FFQ, and accelerometry. The CON group will be scheduled f or mid -
intervention and follow -up 
visits, and will be instructed not to alter physical activity  
habits during the intervention.  All groups will 
be instructed not to alter dietary habits during the study.  
 
3.8 Exercise Training 
Intervention:  Participants 
will participate in structured aerobic training 3 times a week at a heart rate associated with 50-Orientation:
• Information session about 
study
• Obtain informed consent for screening and run-in visits 
Run-in: 
• [ADDRESS_1082928] participants ability to come 
to PBRC 3 times per week 
• Informed consent for baseline 
evaluation
• Verify inclusion criteria (ie: baseline physical activity, waist 
circumference, blood pressure).
• Log compliance wearing 
pedometers using the RED CAP 
™ systemBlood draw: 
• Lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], CBC, chemistry panel, 
insulin
• Intervention interviewPhone-screen Orientation and Run-in
• Clinic Evaluation
• Physical/review of medical 
history
• Blood pressure
• Anthropometry 
• DEXA
• Treadmill exercise test
• FFQ
At baseline: Informed consent for 
randomizationRandomize to the CON, AERO, or  AERO-PA groupMid-intervention: FFQ, weight and waist circumference, accelerometry At follow-up: Exit interviewClinic Evaluation
(baseline, mid-intervention and 
follow-up)
Screen for inclusion/exclusion 
criteria:
• Age (40-65 yrs)
• BMI (30-40)
• Diabetes (No)
• Heart disease (No)
• Stroke (No)
• Currently exercising (No)
• Height/weight
• Other information:
• Ethnic identification
• Contact [CONTACT_3031]
• Medication list
Figure 5. Study Flow  
9 
 
Figure 6. Non -Ex PA in the AERO and AERO -PA group 
in a participant walking 4,500 steps /day at baseline  75% of VO 2peak.  All exercise training will occur on a treadmill (or a stationary bicycle only 
when necessary). Participants will wear heart rate monitors during exercise sessions. The 
speed and grade of the treadmill will be adjusted in order to keep participants within their heart 
rate range. Using standard ACSM equations  34,  and adjust the length of each exercise session 
to meet the daily caloric goal based on the speed, grade of the treadmill , and  participants’ 
weight 35. The caloric goal of each session will be calculated by [CONTACT_787069]’s exercise frequency ( i.e. 3 times per week). Study staff 
will confirm that pedometers measuring Non- Ex PA are removed prior to beginning 
aerobic training sessions. Since individuals in both groups will participate in aerobic exercise 
training in the same room, they will be reminded frequently not to discuss group assignment with each other .  
 
Exercise training dose and progression: Exercise dose (expressed in KKW: kilocalories per kg per week) during aerobic training will be the same in both the AERO and AERO -PA groups. 
During the first month of the study, both groups will participate solely in structured aerobic training with no intervention on Non- Ex PA ( to allow acclimation to aerobic training) . 
Participants  in both exercise groups (AERO, AERO -PA) will expend 8KKW in week 1, 10KKW 
in week [ADDRESS_1082929] utilized the 12KKW dose successfully in two completed exercise training trial s 4, 5. Thus, 
the amount of exercise training should be reasonable for participants to perform. For example, 
at a speed of 3.2 MPH and 2.5% grade, the estimated session time would be approximately 50 
minutes for a participant exercising 3 days per week.  
 
3.9 Non EX- PA: Our research team has 
monitored Non- Ex PA successfully in several 
previous exercise studies4, 5, 7. For the AERO -
PA group, we will average the amount of Non-Ex PA from week 4 to week 6 (when participants are at the full prescription for exercise training [12KKW]) to determine the 
baseline level of Non- Ex PA with exercise 
training (Figure 6) .  At week 6 of intervention, 
the AERO -PA group will begin to 
incrementally increase their Non- Ex PA by [CONTACT_354760] 1,000 steps/day above baseline for the first two weeks. Participants will continue to increase Non- Ex PA by [CONTACT_787070] 500 steps/day every 2 weeks until they reach an average of 3,000 steps/day above baseline (week 14) for the remainder of the intervention. We have selected 3,000 steps as the maximum goal for Non- Ex PA based on data evaluating the increase in steps from 
pedometry -based interventions with similar study populations/design. These studies suggest 
that an increase of 2,000- 4,000 steps /day is feasible 
36-38. We elected to utilize a progressive 
increase in Non- Ex PA to allow participants adequate time to determine behavioral strategies 
to reach Non- Ex PA goals, and to become acclimated to the higher amounts of total physical 
activity. The investigative team will not impose any restrictions on how this increase in Non- Ex 
PA is achieved, with the exception that it is not performed specifically as additional  aerobic 
10 
 exercise training (i.e.  treadmill for 30 minutes). Moderate physical activity consistent with daily 
living (i.e.  leisurely walking in the evening, walking the dog etc.) will be permitted. Participants 
will be instructed to take a “recuperation day” once every week, where Non- Ex PA will be 
tracked, but not intervened on for the purposes of the study. We believe that a weekly 
recuperation day will lessen the total participant burden, and allow adequate recovery time.  
 
Lifestyle counseling to increase Non- Ex PA  in AERO -PA group: The AERO -PA group will 
receive lifestyle counseling to help them obtain the required amount of Non- Ex PA. 
Participants will meet with study staff (~ 15 mins) once a week (from week 6- 10), and every two 
weeks thereafter.  Specific strategies to increases Non- Ex PA will be tailored to each 
participant (occupational strategies, home strategies, etc.). Lifestyle counseling for the AERO -
PA group will occur before or after exercise training sessions, and all sessions will be conducted in a private room to avoid potential contamination with the AERO group. Examples of strategies to increase Non- Ex PA include walking around the house during commercial 
breaks while watching television, talking on a cell phone while walking instead of sitting, parking car farther away from workplace. The intervention is grounded in the principles of social learning and behavior change theories . Counselors will utilize motivational interviewing 
and enhancement for participants whose motivation decreases during the study.  Behavioral 
strategies to foster adherence to Non- Ex PA goals include stimulus control, behavioral 
contracting, problem solving training, and selective reinforcement of target behaviors.  
 
Plan for Tracking and Monitoring Non Ex -PA: Similar to run -in visits, during the intervention, 
we will utilize the study website (RED Cap ™ database) to monitor compliance. The AERO 
group will monitor Non- Ex PA in the same manner as during the run- in period throughout the 
intervention. In the AERO -PA group only, we will obtain self -reported steps data as a cognitive 
behavioral tool as well to monitor Non- Ex PA in real- time by [CONTACT_464].  From week 6 to the 
end of intervention, the AERO -PA group will input the amount of steps completed at the 
conclusion of the day (or within at least 72 hours of completion), whether they wore their pedometer as instructed, whether this day was a recuperation day, and any comments about Non- Ex PA (Figure 7). Non -Ex PA 
compliance will be defined as the amount of total days wearing the pedometer versus total amount of days in the study intervention. Adherence will be defined as 
total amount of steps obtained versus total 
amount of steps prescribed. Non -Ex PA 
values will also be downloaded directly from pedometers in order to obtain objective measures of steps/day in all participants.  
 
Control (CON) Group: As stated earlier , 
participants  randomized to the CON group 
will be instructed not to change their physical activity habits during the study, but will 
participate in all assessment visits (i.e. mid -intervention, following -up test ing). Non-Ex PA will 
also be measured in the CON group as participants will wear pedometers during the 6 month 
invention in “blind mode” and enter information into the RED Cap ™ database online (in the 
same manner as screening). In addition, participants will come in once a month to Pennington to confirm no changes in sedentary status, download pedometer data (L ifecorder Plus has a 
60 day memory), and address any issues with participant compliance.   Intervention (week 6-week 24)
AERO Group:
Information collected:
• Did you wear the  pedometer today (yes/No)
• Were there any periods of time where pedometer was not worn (Yes/No)
• If so, please provide an estimate of the approximate time:_____
• Further comments:_____
AERO-PA Group:
Information collected:• Total amount of steps
• Recuperation day (Yes/No)
• Did you wear the  pedometer today (yes/No)
• Were there any periods of time where pedometer was not worn (Yes/No)
• If so, please provide an estimate of the approximate time:_____
• Further comments:____
• Require assistance from I-CAN staff (Yes/No)
Displayed info for participant: Number of steps left, current steps per week, 
recuperation days left
Figure 7. Web -based pedometer compliance questions in the 
AERO and AERO -PA groups  
11 
  
Adherence plan: We will actively monitor adherence and compliance of exercise training 
using EDIN (exercise training data base) and Non- Ex PA using RED Cap ™. We will review 
these data regularly during the intervention, and I- CAN staff meetings (bi -weekly). We will also 
employ several strategies to promote adherence to the study such as certificates for excellent adherence, raffles for incentive items (e.g. mug, tee- shirt), and regular adherence reports to 
help motivate participants. In the case of non- adherence, every ethical research- based 
strategy will be used to prevent participant drop- out, and continued non- adherence to the 
protocol.  We have identified signs of poor adherence from previous training studies (i.e. lack of attendance without rescheduling, not meeting protocol goals), and have developed standardized responses by [CONTACT_464]. In the case of a non- adherence, a “case manager” will 
develop an adherence plan, and work with the participant on a one- on-one basis.  
 
3.10 Justification of study groups:  Similar to pharmalogical trials, in order for the physical 
activity intervention used in I -CAN (AERO -PA group) to be incorporated in common practice, it 
must be more clinically effective compared to the current standard treatment. The current standard (or recommendation) for aerobic exercise is obtaining at least 150 minutes of moderate physical activity.  Thus, the I -CAN study will determine the extent of the additional 
clinical benefits of increasing Non -Ex PA with  aerobic  exercise training.  
 
3.11 Statistical Considerations:  The results of the present pi[INVESTIGATOR_787057] (effect size/statistical power) of a larger prospective intervention (to be developed into a future R01 application).  Baseline participant characteristics (e.g., age sex, race, weight, BMI, 
waist circumference, % body fat, fat mass, lean mass, cholesterol, triglycerides, blood pressures) will be summarized by [CONTACT_19313] ( CON, AERO , and AERO -PA) as counts and 
percentages for categorical variables, and means and 95% confidence intervals or medians and IQRs for continuous variables. Adherence to protocol assessments (e.g., daily steps, minutes spent in very low activity, aerobic sessions/week, percent of peak VO
2, MET levels) 
will be summarized similarly by [CONTACT_787071]. On study change in peak VO 2, 
estimated METs, weight, waist circumference, cholesterol, triglycerides, and blood pressures will be summarized in an intention- to-treat analysis of (1) all participants and (2) the subset of 
participants who achieve a high level of adherence to protocol.  Linear models will provide the primary framework for significance testing. Statistical significance of differential longitudinal changes in response to interventions will be assessed employing repeated measures mixed effects models with maximum likelihood estimation and Kenward- Rogers adjustment to the 
degrees of freedom in an intention- to-treat analysis of (1) and (2) for each outcome using all 
available data. The two interventions, measurement times (e.g., baseline, mid- intervention, 
study exit), race, sex and interactions will be taken as fixed effects; participants within groups will be considered as having random effects. Other covariates such as age and baseline assessments will be included in preliminary models and retained in final analytical models if warranted. The model covariance structure (e.g.: unstructured, compound symmetric, auto-regressive) across time will be investigated to enhance efficiency of statistical tests. Results for each outcome will be summarized as least squares means and 95% confidence intervals for each intervention across the assessment times (repeated measures). Model residuals will be tested to see if they have distributions that are approximately Gaussian and data transformations will be performed if needed. Group differences in baseline characteristics will be tested and corrective steps taken, such as post -stratification and adding model covariates 
as necessary. Linear contrasts on least squares means will be used to test differential mean changes in each outcome from baseline to subsequent assessment times between the two intervention groups. Null hypotheses will be tested against two- directional alternatives at the 
12 
 nominal 0.05 significance level using Bonferroni adjusted p- values when appropriate. All 
statistical analyses will be performed using statistical software in SAS version 9.3.  
 
3.12 Limitations and Strengths:  A limitation of the project is  the small sample size. However, 
we feel this is appropriate due to the pi[INVESTIGATOR_787058]. In addition,  the results of I -CAN 
will be used to determine the effect size and to power a larger randomized trial  (as an R01 
application) with more cardiovascular/diabetes -related outcomes. Another limitation is that we 
are not measuring total energy expenditure through doubly labeled water (DLW). Due to the 
high cost of  DLW (each participant: $750, total study costs [baseline and follow -up] = $67,500), 
it is not feasible for this pi[INVESTIGATOR_16080]. However, we will  incorporate DLW measurement s when 
this study  is developed into a larger randomized trial. The strengths of I -CAN are that it is a 
practical physical activity intervention, the core principles of which (i.e.  aerobic training and 
attainment of high Non -Ex PA) are feasible in clinical , exercise training and public health  
settings. We have designed our aerobic training intervention to be consistent with public health recommendations. I -CAN will be the first training study to our knowledge with such a strong 
focus on the measurement of Non- Ex PA (adherence and tracking plan, pedometers [blind 
mode capable] , and the use of internet databases to monitoring Non-Ex PA and support 
behavior modification) throughout the entire exercise intervention. Results of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_16080] , 
and the subsequent large randomized controlled trial could have implications for future public health recommendations , and other  populations  with co-morbid low physical activity and 
obesity  (e.g. adults with cardiovascular disease or  type 2 diabetes).  
 
4. Eth ical aspects of  the proposed research:  Ethical research pract ices will be strictly 
adhered to during the implementation of the present study , inclusive of the safety of human 
participants and safeguarding protected health information. The aspects of this study that carry 
the greatest safety risk s are the exercise training and exercise testing components.  All 
members  of the investigative team are required to complete Collaborative Institutional Training 
Initiative (CITI), and all staff monitoring the exercise intervention and performing the exercise 
testing will be CPR/AED certified.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_787059], and will ensure 
that I -CAN is implemented in an ethical manner.  
 
 
Timeline of the I-CAN study  Year 1  Year 2  Year 3  Year 4  
 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
IRB a pproval, MOP d evelopment , training                  
Recruitment and screening                  
Baseline testing                  
Follow -up testing                  
Data cleaning & management                  
Data analysis                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[ADDRESS_1082930] of different doses of aerobic exercise training on endothelial function in postmenopausal women with elevated blood pressure: Results from the drew study. Br. J. Sports Med.  2012;46:753- [ADDRESS_1082931] of different doses of aerobic exercise training on exercise blood pressure in overweight and obese postmenopausal women. Menopause. 2012;19:503- [ADDRESS_1082932] CP. Effects of aerobic and resistance training on hemoglobin a1c levels in patients with type 2 diabetes. JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association . 2010;304:2253- [ADDRESS_1082933] CP, Skinner JS, Blair SN. Effects of different doses of physical activity on cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_757511], overweight or obese postmenopausal women with elevated blood pressure. JAMA. 2007;297:2081- 2091  
6. Garber CE, Blissmer B, Deschenes MR, Franklin BA, Lamonte MJ, Lee I -M, Nieman 
DC, Swain DP. Quantity and quality of exercise for developi[INVESTIGATOR_104618], musculoskeletal, and neuromotor fitness in apparently healthy adults: Guidance for prescribing exercise. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.  2011;43:1334- 1359 
1310.1249/MSS.1330b1013e318213fefb 
7. Church TS, Earnest CP, Thompson AM, Priest EL, Rodarte RQ, Saunders T, Ross R, Blair SN. Exercise without weight loss does not reduce c -reactive protein: The inflame 
study. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2010;42:708- 716 
8. Hamilton M, Healy G, Dunstan D, Zderic T, Owen N. Too little exercise and too much sitting: Inactivity physiology and the need for new recommendations on sedentary behavior. Current Cardiovascular Risk Reports . 2008;2:292- [ADDRESS_1082934] C. Trends over 5 decades in u.S. Occupation -related 
physical activity and their associations with obesity. PLoS ONE. 2011;6:e19657 
10. Brownson RC, Boehmer TK, Luke DA. Declining rates of physical activity in the united states: What are the contributors? Annu. Rev. Public Health. 2004;26:421- 443 
11. Hallal PC, Andersen LB, Bull FC, Guthold R, Haskell W, Ekelund U. Global physical activity levels: Surveillance progress, pi[INVESTIGATOR_30207], and prospects. The Lancet . 2012;380:247-
257 
12. Knuth AG, Hallel PC. Temporal trends in physical activity: A systematic review. J. Phys. Act. Health . 2009;6:548- [ADDRESS_1082935]. Population trends in leisure- time physical activity: Minnesota heart survey, 1980- 2000. 
Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2006;38:1716- 1723  
14. Owen N, Healy GN, Matthews CE, Dunstan DW. Too much sitting: The population health science of sedentary behavior. Exerc. Sport Sci. Rev.  2010;38:105- 113  
15. Bassett DRJ, Freedson P, Kozey S. Medical hazards of prolonged sitting. Exerc. Sport Sci. Rev.  2010;38:101 -102  
14 
 16. Carlson SA, Fulton JE, Schoenborn CA, Loustalot F. Trend and prevalence estimates 
based on the 2008 physical activity guidelines for americans. Am. J. Prev. Med. 2010;39:305- 313 
17. Hollowell RP, Willis LH, Slentz CA, Toppi[INVESTIGATOR_787060], Bhakpar M, Kraus WE. Effects of exercise training amount on physical activity energy expenditure. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc.  2009;41:1640- [ADDRESS_1082936] JA, Kraus WE. Effects of an 8- month exercise training program on off -exercise physical activity. Med. 
Sci. Sports Exerc.  2011;43:1744- 1751  
19. Camhi SM, Sisson SB, Johnson WD, Katzmarzyk PT, Tudor -Locke C. Accelerometer -
determined moderate intensity lifestyle activity and cardiometabolic health. Prev. Med.  
2011;52:358- 360 
20. Healy GN, Dunstan DW, Salmon J, Cerin E, Shaw JE, Zimmet PZ, Owen N. Objectively measured light -intensity physical activity is independently associated with 2- h plasma 
glucose. Diabetes Care. 2007;30:1384- 1389  
21. Healy GN, Dunstan DW, Salmon J, Shaw JE, Zimmet PZ, Owen N. Television time and continuous metabolic risk in physically active adults. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2008;40:639- 645 
22. Di Blasio A, Ripari P, Bucci I, Di Donato F, Izzicupo P, D'Angelo E, Di Nenno B, Taglieri M, Napolitano G. Walking training in postmenopause: Effects on both spontaneous physical activity and training- induced body adaptations. Menopause. 2011;19:23- [ADDRESS_1082937] CP, Kampert JB, Jurca R, Blair SN. Dose -response to exercise in women aged 45- 75 yr (drew): Design 
and rationale. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 2004;36:336- [ADDRESS_1082938] CP, Johnson WD, Blair SN, 
Sénéchal M, Church TS. Exercise training and habitual physical activity: A randomized controlled trial. Am. J. Prev. Med. 2012;43:629- 635 
25. Alberti KGMM, Eckel RH, Grundy SM, Zimmet PZ, Cleeman JI, Donato KA, Fruchart J -
C, James WPT, Loria CM, Smith SC. Harmonizing the metabolic syndrome. Circulation . 
2009;120:1640- [ADDRESS_1082939] C, Katzmarzyk PT. Anthropometric correlates of total body fat, abdominal adiposity, and cardiovascular disease risk factors in a biracial sample of men and women. Mayo Clin. Proc.  2012;87:452- [ADDRESS_1082940] circumference and cardiometabolic risk. Diabetes Care. 2007;30:1647- [ADDRESS_1082941] CP, Johnson WD, Blair SN, 
Sénéchal M, Church TS. Exercise training and habitual physical activity: A randomized controlled trial. Am. J. Prev. Med. 2012 (In Press)  
30. Melanson EL, Jr., Freedson PS. Validity of the computer science and applications, inc. (csa) activity monitor. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 1995;27:934- [ADDRESS_1082942] J. Calibration of the computer science and applications, inc. Accelerometer. Med. Sci. Sports Exerc. 1998;30:777- 781 
32. Matthews CE, Chen KY, Freedson PS, Buchowski MS, Beech BM, Pate RR, Troiano RP. Amount of time spent in sedentary behaviors in the united states, 2003- 2004. Am J 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2008;167:875- [ADDRESS_1082943] multiple dietary records collected during a 1- year 
period. J. Am. Diet. Assoc. 1992;92:686- 693 
34. American College of Sports Medicine. Acsm's guidelines for exercise testing and prescription. Baltimore: Lippi[INVESTIGATOR_4431]& Williams; 2010.  
35. Acms's guidelines for exercise testing and prescription. [LOCATION_001]: Lippi[INVESTIGATOR_4431] & Wilkins; 2006.  
36. Richardson CR, Newton TL, Abraham JJ, Sen A, Jimbo M, Swartz AM. A meta- analysis 
of pedometer -based walking interventions and weight loss. The Annals of Family 
Medicine. 2008;6:69- [ADDRESS_1082944] JR. Using pedometers to increase physical activity and improve health. JAMA: The Journal of the American Medical Association . 2007;298:2296- [ADDRESS_1082945] of pedometer -based physical activity 
interventions: A meta- analysis. Res. Q. Exerc. Sport . 2009;80:648- 655 
  