Study Title: Improving Accessibility and Personalization of Cognitive Remediation  for 
Schizophrenia  
 
Clinicaltrials.gov: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
Study Protocol  
Date  of Approval : 05/24/2018  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Improving Accessibility and Personalization of Cognitive Remediation for Schizophrenia  
 
Protocol Information:  
 
IRB of Record: [LOCATION_001] State Psychiatric Institute  
Protocol # [ADDRESS_1261180] Date of IRB Approval:  05/24/[ADDRESS_1261181] Principal Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_899357], PhD  
Co-Investigator(s):  Scott Stroup, MD Alice Saperstein, PhD  
NYSPI [INVESTIGATOR_295546]: Behavioral Health Services and Policy Research  
 
Source of Funding:  Federal  
Institute/Agency:  National Institute of Mental Health  
Grant Name:  [CONTACT_899381]:  1 P50 MH 115843  
 
Background, Significance and Rationale : Schizophrenia is associated with persistent 
neurocognitive deficits that do not respond to pharmacologic  treatment and add to illness 
burden by [CONTACT_899367], benefit 
from psychosocial programs, and function in the social, vocational, and educational venues 
integral to community integration. Neur ocognition is a crucial intervention target. Cognitive 
remediation (CR) is an evidence -based practice to treat the pervasive and significant cognitive 
deficits that contribute to functional decline in schizophrenia . [LOCATION_001] State Office of Mental 
Health ( NYS OMH) is the first and largest state system of care to implement a statewide 
program of cognitive remediation (CR), an evidence -based practice for improving cognition and 
aiding functional recovery. Through Cognitive Reme diation to Promote Recovery (CR2PR), CR 
is offered in outpatient programs, with plans to expand to more services and further adapt 
implementation to improve treatment outcomes.  This project will work directly with NYS OMH 
clinics that offer CR2PR to build upon and improve current methods of delivering cognitive 
remediation.  
 
Purpose : This project studies the impact of two adaptations. One adaptation focuses on 
increasing the accessibility of the program, which participants report is limited by [CONTACT_899368] -weekly attendance. This project will compare the delivery of CR in either 
two clinic -based sessions (Clinic) or one clinic and one remote session (Hybrid) per week. The 
second adaptation is intended to improve personalization of CR by [CONTACT_899369]. Drawing upon convergent evidence for tailoring 
CR based on need for early auditory processing (EAP) training, this project integrates  a 
measure of EAP into the  baseline assessment to facilitate personalization of the menu of 
restorative computer -based exercises used in CR.  The primary purpose of data analyses is to 
inform the feasibility and acceptability of the adaptations . The primary outcome will be treatment 
satisfaction. Th e secondar y outcomes will be change in neurocognition from pre - to post -
treatment.  
 
Study Locations : [LOCATION_001] State Psychiatric Institute and NYS OMH Facilities:  
✓ Washington Heights Community Service  
✓ Creedmoor Psychiatric Center  
✓ Kingsboro Psychiatric Center  
✓ Manhatt an Psychiatric Center  
✓ Rockland Psychiatric Center  
✓ South Beach Psychiatric Center  
Description of Subject Population: The study sample includes adults with schizophrenia or 
schizoaffective disorder who are referred to and eligible for CR2PR.   
 
Procedures : There are two phases of this study . 
 
Phase 1 : Staff training and Start up  (Months 1 -3).  
The focus in this initial phase is staff training, using the same combination of web, telephonic 
and in person training currently in place for CR2PR.  Clinic staff trained on cognitive assessment 
will be provided with and trained to administer the T one Matching Test as an additional 
component of the baseline assessment administered for routine CR treatment planning. The 
CR2PR clinicians will be trained on hybrid delivery methods and to use the Tone Matching Test 
results to personalize the menu of cognitiv e exercises such that the treatment plan for only 
those identified as EAP  impaired  will include the EAP exercises that are available in the web -
based programs used by [CONTACT_240316]2PR clinics.  CR2PR clinicians will be trained on the protocol for 
Hybrid CR delivery . 
 Phase 2: Pi[INVESTIGATOR_800298] (Months 4 -36).  
The focus of this phase is to implement and evaluate cognitive remediation .   
Recruitment  Methods : Participants will be recruited from [LOCATION_001] State Office of Mental 
Health (OMH) psychiatric facilities where cognitive remediation (CR) is currently a clinical 
service (Cognitive Remediation to Promote Recovery, i.e. CR2PR) under the supervision of PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_899358]. Research re ferrals will be tied to the current system of referrals for  participation in each 
clinic’s CR program . Clinical staff will refer potential participants to the CR  clinician who will 
explain  the program and invite  participation. If clients a re interested in CR services, the CR2PR 
clinician will send all referrals to a research assistant  who will explain research procedures, 
obtain informed consent , and screen for eligibility .  Patients who want CR but who do not want 
to participate in the stu dy will continue with the standard CR service procedures.  The research 
study will not be advertised.  
 
Informed Consent:  All clients  who agree to an initial meeting with research assistant  will 
have the full study explained to them, and will have ample opportunity to ask questions prior to 
signing  consent. The process of informed consent will include explanation of the amount of time 
required,  the possible risks /benefits of study participation, their right to refuse participation in the 
study witho ut prejudice and alternatives to study participation, their right to terminate 
participation at any moment without  prejudice, procedures to protect confidentiality, potential for 
de-identified data sharing, and the contact  [CONTACT_71722] [INVESTIGATOR_32397].   
Eligib ility: 
 
Inclusion Criteria    Methods of Ascertainment  
1. Attending OMH Clinic   Referral by [CONTACT_899370]'s CR2PR  program  
 
2. Diagnosis of  Schizophrenia or  Medical chart review and/or report from referring clinician 
Schizoaffective disorder   and treating psychiatrist  
 
3. Age [ADDRESS_1261182] o f Adult Reading and observation during 
consent  
5. Psychiatric and    Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale  administered by  
[CONTACT_899371] n Criteria    Methods of Ascertainment  
1. Unremitted substance   Medical chart review and/or repo rt from referring clinician  
dependence  / dependence   and treating psychiatrist  
in the past  6 months  
 
2. Neur ological illness   Client report; Medical chart review  
3. Traumatic brain injury in   Client report; Medical chart review  
the last 2 years  
Procedures:  A trained research assistant will obtain informed consent, screen for eligibility and 
obtain additional sociodemographic information. P articipants  will complete the standard CR2PR 
neurocognitive assessment battery plus the TMT  with a trained clinician.  Following completion  
of the baseline assessment , participants will be randomized using a pre -determined  
randomization sequence made by [CONTACT_899372].  
 
Clinic CR : This is the evidence -based CR intervention currently in use at the OMH clinics. The  
Clinic research arm consists of [ADDRESS_1261183] cognitive exercises  from a menu of web -based programs to improve the cognitive 
functions identified as impaired on the  assessment, e.g., attention, memory. With the addition of 
the TMT, they will be able to identify EAP as a  focus area. Computer exercises are followed by 
15-minute manualized discussion groups which prom ote generalization of cognitive gains on 
computer activities to functional gain by [CONTACT_899373] -session cognitive 
activities to daily activities and recovery goals.  
 
Hybrid CR : The Hybrid condition consists of 15 clinic sessions in the above format, and 
independent work  on cognitive exercises for 60 minutes per week for 15 weeks using a laptop, 
PC or tablet available to them  (at home, school, clinic, library). Independent work on designated 
web-based computer exercises can be  done  in multiple or in one sitting. Clients  will keep logs of 
their activities and issues related to  remote practice. During the in -clinic session, the clinician 
will review their remote activities, problem -solve  any access or activity related issues, provide 
personalized bridging, encouragement and feedback, and  review the exercises to be completed 
remotely before the next clinic -based session. Clinicians will also maintain  logs of their 
experiences with remote sessions to document issues pertinent to feasibil ity and effectiveness.  
 
Throughout treatment  in both conditions , CR clinicians document service utilization by [CONTACT_899374], attendance, treatment dropout and completion. PI [INVESTIGATOR_899359] a part of overseeing the CR2PR program.  
 
Within one week following  treatment completion , clients  will be assessed for treatment 
satisfaction and change in neurocognitive functioning  by a research a ssistant . Treatment 
completion is defined as at least [ADDRESS_1261184] informed the choice of cognitive exercises . 
Criteria for Early Discontinuation : Criteria for early discontinuation from the study will follow 
clinic -based guidelines. A person is discontinued from a service if they are no longer able to 
attend due to scheduling conflicts (e.g. , work/school), hospi[INVESTIGATOR_899360], inpatient psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or discharged from the clinic. The CR2PR  
clinic ian will use clinical judgment as to the appropriateness of continued participation for each 
participant, taking into account evidence of clinical worsening, suicidality, or other issues that 
may arise during participation. Consultation with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_899361]. No additional criteria will be used for research purposes . 
 
Assessment Measures:  Screening measures include the Wechsler Test of Adult Reading 
(WTAR -5) and Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale . The Tone Matching Test is included in 
the assessment battery to tailor the CR treatment plan. The primary outcome measure will be 
treatment satisfaction. The secondary outcome will be change in neurocognition from baseline 
to post -treatment (approximatel y 15 weeks).  
 
▪ The Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR -5) will be used to estimate premorbid 
intellectual functioning and determine eligibility (Full Scale IQ ≥ 70). This assessment 
takes 3 -5 minutes.  
 
▪ The Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale  will be used to as sess psychiatric 
stability. Should suicidal ideation or behavior be endorsed, imminent risk will be further 
evaluated by [CONTACT_899375], immediate action will be taken. This 
assessment takes 5 -10 minutes.  
 
▪ The Tone Matching Test (TMT ) consists of pairs of 100 -ms tones that are either the 
same or differ in pi[INVESTIGATOR_899362] 2.5 and 50%, with a 500 -ms inter -tone interval. The 
participant listens to each tone pair and indicates whether the tones were the same or 
different. A cut -off score of  70% correct classifies EAP as impaired or intact. This test 
takes approximately 7 -10 minutes and will be administered by [CONTACT_899376].   
 
▪ Treatment Satisfaction : Following completion of CR, all clients are asked to complete a 
questionnaire rating satisfaction with the treatment experience, working alliance with the 
CR clinician, and perceived benefits from the intervention. Items are rated on a sale of 1 
to 6. Th e outcome measure is an average of all ratings with higher ratings indicating 
greater satisfaction.  This measure takes approximately 2 minutes to complete. 
Treatment satisfaction will be compared between groups.  
 
▪ Neurocognition:  The Brief Assessment of C ognition in Schizophrenia (BACS) is a 
standardized battery. Selected subtests will assess verbal memory, working memory, 
speed of processing, and executive function. The tests will take approximately [ADDRESS_1261185] – Identical Pairs (CPT -IP) is a 
computerized test that assesses attention/vigilance. P articipants view numbers flashed 
on a computer screen and are to respond when the same number appears twice in a 
row. The test takes [ADDRESS_1261186] T scores. Change in neurocognition will be compared 
between groups.  
Research Related Delay to Treatment: Researc h procedures will not result in a delay to 
treatment. All clients will have access to the Cognitive Remediation program provided routinely 
at their clinic.  
 
Clinical Treatment Alternatives:  All clients who decline to participate in research will continue 
the usual process of intake into their clinic’s CR program. They may receive cognitive 
remediation as usual.  
 
Risks/Discomforts/Inconveniences: The main risk is loss of confidentiality. In addition, 
patients may become mildly uncomfortable or tired during assessments or during cognitive 
training. However, no adverse reactions to the assessments or interventions have been 
reported during the two years the clinical service has been in place at the clinics or in 
preliminary studies. The software used in  this study is the same or similar to that used in clinical 
practice in [LOCATION_001] state OMH clinics with high levels of satisfaction. Although there are no 
anticipated risks as a function of the assessments or intervention, given that the sample 
involves pe ople with psychotic disorders, it is conceivable that participants may feel burdened 
by [CONTACT_43056], or may experience psychiatric symptom exacerbation unrelated to the study.  
 
Methods to Minimize Risk:   
 
Confidentiality:  The primary risk is loss of confidentiality.  Procedures associated with potential 
loss of  confidentiality, and measures to protect confidentiality are listed in the consent form. A 
HIPAA  Authorization form, reviewed at the time of informed consent, lists those entities with 
whom know ledge of  participation and data may be shared.  Confidentiality will be preserved by 
[CONTACT_899377], session logs, and  electronic files using a unique numerical 
identifier not linked to personal identifying information (e.g. name,  date of birth). Consent forms 
will contain  identifying information but will not be coupled with numerical identification numbers . 
Study computers  used for collecting and storing data will be encrypted. Hard copy data will be 
maintained in a locked file cabinet and  electronic files  will be stored on password protected, 
encrypted computers, in a locked office at NYSPI. Only the research  team will have access to 
electronic data. Public dissemination of the results of this research will contain no  identifying 
informati on about individual subjects. Data deposited into appropriate repositories for public  
sharing will be stripped of any personal identifying information to protect confidentiality.  
 
Burden or Fatigue : During assessments, breaks and refreshments may be provided to 
minimize burden or fatigue and, if feasible, assessment sessions may be divided. OMH 
clinicians have been trained to attend to signs of burden or fatigue during assessments and 
intervention. P articipants will discuss their treatment experience with the CR clinician on a 
weekly basis. This will assist clinicians in trouble -shooting challenges (clinical or practical) to 
participation and minimize perceived burden. In -clinic, breaks during treatme nt sessions are and 
will continue to be offered as needed. Patients completing remote sessions may self -pace their 
completion of exercises and may do them in a location that is convenient and comfortable.  
 
Unanticipated Adverse Events:  A trained research assistant will administer the Columbia -
Suicide Severity Rating Scale during the screening appointment to assess psychiatric stability. 
Should suicidal ideation or behavior be endorsed, imminent risk will be further evaluated by [CONTACT_899378] , immediate action will be taken, similar to what is outlined for clinical 
worsening. PI [INVESTIGATOR_899363]. Supervision of cognitive remediation clinicians with  PI [INVESTIGATOR_899364]’ clinical stability and ability to continue with treatment sessions. 
Clinical worsening will be reported to PI [INVESTIGATOR_899365]. Clini cal worsening is defined as an increase in 
symptoms (e.g. , hallucinations, paranoia) that causes significant distress, poses imminent risk, 
and/or impairs the ability of the individual to participate in study procedures. The consent form 
states that if the  participant experiences an increase in symptoms or distress, the study 
personnel should be informed and will assist the participant in getting the help they need. When 
research personnel encounter clinical worsening during any study -related procedure they  will 1) 
assist the subject in contact[CONTACT_899379], therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541], or psychiatrist and 2) report 
the urgent clinical issue to PI [INVESTIGATOR_899358]. In the unlikely situation that a subject is deemed to be an 
imminent risk to self or others (i.e. , expres ses imminent suicidal or homicidal ideation), the study 
personnel will physically walk the subject to their primary case worker, therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541], or psychiatrist. 
Further course of action may include contact[CONTACT_899380] 911. Any unanticipated adverse event will be reported immediately to 
PI [INVESTIGATOR_899366] . 
 
Certificate of Confidentiality:  This study will be conducted under a Certificate of 
Confidential ity. 
 
Direct Benefits to Subjects:  Cognitive remediation and computerized learning software have 
been used in many psychiatric patient populations in various settings and are well -recognized 
procedures without serious risk. There is potential for direct be nefit to the patient participants, 
such as improvement in cognition, and potential benefits for the treatment of other people with 
neuropsychiatric disorder.  
 
Compensation or Reimbursement : Participants will be compensated $40 for the baseline 
assessment a nd $[ADDRESS_1261187] -treatment assessment.  
 
References  
 
1. Bowie CR, Harvey PD. Cognitive deficits and functional outcome in schizophrenia. 
Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2006;2(4):531 –536  
 
2. Green MF, Kern RS, Braff DL, Mintz J. Neurocognitive deficits and f unctional outcome in 
schizophrenia: are we measuring the "right stuff"? Schizophr Bull. 2000;26(1):119 -136. 
 
3. Green MF, Kern RS, Heaton RK. Longitudinal studies of cognition and functional outcome in 
schizophrenia: implications for MATRICS. Schizophr Res . 2004;72(1):41 -51.  
 
4. Medalia A, Erlich MD, Soumet -Leman C, Saperstein AM. Translating cognitive behavioral 
interventions from bench to bedside: The feasibility and acceptability of cognitive remediation in 
research as compared to clinical settings. Sch izophr Res. 2017 Jul 30. pii: S0920 -
9964(17)[ZIP_CODE] -3.  
 
5. Medalia, A, Saperstein, AM, Hansen, M, Lee, S. Personalized treatment for cognitive 
dysfunction in individuals with schizophrenia spectrum disorders. Neuropsychol Rehabil. 2016; 
24:1-12.  
 
6. Fisher M, Loewy R, Carter C, Lee A, Ragland JD, Niendam T, Schlosser D, Pham L, 
Miskovich T, Vinogradov, S. Neuroplasticity -based auditory training via laptop computer 
improves cognition in young individuals with recent onset schizophrenia. Schizophr Bu ll. 
2015;41(1):250 -8.  
 
7. Ventura J, Wilson SA, Wood RC, Hellemann GS. Letter to the Editor. Cognitive training at 
home in schizophrenia is feasible Schizophr Res. 2013;143:[ADDRESS_1261188] of Adult Reading: WTAR. San Antonio, TX: The Psychological 
Corporation, 2001.  
 
9. Posner K, Brown GK, Stanley B, Brent DA, Yershova KV, Oquendo MA, Currier GW, Melvin 
GA, Greenhill L, Shen S, Mann JJ. The Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale: initial validity 
and internal consistency findings from three multisite studies with adolescents and adults. Am J 
Psychiatry. 2011;168(12):1266 –1277.  
 
10. Javitt DC and Sweet RA. Auditory dysfunction in schizophrenia: integrating clinical and basic 
features. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2015;16(9):535 -50.  
 
11. Petk ova E, Lu F, Kantrowitz J, Sanchez JL, Lehrfeld J, Scaramello N, Silipo G, DiCostanza 
J, Ross M, Su Z, Javitt DC, Butler PD. Auditory tasks for assessment of sensory function and 
affective prosody in schizophrenia. Compr Psychiatry. 2014;55(8):1862 -74. 
 
12. Keefe RS, Goldberg TE, Harvey PD, Gold JM, Poe MP, Coughenour L. The brief 
assessment of cognition In schizophrenia: Reliability, sensitivity, and comparison with a 
standard neurocognitive battery. Schizophr Res. 2004;68: 283 –297.  
 
13. Cornblatt BA, Ris ch NJ, Faris G, Friedman D, Erlenmeyer -Kimling L. The continuous 
performance test, identical pairs version (CPT -IP): I. New findings about sustained attention in 
normal families. Psychiatry Res 1988; 26:223 -238. 
 
 
 