 Clinical Investigation  Plan Cover Page  
 
 
 
 
[ADDRESS_1071757] Number: 05327101  
 
 
Quantifying Patient Preferences for Leadless Pacemakers  
Study Document No:   
 
Date: 21-FEB- [ADDRESS_1071758] OF TABLES  
Table 1. Responsible Parties  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ .... 5 
Table 2. Attribute Table  ................................ ................................ ................................ ................................ ............  11 
Table 3. Items in the Ranking Exercise  ................................ ................................ ................................ .................  12 
 

Patient Preference Study Protocol   
February 21, 202 2 
7 3.SYNPOSIS
Abbott’s dual chamber leadless pacemaker (Leadless DR System) will offer an alternative to 
traditional dual chamber pacemakers among patients in need of dual -chamber rate -responsive 
bradycardi a pacing therapy.  Relative to conventional transvenous pacemakers, the Leadless DR 
System offers advantages including that it is totally self -contained and does not require separate 
components (leads and generator) , thereby [CONTACT_779748] s, for example pocket infection, lead fracture, and lead dislodgment .  In 
addition, because the device is placed directly in the heart, it is not visible, and does not 
necessitate a lump and scar on the chest.  However, its drawbacks relative to transvenous 
pacemakers include a potentially higher rate of complications  like cardiac perforation , shorter 
battery life requiring more frequent replacement procedures, and less historical evidence about 
its safety and ef ficacy. Obtaining scientific information on the  relative importance of the 
advantages and disadvantages of both types of pacemakers from the patient perspective will 
provide valuable information to regulators, providers, and patients.  
A quantitative patien t preference survey , using a discrete -choice experiment (DCE),  will be 
developed, tested and fielded amongst individuals undergoing evaluation for a cardiac pacemaker 
at US clinical sites participating in Abbott’s single -arm Investigational Device Exemptio n (IDE) trial 
for the Aveir dual -chamber leadless pacemaker.  Adult patients  who are referred to the study site 
for evaluat ion for a pacemaker or with a known i ndication for a de-novo pacemaker will be eligible 
to complete the patient -preference survey via online administration.  All participants will complete 
the patient -preference survey before  being approached about their potential interest in enrolling  
in the trial , and thus before they receive  information about dual -chamber pacemakers and before 
they receive  their pacemaker .  
 
 
The primary objective of the study is to quantify patient preferences for pacemaker device 
features. The secondary objective  is to explore and characterize heterog eneity in patient 
preferences. 
 
 
 

Protocol    
  February 21, 202 2 
8 
 
 4. RATIONALE FOR PATIENT PREFERENCY STUDY  
Abbott’s dual chamber leadless pacemaker will offer an alternative to traditional dual chamber 
pacemakers. The dual chamber leadless implantable pacemaker system, henceforth referre d 
to as the “Leadless DR System ”, is a programmable system comprising two i mplanted 
leadless pacemaker devices that monitors and regulates the patient’s heart rate by [CONTACT_779749] -responsive bradycardia pacing therapy. Each leadless pacemaker device 
of a Leadless DR System is a self-contained pulse generator with b uilt-in battery and 
electrodes that provide bradycardia therapy (sensing and pacing). As a leadless pacemaker, 
it does not require a pacing lead or its associated connector, nor does it require a pulse 
generator pocket.  Instead, it is intended for direct implantation into the right ventricle and/or 
the right atrium.  
The Leadless DR system eliminates complications associated with the leads, surgical pocket, 
and connectors required with a traditional dual chamber pacemaker  (e.g. pocket infection, 
lead fractu re, and lead dislodgment ). Among leadless pacemaker systems, Abbott’s system 
is unique in its ability to upgrade from a single to a dual chamber leadless configuration and 
the retrievability of the dual chamber system. The system also provides other import ant, non -
clinical benefits. First, a leadless system may improve patient comfort because it is implanted 
directly in the heart; therefore, patients cannot feel the device. With a traditional pacemaker, 
some patients report pain or discomfort around the gen erator pocket.i Second, the leadless 
system eliminates the visible lump and scar at a traditional pacemaker’s pectoral implant site. 
A leadless system also minimizes the need for activity restrictions after surgery, which are 
required following traditiona l pacemaker surgery to prevent lead dislodgement.  
At the same time, the Leadless DR system presents certain disadvantages compared to a 
traditional pacemaker. First, although the Leadless system avoids risks associated with leads, 
pockets and connectors, it increases the risk of cardiac perforation during implantation. 
Second, the battery life of the two generators in a Leadless DR system will be shorter than 
the battery life of the generator in a traditional pacemaker, meaning the Leadless generators 
will have to be replaced more often than a traditional generator. The Leadless DR system is 
also a new technology, while traditional pacemakers have been commercially available for 
over 50 years. As such, there is less evidence available regarding physicians’ and patients’ 
experience with leadless systems, particularly in the longer term, compared to traditional 
pacemakers.  
Conventional transvenous pacemakers provide significant improvements in physical 
functioning and outcomes in individuals with bradyarrhyth mia. Although generally well 
tolerated, serious adverse events, including pocket -related issues (i.e. infections, hematomas, 
skin erosion, twiddler’s syndrome) and lead -related issues (i.e. infections, fractures, connector 
issues, lead -induced tricuspid re gurgitation, venous obstruction or thrombosis), pose 

Protocol    
  February 21, [ADDRESS_1071759] different levels of 
importance on the features of transvenous pacemakers and leadless pacemakers and their 
associated risks.  
The Investigational Device Exemption (IDE) clinical trial that will be used to support market 
approval for the Leadless DR System is currently under development. It will be conducted in 
a global patient population with cardiovascular issues in which  a pacem aker is indicated .  The 
purpose of the global IDE study is to evaluate the clinical safety and efficacy of a dual chamber 
leadless pacemaker in patients indicated for dual chamber pacing.  
Abbott is conducting a patient preference study among sites partici pating in  the trial, in 
collaboration with the Duke Clinical Research Institute’s (DCRI)  
, to quantify patient preferences pertaining to risks and features of 
conventional transvenous pacemakers and leadless pac emakers. The preference study is 
designed to elicit patient preferences for risks and features that vary between a dual chamber 
leadless pacemaker system  and a dual chamber transvenous pacemaker system, to quantify 
their relative importance . The results of  the patient preference study will inform technology 
development, support regulatory review , and potentially support Abbott dual -chamber 
leadless system product labeling to provide patients’ perspectives on perceived advantages  
versus the risks of a leadle ss dual chamber system compared to a dual chamber transvenous 
pacemaker.  
 
5. OBJECTIVES  
5.1. Primary  
The primary objective of the study is to quantify patient preferences for pacemaker device 
features. This includes estimates of the following:  
o The conditional relative importance of device features included in the DCE  
o Maximum p ercentage -point increases in the acceptable risk of complications or infection 
for an improvement in another attribute (for example: to get a preferred device type, to 
avoid  discomfort, or to have a device with longer battery life)  

Protocol    
  February 21, 202 2 
10 
 
 o Other value equivalents (for example: What patients will give up in terms of years of 
battery life to move from a less -preferred device type to a more -preferred device type ). 
o Predicted choice probabi lities for product profiles relative to specified comparators (i.e. 
the likelihood that an average respondent in the sample would choose a device profile 
with specific features, compared with a profile with different features)  
o Mean ranking of select device  features not included in the DCE (i.e. insertion  procedure, 
visible lump of the generator, and scar on chest or groin)  
5.2. Secondary  
The secondary objective s of the study include the following:  
o Use latent -class analysis to investigate whether there are classes of respondents with 
systematically different preferences and to investigate whether these differences in 
preferences are correlated with self -reported characteristics   
o Test for differences i n preferences in the following subgroups:  
• Participants who agreed (verbal or written) to be screened for  participation in the IDE 
study compared with those who did not  (see Section 7)  
• Gender  
• Age 65 years and older compared with those younger than 65 years  
• Body mass index (BMI)  stratified by [CONTACT_779750] (i.e. BMI≥ 30 versus 
>30) 
• History of major surgery (self -report) requiring a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_271477] [ADDRESS_1071760] 5 years  
• Those with a sedentary lifestyle compared with those with a n on-sedentary lifestyle 
where sedentary is defined as not exercising and non -seden tary is any amount of daily 
exercise.  
 
6. METHODS  
6.1. Study Design  
In the DCE, respondents will be asked to select their preferred device alternative in a series 
of experimentally controlled pairs of hypothetical device alternatives. The alternatives will be 
defined in terms of specific levels of device features (attributes).  
6.2. Attribute Selection  
The DCRI team, which includes an expert clinical researcher and electr ophysiologist, 
collaborated with Abbott and patient advisors (see Section 6.3) to select the study attributes. 
Selection of attributes and corresponding levels were informed by a scopi[INVESTIGATOR_779746], scientific abstracts, and product  information available from manufacturers 
of traditional and leadless pacemaker devices. Priority was given to treatment features 
thought to be of concern to patients and those that differentiate device alternatives.  

Protocol    
  February 21, 202 2 
12 
 
 regarding  leads, respondents could choose “having a pacemaker without leads” or “having a 
pacemaker wit h leads” , as shown in Table 3.  The chosen feature of greater concern is then 
transferred to the ranking exercise so that all features shown in the ranking exercise represent 
negative aspects of pacemakers from the patient perspective.  
Table 3. Items in the Ranking Exercise   
Insertion  procedure  
• Pacemaker inserted through cut in skin on the chest  
• Pacemaker inserted using tube through the groin  
Leads  
• Having a p acemaker with leads  
• Having a p acemaker without leads  
Pacemaker location  
• Having a p acemaker placed under the skin on the chest  
• Having a p acemaker attached to the walls inside the heart  
No heavy lifting is allowed for 6 weeks (versus limited activity for 
2 weeks)  
Scar on chest (versus no scar)  
Lump on chest (versus no lump)  
 
6.3. Patient Advisory Group  
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 

Protocol    
  February 21, 202 2 
13 
 
 6.4. Pretesting the Survey Instrument  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
6.5. Survey Instrument  
The final survey instrument includes the following sections:  
o Screening questions to confirm eligibility ( Section 7) 
o Informed consent ( Section 14.2) 
o Patient -reported information on personal health and socio demographic characteristics  
o Attribute descriptions  
o Tutorial on risks presented graphically  
o Practice questions to familiarize respondents with the DCE question format  
o Comprehension questions  
o DCE questions  
o Ranking exercise  
 
The DCE survey is expected to take 25 -30 minutes to complete. The survey will be 
administered online.  
 
6.6. DCE Experimental Design  
A D-efficient experimental design representing 48 choice questions was generated using 
design algorithms in SAS (Kuhfeld 2010).iv The design was divided into [ADDRESS_1071761] System IDE clinical trial sites for evaluation 
for a pacemaker or with a known indication for a de -novo pacemaker will be eligible to 
complete the patient -preference survey via online administration  (Figure 1 ). Only IDE study 
sites in the Unit ed States will participate.   
To be eligible to complete a PPI [CONTACT_154700] , patients  must meet the following eligibility criteria:  
• Adult patients age 18 years or older  
• Reside in the [LOCATION_002]  
• Able to read and speak English, consent to participate in the PPI [CONTACT_154700]  
• Willing and able  to use a tablet or computer to complete the survey   Figure 1. Flowchart for Recruitment in PPI [INVESTIGATOR_779747] 21, 202 2 
17 
 
 form for patients who verbally consent to participate in the IDE trial. This  information will be 
used to differentiate among: 1) patients who verbally consented to be  screened but did not 
meet inclusion/excl usion criteria ; 2) patients who met eligibility criteria but declined to 
participate in the IDE trial; and 3) patients who ultimately enrolled in the trial and received a 
leadless pacemaker.  
DCRI will send Abbott passcodes  along with information  indicating  whether the survey was 
completed or partially completed, and Abbott will transfer the passcodes to study sites.  Using 
this method, DCRI will not receive any patient protected health information (PHI).   
Participants should complete the survey using a tabl et or PC. Participant s should be strongly 
discouraged from using a mobile phone to complete the survey.  
10. Participant C ompensation  
As described in Section 9, s tudy sites will maintain crosswalks linking pass codes  for the 
patient preference survey with patient identifiers in order to track who has completed the 
survey and to pay any incentives that may be due to the participant. It is assumed that Abbott 
or study sites will process incentive payments.  
11. Data M anagem ent 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 
 

Protocol    
  February 21, [ADDRESS_1071762]:  
o Years since diagnosis with heart problems  
o Actions taken to manage heart problems  
o Years since first pacemaker received  
o Number of times pacemaker replaced  
o Years since last pacemaker replacement  
o Type of pacemaker  
o Experience with pacemaker d iscomfort, complications, and infections  
o Experience with major surgery  
o Age 
o Gender  
o Height and weight (to compute BMI)  
o Lifestyle activity level  
o Marital status  
o Race/ethnicity  
o Source of health insurance  
o Highest education completed  
o Employment status  
o Responses to comprehension questions  
o Respondents’ treatment choices in the DCE questions  
o Respondents’ ranking of items in the ranking exercise  
The survey will not collect  any protected health information (PHI).  
11.2.  Additional Variables  
Additional participant -level variables not collected in the survey will be tracked  by [CONTACT_779751] . These data will later be merged with survey data for analysis. Variables that 
will be transferred to Duke are limited to the following:  
o Participants’ pass codes  to access the survey  
o Whether the participant completed or partially completed the preference survey  
o Whether the individual agreed to participate in  the IDE clinical trial 
o Study site identifier  
 
 

Protocol    
  February 21, 202 2 
19 
 
 11.3.  Study  Endpoints  
Study  endpoints will include a set of log -odds preference weights for all attribute levels 
included in the DCE.   From these preference weights, the following endpoints will also be 
calculated:  
o The conditional relative importance of device features included in the DCE  
o Percentag e-point increases in the maximum -acceptable risk (MAR) of complications or 
infection for an improvement in another attribute (for example: to get a preferred device 
type, to avoid  discomfort, or a have a device with longer battery life)  
o Other value equiva lents (for example: What patients will give up in terms of years of battery 
life to move from a less -preferred device type to a more -preferred device type)  
o Predicted choice probabilities for product profiles relative to specified comparators (i.e. the 
likelihood that an average respondent in the sample would choose a device profile with 
specific features, compared with a profile with different features)  
Mean ranking of select device features not included in the DCE (i.e. insertion  procedure, 
visible lump of the generator, and scar on chest or groin)  will be estimated.  
12. Analysis  
Discrete -choice experiments generate complex cross -section/time -series choice data for each 
respondent. These data inc lude a dichotomous dependent variable and are analyzed using 
advanced statistical methods. The basis for the analysis is the model specification assumed when 
generating the experimental design prior to survey implementation. That specification considers 
a categorical main -effects model for all study attributes. However, the specification assumed in 
the experimental design takes into account only statistical considerations. The statistical analysis 
of choices will provide a measure of the impact of changes i n the attribute levels on the likelihood 
that treatments are selected by [CONTACT_170496], also referred to as attribute -level preference 
weights.  
Respondents’ reactions to the stimuli in DCE questions generally involve complex decision 
process es, and the fina l model specification must account for the pattern of choices as observed 
in the data set. The Statistical Analysis Plan from the DCRI  lays out the initial 
analyses that will be conducted to assess the quality of the data and describes exploratory analytic 
strategies that will inform the final model specification.  
The design and study specifications have been developed to support a r obust analysis and 
reporting that will include the following:  
• Summary statistics of respondents’ demographic characteristics, sociodemographic 
characteristics, experience with heart problems and treatment for heart problems  

Protocol  
February 21, 202 2 
20 •An evaluation of data quality including respondents’ performance on survey
comprehension questions, time to complete the survey, response non -variance, and
attribute dominance
•A scope test to evaluate whether respondents are sensitive to actual levels of risk
presented
•Subgroup analysis for pre -specified subgroups
•An analysis of preference heterogeneity among respondents and associations with
different demographic, clinical, and treatment characteristics
•Selection of the most appropriate preference model specification and rep orting of the
relative importance of device features included in the DCE, equivalence values
(including MARs ), and predicted choice probabilities
•Results of a ranking exercise for additional device features not included in the DCE
Additional, d etailed descriptions of planned study analyses are included in the Statistical Analysis 
Plan from the DCRI . 
13. Limitations  of the Research Methods
Although the study will follow good survey practices to elicit truthful responses from participants, 
choice s obtained with DCE questions do not have the same consequences as real -world 
treatment decisions.  
The use of a fractional -factorial D -efficient design will not allow the estimation of individual -level 
preferences or higher -order interaction likely effect s between attributes. This, however, is offset 
by [CONTACT_779752] a design will allow us to ask respondents to complete a more reasonable 
number of DCE questions.  
The study design can be limited by [CONTACT_779753]. However, to  
address, the study employs accepted best practice survey design strategies such as low reading 
level text, a risk tutorial, color, and graphics to engage respondents and the inclusion of 
comprehension questions to evaluate respondents who are sufficiently  well prepared to provide 
valid preference data.  
14. Protection of Human Subjects
14.1.  Institutional Review Board/Independent Ethics Committee  
The  will be the IRB of 
record for this study. The  has oversight of 10 convened IRBs, of which 8 meet 
monthly. The holds a Federal -Wide Assurance 

Protocol  
February 21, 202 2 
21  from the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) Office for 
Human Research Protections (OHRP)  that allows us to review and approve human subject 
procedures through our IRB committees. These committees are also registered with OHRP 
for both DHHS and Food and Drug Administration -regulated research. The FWA requires IRB 
review for all studies conduct ed by [CONTACT_779754], regardless of the 
funding source.   
14.2.  Informed Consent  
An electronic consent document  will be provided by [CONTACT_779755]. The 
consent document will provide information about the study and instruct participants  that they 
may contact [CONTACT_779756]/or the IRB should they have any questions about the study. 
Site re search staff are responsible for providing the contact [CONTACT_779757] t form. Participants will be asked to read this information, and they wi ll be given the 
option to agree or not agree to continue with the PPI [CONTACT_154700].  
14.3.  Confidentiality  
While it is impossible to guarantee perfect data security given the electronic nature of data 
collection, every effort to ensure security will be made and this w ill be explained to 
respondents as part of their informed consent. The online patient preference survey will not 
collect individually identifying information. The only information that will be collected that could 
be used to identify an individual is the passcode  used to access the survey. However, the 
crosswalk between the pass code and personal identifying information will be maintained at 
IDE study sites. Information from study sites transmitted back to Duke will be limited to 
variables described in Secti on 11.2. 
Further, to ensure data privacy, data will be collected on secure data systems by [CONTACT_779758]. No data will be intentionally 
disclosed to third parties.  
All data and records will be kept c onfidential in accordance with i nstitutional policies and 
HIPAA on subject privacy and that the Investigator and other site personnel will not use such 
data and records for any purpose other than those specified and use upon analysis for 
potential publicat ion purposes. Any data analyzed for publication will remain de -identified.  

Protocol    
  February 21, 202 2 
22 
 
 REFERENCES  
 
 
i Magnusson, P., Liv, P. Living with a pacemaker: Patient -reported outcome of a pacemaker 
system. BMC Cardiovascular Disorders  2018; 18(1). doi:10.1186/s12872 -018-0849 -6. 
 
ii Cabanas -Grandío P, Campo EG, Bisbal P, et al. Quality of Life of Patients Undergoing  
Conventional vs Leadless Pacemaker Implantation: A Multicenter Observational 
Study.  J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol  2020 ;31(1):330 -336.  doi: 10.1111/jce.[ZIP_CODE].  
 
iii Udo EO, van Hemel NM, Zuithoff NPA, et al. Long Term Quality -Of-Life in Patients with 
Bradycardia Pacemaker Im plantation. Int J Cardiol. 2013; 3;168(3):2159 -63. doi: 
10.1016/j.ijcard.2013.01.253.  
 
iv Kuhfeld, W. Marketing Research Methods in SAS . 2010  
v Orme BK. Getting Started with Conjoint Analysis: Strategies for Product Design and Pricing 
Research.  Vol 2nd. Madison, WI: Research Publishers, LLC; 2010.  
 
vi Yang JC, Johnson FR, Kilambi V, Mohamed AF. Sample size and utility -difference 
precision in discr ete-choice experiments: A meta -simulation approach. Journal of 
Choice Modelling. 2015;16(C):50 -57. 
