Title: A Multi -Component Alcohol and Sex Risk Intervention for College Students  
NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Document Date: IRB Approval 8/23/21 
 
Study Protocol and Statistical Analysis Plan  
RECRUITMENT  
Participants will be recruited from two university in the [LOCATION_003] . All participants will be between 
the ages of 18- 24 and will  be eligible to participate regardless of drinking or relationship status. 
Students will be recruited from a random sample of students provided by [CONTACT_378333]'s Office 
or Office of Research at each site, stratified by [CONTACT_767837]. Approximately three 
weeks into the fall semester, students will receive an email with an invitation to participate and a 
link to an IRB approved consent form. Each participant receives a personalized link wit h a 
random, unique personalized identification number (PIN) embedded in the link. This PIN is used 
instead of identify information to track participation, track incentive payments, and for creating 
ingroup materials (more details below). Before each in -person group session, participants will 
receive emails, phone calls and / or text messages about the time and location of the group meeting . 
BASELINE DATA COLLECTION  
After providing consent, participants will be asked to complete a brief survey assessing past  
drinking, sexual behaviors, protective behavioral strategy use, by[CONTACT_358514], intentions of engaging in protective behavioral strategy use, intentions of engaging in by[CONTACT_358514], and 
self-efficacy measures of protective behavioral strategy us e and by[CONTACT_767838].  
As part of the consent form, participants will consent to take the survey and participate in the 
groups. After completing the survey questions, participant will be reminded about the content 
and format of the group meetings. The y will then be asked to select a time to attend the group 
meetings, alternatively they can indicate that they are still interested but not available to attend 
any of the meeting times, or that they no longer wish to attend the group meetings. Participants 
who sign up for the groups or indicate they are still interested in attending will be redirected to 
an additional survey to input their contact [CONTACT_3031]. At the end of the survey, participants will 
be provided with a link to resources related to sexual assault and alcohol use. Participants will 
receive a $[ADDRESS_1052963] for completing the survey.  Participants will be randomized to the 
SPLASH intervention or the control condition (i.e., healthy eating and physical activity 
promotion).  
IN-PERSON GROUP MEETING CONTENT 
Both the SPLASH intervention and control condition comprise of two group sessions that will 
take place approximately two weeks apart. Each group session will take approximately two 
hours . Upon arrival to the session, each participant will  be asked to sign an informed consent 
form that includes permission to audiorecord the meeting. During the preamble statement to the 
group, the facilitators will discuss the importance of anonymity of in -group responses, and 
students will be asked to treat  the group discussion as a privileged conversation. Participants will 
be asked to use a fictitious name [CONTACT_767846]. 
Discussions will be audiorecorded.  
SPLASH CONDITION  
Session 1 will involve normative feedback and protective behavioral strategies training related to 
alcohol use and sexual behaviors. The normative feedback component of the intervention is  
interactive (i.e.,  using live anonymous polling software participan ts will be able to text their 
responses to questions related to other same -campus students’ alcohol consumption, alcohol use 
before/during sex, and frequency of unprotected casual sex and immediately view the group’s responses). Data collected through the system are anonymous and are not connected to student 
cell phone numbers or any other identifying information. Participation in the polling is voluntary 
and there are no questions about students’ personal behaviors. The normative feedback will involve a di scussion of, for example, why students hold normative misperceptions.  
In addition to normative feedback, participants in session 1 will receive protective behavioral 
strategies (PBS) training in order to build skills for overcoming barriers and implementi ng PBS 
to reduce risky alcohol and drinking -related sexual behaviors. The methods we will utilize are 
based on our past research (Kenney, Napper et al., 2014; LaBrie, Napper et al., 2015). More 
specifically, prior to the intervention session students’ resp onses to the baseline survey are used 
to populate a feedback sheet that describes how often they use a series of protective strategies. Each sheet is labeled with a unique participant ID number (the same PIN as that used to identify 
their survey data), and not student names (or any other identifying information). When students 
check into the meeting, their name [CONTACT_767847] a folder containing 
their personal feedback sheet(s). The folder provides students with a method to keep the ir 
responses private if they wish.  
During the intervention, students will be asked to review their responses on the feedback 
sheet(s). They will be asked, for example, to identify strategies they commonly use and strategies 
they would like to use more oft en. Participants will be encouraged to discuss as a group why they 
find strategies useful, how they use them, barriers to use (including heavy alcohol use), and how they overcome barriers to use. Participants will be encouraged to set personal goals about their 
use of strategies in the future and asked to write down these goals. The facilitators will 
encourage participants to provide suggestions and support for each other, and will utilize group 
process strategies (e.g., creative inquiries, circular questio ning) to facilitate peer discussion and 
collective brainstorming. Students do not have to share their own personal experiences if they are 
not comfortable and instead they can talk more generally about college students’ experiences or 
not participate in th e group discussion. As noted above, participants will be encouraged to use a 
fictitious name [CONTACT_767848]. Participants are able to take home their folder containing the 
feedback sheets and goals.  
Session 2 will address alcohol use and by[CONTACT_767839]. At the beginning of the session 
participants will be reminded about the audiorecording and to use fictitious names. Any 
participants who missed session 1 will be asked to sign consent forms. Participants will receive 
interactive normative feedback on the prevalence and acceptability of by[CONTACT_767840] 1. Participants will also be presented with 
by[CONTACT_767841] . In small groups, 
participants will be asked to identify possible dangers in the scenarios and specific strategies that could be used to intervene. The session will end with a group discussion on the intersection of 
alcohol use and by[CONTACT_767838] (e.g., how alcohol us e inhibits intervention). At the end of 
both Session 1 and 2 participants will be offered an information sheet with information about alcohol and sex -assault related resources . 
CONTROL CONDITION  
The procedures for the control condition are the same as thos e described above; however, the 
content of intervention focuses on promoting healthy eating and physical activity.  For example, 
during Session [ADDRESS_1052964] -intervention assessment measures in 
order to determ ine participants’ perceptions of the helpfulness of the intervention and acceptance 
of the intervention content . Participants will receive a $[ADDRESS_1052965] -session measures.  
MITIGATING RISK  
Participants will be informed that their participation is voluntary, that they can decline to answer 
any questions they do not feel comfortable answering, and that they can withdraw from the study 
at any time without penalty. In addition, efforts will be taken to ensure all participant data is kept confidential. While some of the topi[INVESTIGATOR_767834], the questions do not 
fall outside of the bounds of questions that might come up during a routine doctor's visit, and 
thus do not pose more than a minimal risk. During group meetings, participants will not be 
required to share personal alcohol or sex related information. During the group discussions, 
participants will be asked to use a fictitious name. Participants will be reminded that it i s their 
choice what they disclose during group discussions. At the end of the group, students will be 
offered information about alcohol and sex -assault related resources.  
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
Preliminary analyses will examine patterns of missing data, dropout rates, and differences 
between the two sites. Before commencing analyses, variable distributions will be assessed and 
outliers dealt with appropriately  when necessary. We will assess the effectiveness of the 
randomization procedure by [CONTACT_767842]. If meaningful differences 
are observed between conditions, individual -level covariates will be used.  
Study Feasibility and Treatment Feasibility/Acceptability. We will assess the feasibility of 
procedures by [CONTACT_767843], refusal rates, follow -up rates. We will assess the 
feasibility and acceptability of SPLASH and the general health promot ion control by [CONTACT_767844], completion (attending both sessions, drop- outs), and descriptive 
analysis of satisfaction data .  
Intervention Effects: In examining preliminary intervention effects, we will investigate the effect 
of condition on outcomes (i.e., alcohol use, safe sex behaviors, use of PBS and by[CONTACT_767845] , perceived norms, self -efficacy, and willingness ). Given that effect size estimates may 
be unreliable for small pi[INVESTIGATOR_767835] ( e.g., 95% CIs) and 
direction of effects between conditions. We  will explore correlations among condition, alcohol 
and sex- related outcomes.  
Between -Group Comparisons and Power: Given the pi[INVESTIGATOR_767836], our focus will  be on ascertaining whether the direction of the results are consistent 
with proposed hypotheses, and whether the strength of effect sizes for differences between 
conditions (e.g., Cohen’s d and it’s 95% CIs) are of practical magnitude. In addition, we wil l 
conduct a series of independent t  tests, as a function of treatment vs. control group, on dependent 
measures for each of the post -intervention time points. If relevant baseline covariates are 
identified, analyses of covariance (ANCOVA) will be used instead.  
While our primary goal is to test feasibility and acceptability of interventions and to generate 
data supporting the direction of effects to indicate the potential for a large- scale randomized trial, 
we will use mixed models (normally distributed vari ables) and generalized estimating equation  
analysis (count / binary outcomes) to examine longitudinal differences in outcomes between 
conditions.  
 