1 Study Protocol  
Transcranial electrical Stimulation in Stroke EaRly After onset Clinical Trial 
(TESSERACT)  
Version 1.6  (Revised  on 
1/12/21 and approved on 
1/22/21)
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
6/7/23, 9:22 AM webirb.research.ucla.edu/WEBIRB/Doc/0/8C9NI8BA5F A4RAJCKL5FDAOT90/fromString.html
https://webirb.research.ucla.edu/WEBIRB/Doc/0/8C9NI8BA5F A4RAJCKL5FDAOT90/fromString.html 1/[ADDRESS_35284]
Los Angeles, CA  [ZIP_CODE]
http://ora.research.ucla.edu/ohrpp
General Campus IRB: ([PHONE_566]
Medical IRB: ([PHONE_567]
 
 
 
APPROV AL NOTICE
 
 
Conducting Research During the COVID-19 Public Health Outbreak:  Please review the information provided on
the UCLA  Research Ramp Up website to determine whether any current Policy may af fect this IRB approved or
exempt study . https://www3.research.ucla.edu/research-ramp-up  Information includes (a) an overview of the ramp-
up process, (b) health and safety guidelines, and (c) appendices describing requirements for dif ferent types of
research.
 
DATE: 1/22/2021
TO: MERSEDEH BAHR-HOSSEINI, MD 
NEUROLOGY  
FROM: JAMES MC GOUGH, MD
Chair , MIRB3
RE: IRB#18-000421-AM-[ZIP_CODE]  
Broadening the exclusion criteria, minor revisions of the protocol and informed
consent form
Transcranial Electrical Stimulation in Stroke EaRly After onset Clinical Trial
(TESSERACT)
Version: v1.5, 6/13/[ADDRESS_35285] (UCLA  IRB) has approved the above-referenced study .  UCLA's Federalwide Assurance
(FWA) with Department of Health and Human Services is FW A00004642.
Submission and Review Information
Type of Submission Amendment
Type of Review IRB Review: Expedited 
Approval Date 1/22/2021
Expi[INVESTIGATOR_35723] 3/25/2021
Funding Source(s) 1) AMERICAN HEAR T ASSOCIA TION - NA TIONAL
    Grant PI : [INVESTIGATOR_35724]-HOSSEINI
    Grant T itle: Developi[INVESTIGATOR_35725]
6/7/23, 9:22 AM webirb.research.ucla.edu/WEBIRB/Doc/0/8C9NI8BA5F A4RAJCKL5FDAOT90/fromString.html
https://webirb.research.ucla.edu/WEBIRB/Doc/0/8C9NI8BA5F A4RAJCKL5FDAOT90/fromString.html 2/3stimulation as a novel neuroprotective method in acute
ischemic stroke
    Grant Number : 18CDA341 [ADDRESS_35286]
Specific Conditions for Approval
 
-- Translations Needed  - Please submit translated copi[INVESTIGATOR_35726](s) before recruiting or consenting any subjects for whom these
translations are required. Be sure and provide subjects with the appropriately
translated Research Participant's Bill of Rights. Numerous translations are available
for download on the HRPP  website at http://www .ohrpp.research.ucla.edu/pages/bill-
of-rights.
-- Research Participants Bill of Rights  - By [CONTACT_35751] , a copy of the Research
Participants Bill of Rights in a language in which the participant is fluent must be given
to all research participants in this study as there is a real or foreseeable risk of
biomedical harm. Numerous translations are available for download on the HRPP
website at http://ora.research.ucla.edu/OHRPP/Pages/BillofRights.aspx .
Regulatory Determinations
-- Waiver of Informed Consent  - The UCLA  IRB waived the requirement for informed
consent under 45 CFR 46.1 16(d) for the no direct contact [CONTACT_35752] (screen
failure data).
-- Waiver of Informed Consent  - The UCLA  IRB waived the requirement for informed
consent under 45 CFR 46.1 16(d) for medical record review to identify potential
subjects.
-- Surrogate Consent  - The UCLA  IRB approved the use of surrogate consent in an
emergency setting in accordance with CA  Health & Safety Code [ZIP_CODE].
-- Medical Device - Significant Risk  - The UCLA  IRB determined that the medical
device being used in this study is a significant risk device [21CFR812.3(m)] and the
regulations at 21CFR812 must be followed.
-- Surrogate Consent  - The UCLA  IRB approved the use of surrogate consent in a
non-emergency situation in accordance with CA  Health & Safety Code [ZIP_CODE].
-- HIPAA General W aiver  - The UCLA  IRB waived the requirement for HIP AA
Research Authorization for medical record review to identify potential subjects.
-- HIPAA General W aiver  - The UCLA  IRB waived the requirement for HIP AA
Research Authorization for the no direct contact [CONTACT_35752] (screen failure
data).
Currently approved recruitment and/or consent documents:
 
Document NameDocument
Version #
18-000421- TESSERACT -Informed consent-Clean Version-
Jan2021 (1).pdf.pdf0.01
Important Note:   Approval by [CONTACT_35753], in and of itself, constitute approval for the
implementation of this research.  Other UCLA  clearances and approvals or other external agency or collaborating institutional
approvals may be required before study activities are initiated.  Research undertaken in conjunction with outside entities, such
6/7/23, 9:22 AM webirb.research.ucla.edu/WEBIRB/Doc/0/8C9NI8BA5F A4RAJCKL5FDAOT90/fromString.html
https://webirb.research.ucla.edu/WEBIRB/Doc/0/8C9NI8BA5F A4RAJCKL5FDAOT90/fromString.html 3/3as drug or device companies, are typi[INVESTIGATOR_35727] .
General Conditions of Approval
As indicated in the PI [INVESTIGATOR_35728], the PI [INVESTIGATOR_35729] , the ethical performance of the project, the protection of the rights and welfare of human subjects, and
strict adherence to any stipulations imposed by [CONTACT_1201].
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_35730], as well as with all applicable Federal, State, and
local laws regarding the protection of human subjects in research, including, but not limited to, the following:
Ensuring that the personnel performing the project are qualified, appropriately trained, and will adhere to the provisions
of the approved protocol,
Implementing no changes in the approved protocol or consent process or documents without prior IRB approval
(except in an emergency , if necessary to safeguard the well-being of human subjects and then notifying the IRB as
soon as possible afterwards),
Obtaining the legally ef fective informed consent from human subjects of their legally responsible representative, and
using only the currently approved consent process and stamped consent documents, as appropriate, with human
subjects,
Reporting serious or unexpected adverse events as well as protocol violations or other incidents related to the protocol
to the IRB according to the OHRPP  reporting requirements.
Assuring that adequate resources to protect research participants (i.e., personnel, funding, time, equipment and space)
are in place before implementing the research project, and that the research will stop if adequate resources become
unavailable.
Arranging for a co-investigator to assume direct responsibility of the study if the PI [INVESTIGATOR_35731] , for example, when on sabbatical leave or vacation or other absences.  Either this person is
named as co-investigator in this application, or advising IRB via webIRB in advance of such arrangements.
2 
  
 
Investigational Plan:  
Protocol: Transcranial electrical Stimulation in Stroke E aRly After onset Clinical 
Trial (TESSERACT)  
 
 
Overview of Protocol of TES SERACT  
 
Title  Transcranial electrical Stimulation in Stroke E aRly After 
onset Clinical Trial (TESSERACT)  
Objective  To evaluate the safety , tolerability, and feasibility, and 
preliminaril y explore the potential efficacy, of transcranial 
direct current stimulation (tDCS) as an innovative non - 
invasive neuroprotection technique in acute ischemic 
stroke.  
Study Design  A single site, sham - controlled, dose escalation study  
Population 
Studied  24-48 acute ischemic stroke patients from Ronal Regan 
Medical Center (RRMC) Emergency Department or RRMC 
Inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4791]:  
1) New focal neurologic deficit consistent with acute 
ischemic stroke; 2) NIHSS >4; 3) Age >18; 4) Last known 
well time within 24 hours of randomization stimulation 
initiation; 5) ICA or M1 or M2 MCA occlusion on MRA; 6) 
substantial salvageable penumbra on multimodal MRI 
(tissue -at-risk perfusion lesion volume exceeds co re 
volume by ≥ 20%); 7) I neligibl e for intravenous 
thrombolysis; 8) Ineligible for endovascular thrombectomy; 
9) Signed informed consent obtained from the patient or 
patient’s legally authorized representative.  
Intervention  3:[ADDRESS_35287] Current Stimulation (tDCS)  
[ADDRESS_35288] current stimulation (tDCS) is a non -invasive neuromodulatory technique that 
applies a weak electrical current to the brain via scalp electrodes. tDCS has been investiga ted in 
a variety of chronic neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders such as depression, traumatic 
brain injury and stroke rehabilitation with promising benefits and excellent safety profile.  Notably, 
tDCS has been shown to carry a strong neuroprotecti ve effect in animal models of acute ischemic 
stroke (AIS) due to large vessel occlusion (LVO).  
   Stroke is a leading cause of mortality and morbidity across the world. While endovascular 
therapy (ET) has fundamentally improved outcomes of AIS patients with LVO, patient outcomes 
even with ET remain suboptimal, with only 20 -25% achieving a disability -free outcome. 
Complementary neuroprotective, vasoprotective, and collateral enhancement strategies can 
preserve cells and the neurovascular unit until orthograde reperfusion is achieved by [CONTACT_35754], 
particularly in AIS patients in whom ET is delayed due to hosp ital-to-hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1410]. 
Furthermore, these agents may protect against reperfusion injury, and attenuate secondary injury 
cascades that persist despi[INVESTIGATOR_35732]. Importantly as well, even in the modern thrombectomy 
era, not all patients with LVO are t reatable with ET. In some patients with LVOs, ET is not 
technically performable due to unfavorable angioarchitectural features or in other LVO patients, 
the risk of intervention is judged too great, due to the presence of early hemorrhagic 
transformation, temporally advanced or large core infarct, or severe cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_35733]. Therefore, a great need for complementary or standalone therapi[INVESTIGATOR_35734]. While 
many past attempts at developi[INVESTIGATOR_35735], the gre at 
preponderance were pharmacologic agents that affected only one or two molecular ischemic 
pathways and were administered intravenously, reducing delivery to brain areas with low blood 
flow, and, even there, requiring passage through the blood -brain barri er. In contrast, in pre -clinical 
acute ischemic stroke models, tDCS has been shown to have widely pleiotropic neuroprotective 
molecular mechanisms of action and can be delivered to the salvageable ischemic tissue beyond 
the occlusive thrombus despi[INVESTIGATOR_35736]. Given the promising results in acute stroke 
models, translational studies to the acute human ischemic stroke patients are needed, beginning 
with a dose -escalation feasibility and safety trial.  
   In this proposal, we will perform a single ce nter, sham -controlled, dose escalation study. 
Cathodal tDCS (C -tDCS) will be delivered to penumbral tissue in patients with large and medium 
vessel occlusions who are not eligible for endovascular thrombectomy, yet harbor substantial 
salvageable penumbra.  
 
Specific Aim I: To establish the safety and tolerability of tDCS in AIS.  
   Hypothesis I -a: tDCS will be safe in AIS patients with no increased risk of symptomatic 
intracranial hemorrhage (SICH) within the 24 -hour period after stimulation. Hypothesis I -b: tDCS 
will not increase the rates of asymptomatic intracranial hemorrhage, early neurological 
deterioration (NIHSS during the 24 -hour period after stimulation), 90 -day mortality, and all serious 
adverse events.  Hypothesis I -c: Majority of AIS patients (≥  90%) will tolerate the tDCS by 
[CONTACT_9159] 75% of the stimulation period with no major stimulation related pain, discomfort 
and skin changes.  
 
Specific Aim II: To determine the feasibility of delivering tDCS in AIS.  
   Hypothesis II -a: tDCS will  be started more rapi[INVESTIGATOR_35737] 
10 patients median time from randomization to tDCS initiation will be ≤ 10 minutes.  
 
Specific Aim III: To explore the potential imaging and clinical efficacy of tDCS in AIS.  
This aim will be accomplished by [CONTACT_35755], in actively treated and sham patients:  
1) Early and late penumbral salvage, defined as proportion of penumbral tissue on baseline 
multimoda l MRI that does not proceed to infarct on 2 -hour and 24 -hour MRI (PWI); 2) Early and 
4 
 late collateral enhancement, evidenced by [CONTACT_35756] 2 -hour and 24 -
hour perfusion -weighted MRI (PWI); 3) Early and late reduction in infarct growth  from baseline to 
2-hour and 24 -hour MRI; 4) Early improvement in neurologic deficit (NIHSS at 24h); 5) 
Improvement in final 3 -month disability and quality of life (modified Rankin scale, AMC Linear 
Disability Scale , EQ-5D, and Barthel Index)  
 
Impact  
   This in -hospi[INVESTIGATOR_35738], in non -thrombectomy candidates in a closely -observed, Emergency 
Department and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6885] s, will identify tDCS dose regimens that are feasible, well -
tolerated, and preliminarily safe in patients with acute ischemic strok e. Study finding will identify 
the most promising dose regimens to advance to phase 2b and pi[INVESTIGATOR_30338] 3 efficacy trials for 
two patient populations with pressing need for improved therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]: 1) thrombectomy ineligible 
patients (standalone neuroprotectio n), and 2) thrombectomy -eligible patients (bridging 
neuroprotection in prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_35739] -arriving patients).   
 
B. Background  and Significance   
   Stroke is a devastating condition and continues to be a leading cause of adult death 
and disability.1 Current therapeutic strategies for AIS focus on timely restoration of blood 
flow by [CONTACT_35757], using 
pharmacologic fibrinolysis and/or endovascular thrombectomy (ET).2,3 However, the 
reperfusion strategy has limitations that would be aided by a neuroprotective intervention. 
An important minority of early -arriving patients are ineligible for both IV tPA (due to lytic 
contraindications) and ET (due to difficult vascular access, large core, peripheral target 
occlusion beyond catheter reach in patients with medium vessel occlusion (MVO)). Other 
patients are non -responders: IV tPA only achieves reperfusion in only 15 -40 percent of 
large vessel occlusions (LVOs); ET fails to achieve substantial reperfusion in 20 -30%. 
Furthermore, even among reperfusing patients, rates of excellent outcome are low, only 
20-25% mRS [ADDRESS_35289] of success are: 1) pleiotropic effects, interdicting 
multiple pathways in the ischemic cascade, and 2) delivery by a direct transcranial, rather 
than intravascular, route, with fast and direct delivery to neural tissues regardless of 
cerebral perfusion. Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) offers promise as  just 
such an approach. Furthermore, few trials of neuroprotection in human have used 
penumbral imaging for patient selection [ADDRESS_35290] likely to be of benefit 
is crucial in studies of neuroprotection and our study utilizes such an approach.  
5 
    tDCS is a non -invasive neuromodulation method that delivers a weak electrical current 
to the brain via scalp electrod es.12 Rather than directly eliciting a neuronal response, 
tDCS modulates neuronal excitability in regions of the brain depending o n the polarity of 
stimulation. By [CONTACT_35758] (C -tDCS) reduces 
neuronal excitability [in contract to anodal tDCS (A -tDCS) which increases excitability]. 
13,[ADDRESS_35291] of tDCS in different animal models of acute 
cerebral ischemia  (table 1) :  
B.1. Proposed neuroprotective mechanisms of  tDCS based on experimental pr e-
clinical models of acute cerebral ischemia  
B.1.1. Inhibition of peri -infarct excitatory depolarizations  
   During the acute stages of cerebral ischemia, an excitotoxic cascade will be triggered 
by [CONTACT_35759] t hat are released as the result 
of cellular necrosis.21 Experimental models of acute middle cerebral artery occlusion 
(MCAO) have shown that the excitotoxicity generates recurrent spontaneous waves of 
depolarization also known as peri -infarct depolarizations (PI[INVESTIGATOR_29721]).22,[ADDRESS_35292] growth correlates with the numb er and duration of PI[INVESTIGATOR_35740]: 1) An abnormal vasoconstriction in response to 
depolarization 2) An imbalance between increased metabolic overload, induced by [CONTACT_35760], and blood supply in acute is chemic stroke.[ADDRESS_35293] of C -tDCS on PI[INVESTIGATOR_35741] 3 -vessel occlusion rat stroke model, with cumula tive 
stimulation durations of 120 and 180 mins (15' on -15' off cycles).[ADDRESS_35294] volume by 20 -30%. They found no effect on brain edema between the stimulated 
and sham groups and no tDCS induced macroscopic or microscopic lesion or 
hemorrhagic transformation.  
B.1.2. Anti -inflammatory, Anti -apoptotic, and Angiogenic effect  
  Beyond the activation of the excitotoxic cascade, an inflammatory response and 
programmed cellular apoptosis will result in a secondary damage and expansion of the 
irreversibly damaged core (Figure1). [ADDRESS_35295] size and cerebral edema. Peruzzotti et al. studied tDCS in acute stroke mice 
models with MCAO with cathodal hemispheric tDCS applied for 40 minutes (20'on -
20off -20’on). [ADDRESS_35296] 
size, with lowering of cortical glutamate synthesis, downregulation of N -methyl -D- 
aspartate (NMDA) receptor (NR2B) expression, and reduction in peri -ischemic 
inflammatory response and apoptotic markers.   
6 
 Furthermore, a significant functional amelioration and improvement of cerebral edema 
were observed even when stimulation was applied hours after the MCAO. No 
macroscopic or microscopic lesion or hemorrhagic transformation induced by [CONTACT_35761] .  
   Baba et al. showed in their study  that a low -frequency  (2 and 10 Hz) electrical cortical 
stimulation exert s neuroprotective effects reflect ing by [CONTACT_35762], blockade of microglial/astrocytic activation and expressi on of 
trophic factors. They also demonstrated an increase in cerebral blood flow of the 
electrically stimulated animals. [ADDRESS_35297] was observed at higher 
frequenc y (50Hz).  
 
 
Figure 1.  This schematic shows the events leading to ischemic brain injury.  
 
B.1.4. Preservation of neuro nal axons  
   Kim et al. studied the neuroprotective effect of cathodal and anodal tDCS on axons and 
myelin integrity. They delivered tDCS for [ADDRESS_35298] was more pronounced  with cathodal compared to anodal stimulation.  
 
 

7 
  
Study 
authors  Type of 
subjects  Onset of stim 
following  MC
AO Polarity and 
location of the 
center electrode  Intensity (mA)  Total Duration 
of stim  Total N  
Notturno et al 
et. al  
2013  Rat MCAO 
model  45 min  Cathode over cortical 
surface overlying 
ischemia  0.2 
(density of 2.86 
mA/cm2)  120 and 180min 
(alternating 
15’on -15’off)  48 
Peruzzotti -
Jametti et. al  
2010  Mice MCAO 
model  30 min  Cathode or anode 
over cortical surface 
overlying ischemia  0.25 (density of 
5.5 mA/cm2) 40min 
(alternating 
20’on -20’off)  137 
Baba et al.  
2009  Rat  MCAO  
Model  60 min  Electrode over 
cortical surface 
overlying ischemia  0.1 and 0.2 with 
frequencies of 0, 
2, 10, 50  3 Days or 1 
week  107 
Kim et al.  
2010  Rat MCAO 
model  Day 2  Cathode or anode 
over cortical surface 
overlying ischemia  0.1  30 min daily for 
2 weeks  61 
Glickstein et. 
al 1999  
  Rat MCAO 
model  5 days prior to 
MCAO  Stimulation of the 
fastigial nucleus of 
cerebellum  0.01-0.02 60min(alternati
ng 1 sec on -1 
sec off)  98 
Reis et.al  
1997, 1991  Rat MCAO 
model  Immediately 
after, up to 10 
days prior to 
MCAO  Cathode over the 
fastigial nucleus of 
cerebellum  0.01-0.02 60min  99 
Zhang et.al  
1993  Rat MCAO 
model  3-5 min  Cathode over the 
fastigial nucleus of 
cerebellum  0.07-0.1 60min 
(alternating 1 
sec on -1 sec 
off) 44 
Yamamoto 
et.al 
1993  Rat MCAO 
model  Immediately  Cathode over the 
fastigial nucleus of 
cerebellum  0.07-0.1  60min 
(alternating 1 
sec on -1 sec 
off) [ADDRESS_35299] of tDCS in AIS, we performed a systematic review 
of all preclinical acute cerebral ischemia studies using tDCS as a neuroprotective method.  
Our systematic search identified 21 controlled comparisons of tDCS in preclinical  acute 
cerebral ischemia models, including a total of 256 animals, all with middle cerebral artery 
occlusion. 25,26,36 -40 Hemispheric cathodal stimulation was used  in 3 experiments (32 
animals), hemispheric anodal stimulation in 1 experiment (8 animals) , Electrical 
stimulation in 4 experiments ( --- animals) and fastigial nucleus stimulation in 13 
experiments (91 animals). Overall, tDCS reduced final infarct volume b y 24.68  mm3 (95% 
CI 26.53-22.83, P<0.[ZIP_CODE]). Only mild heterogeneity of effect by [CONTACT_35763] (I2=90.5%), with the infarct reduction magnitudes relatively larger  with cathodal 
hemispheric stimulation – 30.94 mm 3 (95% CI 34.35 - 27.53 , P< 0.[ZIP_CODE]), followed by 
8 
 targeted fastigial nucleus  stimulation  – 26.4 mm 3 (95% CI 2 9.26-23.63 , P< 0.[ZIP_CODE]), 
then hemispheric electrical stimulation – 18.16 (95% CI 23.85 -12.48, P< 0.[ZIP_CODE]), and 
hemispheric anodal  stimulation - 13 mm 3 (95% CI 17.56 - 8.44, P< 0.[ZIP_CODE])  (Figure 2).  
 
 
Figure [ADDRESS_35300] of tDCS across 21 pre -clinical experiments*  
*includes all published studies except Kim et al 2009, which did not report infarct volume in as similable units  
  
These findings demonstrate that  tDCS significantly reduces final infarct volume across 
animal preclinical studies.  The greatest neuroprotective effect is observed with the C -
tDCS directly applied to the ischemic hemisphere (hemispheric cathodal stimulation). 
Therefore, our proposed stud y of hemispheric C -tDCS in patients with acute ischemic 
stroke is warranted.  
C.3. Vascular response associated with tDCS  
   A preliminary study in human volunteers by [CONTACT_35764]  (Co-mentor of the current 
proposal) demonstrated that tDCS produces vasodilation of cerebral vessels (Figure 3). 
Furthermore, the vasodilatory response to tDCS is evident by [CONTACT_35765] -
dependent effect in causing skin erythema. The cerebral vasodilatation is likely partially 
due to non -specific polarization of vas cular system.  Bikson and colleagues also 
demonstrated that 10 minutes of tDCS resulted in up -regulation of endothelial nitric oxide 
synthase (eNOS) gene expression and increase production of nitric oxide (NO), a known 
vasodilator. [ADDRESS_35301] conducted trials of transcranial 
delivery of acute neuroprotective intervention using laser 43, and trials of collateral 
enhancement interventions 44 and trials and studies using MRI penumbral imaging and 
permeability imaging as technical efficacy and safety end points.   
C.5. Frequency and features of AIS LVO and MVO patients with substantial 
salvageable penumbra who do not undergo ET  
   Among the eventual target populations for tDCS as a neuroprotective intervention in 
acute LVO and MVO AIS, several are suboptimal for inclusion in an initial, dose escalation 
safety trial. Ambulance patients (prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_35742]) are in a chaotic 
environment unsuited for close safety observations; ED patients pre -ET (bridging 
neuroprotection) have intense time -pressure for usual care making safety -emphasis 
studies difficult; ET failure patients (rescue neuroprotection) have potenti al complications 
from their failed procedure confounding study interpretation. In contrast, ET -ineligible 
patients (pure neuroprotection) are an attractive cohort for a safety study, as they are 
under close observation, free of intense time -pressure for ET , and free of course outcome 
being strongly determined by [CONTACT_35766]. To plan the current proposal, we, therefore,  
performed a study to delineate the frequency, clinical characteristics, and outcomes of 
patients with substantial salvageable penumbra who ar e ineligible for ET in the modern 
stent retriever era 45. Patients were recognized as having substantial salvageable 
penumbra when their p erfusion lesion volume (tissue with a delay in contrast arrival to 
peak concentration (Tmax) of  6 sec on perfusion -weighted image (PWI)) was ≥ 1.2 
times larger than the ischemic core volume (tissue with a low mean water diffusivity or 
apparent -diffusion coefficient (ADC) ≤ 620 µm2/s on diffusion -weighted image (DWI) ) 
(PWI -DWI Mismatch). 46-48 We then categorized the patients with substantial salvageable 
penumbra as having an LVO if MRA or CTA showed occlusion of the intracranial internal 
carotid (ICA), the M1 segment of the middle cerebral artery (MCA), the vertebra l artery 

10 
 (VA), or the basilar artery (BA). Patients were categorized as having an MVO if MRA or 
CTA showed occlusion of the M2 segment of the MCA, the A1 segment of the anterior 
cerebral artery (ACA), or the P1 segment of the posterior cerebral artery (PCA ); or if 
perfusion imaging indicated occlusion an M3 segment of the middle cerebral artery by 
[CONTACT_30432] a perfusion lesion volume of at least 10 ml in an appropriate territorial distribution. 
Among 174 consecutive AIS patients, 29 (17%) were LVO and MVO pati ents with 
substantial salvageable penumbra who did not undergo ET. Mean age was 81 (±13), 45 
% were female, and median NIHSS was 11 (IQR 5 -19).  The prevalence of LVO was 59 
% (19/29) and MVO 41% (12/29). Patients with ICA, M1 and M2 occlusions constituted  
most of the cases (78%).  The four most common reasons for not pursuing ET intervention 
were: distal occlusion (28%), large infarct core (16%), low NIHSS (16%), temporally 
advanced core injury evident from fluid attenuated recovery (FLAIR) changes on MRI or 
frank hypodensity on CT (13%). Other reasons included: chronic occlusion of the cervical 
internal carotid artery precluding intracranial access (9%); poor pre -stroke baseline 
function (9%); intracranial occlusion judged to be a chronic atherosclerotic o cclusion 
(6%); extracranial vessel tortuosity precluding intracranial access (3%). Median time from 
LKN to imaging was 410 min (IQR 198 -615). Mismatch ratio was median 5.6 (IQR 2 - 
infinite), salvageable penumbra volume mean was 54 ml (±63), and ischemic co re volume 
was mean 20ml (±31). Severe disability or death at discharge (mRS 4 -6) occurred in 72%. 
These findings demonstrate that, even in the modern stent retriever era, one in six acute 
cerebral ischemia patients presents with substantial salvageable penumbra judged not 
appropriate for ET. This population is more than sufficiently common for the proposed 
study. Figure 4 demonstrates an exemplary patient with an LVO and substantial 
penumbra in whom endovascular thrombectomy was not pursued.  
 
 
 
Figure 4 . 92 y/o woman with left intracranial internal carotid occlusion with ischemic core judged too large 
for favorable benefit -risk ratio. Perfusion lesion volume 195 ml, ischemic core volume 100.3 ml, mismatch 
ratio 1.9. The penumbral volume is calcul ated as 95 ml (195 ml -100ml).  
 
D. Trial Design and Metho ds 
D.1. Study overview  
This proposal is a prospective, single -center, dose -escalation safety, tolerability and 
feasibility study of tDCS in acute stroke patients with substantial salvageable penumbra 
due to a large or medium vessel occlusion who are ineligible for endovascular t herapy. 
The primary safety endpoints will be symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage during the [ADDRESS_35302] 
growth, and clinical outcomes of early neurologic deficit evolution, and 3 -month global 
disability and health -related quality of life.  
D2. Technology  
D.2.1. tDCS Device and Stimulation P arameters  
The study will employ a Soterix ™ high-definition DC -Stimulator, owned by [CONTACT_1961]. This tDCS unit consists of a stimulator, 4x1 HD interface and an adjustable 
cap with pre -maid openings that quickly and easily fits different head sizes. (Figure 5). 
The cap will be loaded  with plastic electrode holders. These will be filled with conductance 
gel (Signa® gel), 1 cm2 electrodes will be placed in the holders, and the holder then 
locked.  
 
Figure  5.  Shows  an example of  electrode  positioning  in a 4 to 1-ring configuration in a patient with left M1 
occlusion . A) The reference  electrodes  (anode -blue) are positioned  on F3, T3, Cz and  P3 and the center  
electrode  (cathode -red) is positioned  over the C3 (central  sulcus ). B) shows the computational modeling of 
the electric al field, concentrated over the MCA territory. C) Shows the electrode positioning on the tDCS 
HD cap,  the schematic of the tDCS stimulator connected to the HD int erface, and the Soterix  HD tDCS 
unit (stimulator + interface) that will be used in this study. This stimulator connects to the adjustable cap . 
D) Shows the penumbral region on the perfusion MRI of the patient with L MCA occlusion.   
 
D.2.2. Montage  
The electrode positioning montage will be a 4 to 1 -ring configuration, with the center or 
active electrode connected to cathode and the 4 reference or return electrodes  connected 

12 
 to anode. The 4 to 1 -ring configuration is chosen to focus the stimulation to the penumbral 
region.   
For electrodes positioning location, we use one of the 6 predefined positionings according 
to the location of the vascular occlusion: middle ce rebral artery (MCA) M1 branch, MCA 
inferior branch (M2 -I), MCA superior branch (M2 -S), Anterior Cerebral artery (ACA), 
Posterior Cerebral Artery (PCA), Posterior Inferior Cerebellar Artery (PI[CONTACT_28474]). These 
electrode positionings are based on computational mod eling of 6 electrical fields 
concentrated over different parts of the aforementioned vascular territories: electrical field 
covering territory of MCA -M1 branch; electrical  field covering territory of MCA -M2 superior 
branch; and electrical field covering territory of MCA -M2 inferior branch, electrical field 
covering territory of ACA; electrical  field covering territory of PCA; electrical field covering 
territory of PI[CONTACT_28474] . 
 
D.2.3. Sterility and Quality Assurance  
   Prior to stimulation, all the electrodes will be monitored for any sign of damage such as 
chippi[INVESTIGATOR_007]. The electrodes will be discarded after being exposed to [ADDRESS_35303] use, recharging the device after each 
procedure, verifying the device  is charged prior to each procedure, recognizing and 
addressing the different Warning/Error indications (e.g., battery light flashing blue, 
indicating that the battery is low but can still perform at least one procedure, battery light 
steady red, indicatin g battery low error – not enough battery power to run a complete 
procedure, etc.) and specific instructions for returning the device to the sponsor in the 
event of an error notification that cannot be addressed by [CONTACT_14523], or a failure 
of the de vice to charge after three hours. All device training will be documented in a 
training log that will be maintained in the site regulatory binder.  
D3. Subjects  
   Twenty -four to 48 acute ischemic stroke patients with substantial salvageable 
penumbra due to a large or medium vessel occlusion who are ineligible for endovascular 
therapy and meet study inclusion/exclusion criteria will be enrol led from Ronald Reagan  
Medical Center (RRMC) Emergency Department  or RRMC  inpatient s.   
    Based upon acute stroke patient referral rates to UCLA over the past 3 years and our 
retrospective study looking at the thrombectomy -ineligible patients with substantial 
penumbra in an 8 -month period (1 in 6 acute ischemic stroke patients), we anticipate 8-
16 en rollments per year . Therefore, we estimate that the study enrollment will take 3 
years to complete.  Enrolled subjects will be randomized to active versus sham 
stimulation in 3:1 ratio.  
D.3.1  Entry Criteria  
Inclusion criteria:  
1) New focal neurologic deficit consistent with AIS  
13 
 2) NIHSS≥4 or NIHSS< 4 in the presence of  disabling deficit (a deficit that, if unchanged, 
would prevent the patient from performing basic activities of daily living such as bathing, 
ambulating, toileting, hygiene, and eating or returning to work);  
4) Age>18;  
5) Presence of any cortical vessel occlusion including ICA, branches of MCA , Anterior 
Cerebral artery (ACA), Posterior Cerebral artery (PCA), Posterior -Inferior cerebellar 
artery (PI[CONTACT_28474]) ;  
6) Presence of salvageable penumbra with Tmax> 6 sec/ ischemic core volume (ADC < 
620 µm2/s or rCBF< 30 %) ≥ 1.2  
7) Patient ineligible for IV tPA, per national AHA/ASA Guidelines  
8) Patient  ineligible for ET p er AHA/ASA national G uidelines  – one or more of : poor 
prestroke functional status (mRS score >1), mild neurological symptoms (NIHSS <6), 
large ischemic core (ASPECTS <6), thrombectomy not technically performable due to 
severe vessel tortuosity, cervical artery chronic occlusion, or other unfavorable 
angio architectural features that preclude endovascular access to the target intracranial 
vessel.  
9) Subject is able to be treated with tDCS within [ADDRESS_35304] known well time;  
10) A signed informed consent is obtained from the patient or patient’s legally authorized 
representative  
Exclusion criteria   
1) Acute intracranial hemorrhage  
2) Evidence of a large Ischemic core volume (ADC < 620 µm2/s or rCBF< 30%) ≥ 100  
3) Presence of tDC S contraindications - electrically or magnetically activated intracranial metal 
and non -metal implants.  
4) Severe MR contrast allergy or renal dysfunction with eGFR<30ml/min, precluding MRI 
gadolinium  or CT iodine contrast  
5) Pregnancy  
6) Signs or symptoms  of acute myocardial infarction, including EKG findings, on 
admission  
7) History of seizure disorder or new seizures with presentation of current stroke  
8) Evidence of any other major life -threatening or serious medical condition that would 
prevent completion of the study protocol including attendance at the 3 -month follow -up 
visit 
9) Concomitant experimental therapy  
10) Preexisting scalp lesion at the site of the stimulation or presence of skull defects (may 
alter current flow pattern)  
11) Preexisting coagulopathy, consist of platelet count of ≤ 100, INR ≥ 3, PTT ≥ 90.  
12) Patients suspected of having infective endocarditis and ischemic stroke related to 
septic emboli   
13) Patients suspected or known to be infected with coronavirus 2019 (CoVID -19) 
14) Patient with radiographic evidence or suspi[INVESTIGATOR_35743], 
cerebral cavernous malformations, cerebral telangiectasia, multiple previous 
intracerebral hemorrhages (amyloid angiopathy)  
15) Suspected cerebral vasculitis based  on medical history and CTA/Magnetic 
Resonance Angiogram (MRA)  
16) Suspected cysticercosis  
14 
 17) Suspected cranial dural arteriovenous fistula  
18) Cerebral venous thrombosis  
19) Head trauma causing loss of consciousness, concussion, confusion, or a headache 
within the past 30 days  
20) Patient has suffered a hemorrhagic or ischemic stroke within the last three (3) months  
21) History of a cancer known to cause hemorrhagic metastases, e.g., melanoma, renal 
cell carcinoma, choriocarcinoma, thyroid carcin oma, lung carcinoma, breast carcinoma, 
and hepatocellular carcinoma  
22) History of left atrial myxoma  
23) Evidence of dissection in the intracranial cerebral arteries  
24) Suspi[INVESTIGATOR_35744]  
25) Significant mass effect with midline shift  
26) The patient is in a coma  
Biological variables  
   The entry criteria have been designed to be broadly inclusive of biological variables that 
may modify disease course and treatment response, including enrollment of all adults of 
any age, both males and fema les (except pregnant females ), and all weights compatible 
with MR -scanning. Pregnant women will be excluded as the safety of tDCS has not been 
established in pregnancy. A pregnancy test will be performed prior to enrollment in 
women of childbearing age.  Children will be excluded because of the rarity of diagnosis 
in children in the acute time window, and greater brain plasticity and recovery in younger 
individuals. Given the uncommon availability for enrollment and very different course, 
including children in trial could differentially favor or unfavor one study arm, and make 
interpretation of findings challenging.  
   With regards to the time window, patients treatable within [ADDRESS_35305] sho wn that patients in the 6 -24h 
window with imaging evidence of substantial salvageable penumbra are responsive to 
acute stroke therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]. 10,11 Sites of vessel occlusion will include any cortical vessel 
occlusion including distal branches of MCA (M3, M4), ACA, PCA, and PI[CONTACT_28474], in addition 
to LVO’s (ICA, M 1, and M2 branches of MCA), and regarding the severity of deficits, we 
will include NIHSS < 4 in the presence of a  disabling deficit, in addition to NIHSS ≥ 4. This 
patient population with more distal vessel occlusion and less severe deficits are the likel y 
patients not proceeding to thrombectomy even in the current expanded treatment era, 
and who are also as informative regarding the main safety, tolerability, and feasibility 
endpoints of the study.  
D.3.2. Enrollment and Consent  
   All acute ischemic stroke patients within 24 hours of their symptoms onset who 
present to Roland Reagan Medical Center (Emergency Department or inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_35745] a different indication) and meet the study 
inclusion/exclusi on criteria will be identified by a study physician -investigator and 
subsequently offered enrollment in the trial. Prospective subjects will be provided with 
written and verbal information regarding the nature of the study, the procedures and 
evaluations i nvolved, and the potential risks and benefits. All participating patients or 
their legally authorized representatives (LAR) will provide explicit written informed 
consent.  
[ADDRESS_35306] the capacity to give informed consent. The likely range of 
impairment includes stupor and aphasia. By [CONTACT_14535], the investigators 
will assess whether the affected individual understands the central elements of the 
study procedures and has the capacity for informed consent, using the recomm ended 
approach of the institution’s Institutional Review Board, such as the UCLA Office of 
Human Research Protection Decision -Making Capacity Assessment Tool.  
    Patients with capacity to consent will be invited to participate by [CONTACT_978]. In patients 
without the capacity to consent, the patient’s LAR will be asked to provide consent for 
participation. If the LAR is not physically available but reachable through the phone at 
the time of enrollment, the informed consent will be sent to the LAR via fax or email 
after discussing the details of the study via phone. Then the LAR returns the signed/e -
signed form to the PI, again either via tax or email.   
The investigat or will inform the patient or legally authorized representative of the 
availability of the study as follows: “You (your relative) is having a stroke. We are doing 
a research study of a new treatment for stroke. Here is an informed consent form that 
describ es the study. Please read it. After you are finished, I will answer any questions 
you may have.” Once subjects or their legally authorized representatives have read and 
understood the IRB -approved consent form, and had all their questions answered, 
written  informed consent will be elicited.  
D.4. Dose Tiers and Randomization  
   We will implement a traditional 3+3 (rule -based, modified Fibonacci) dose escalation 
design, with 3:1 randomization to active treatment vs sham control. There will be 6 dose 
tiers, re flecting increasing intensity and duration of stimulation: Tier 1 – 1 mA, single 20 - 
min cycle; Tier 2 – 2 mA, single 20 min cycle;  Tier 3 – 1 mA, 2 cycles of 20 min/20 min off; 
Tier 4 – 2 mA, 2 cycles of 20 min/20 min off; Tier 5 – 1 mA, 3 cycles of 20 min /20 min off; 
Tier 6 – 2 mA, 3 cycles of 20 min/20 min off (Figure 7). Patients in the sham stimulation 
arm at all the tiers will have the cap and electrodes in place, and switches moved but 
without any delivered electrical stimulation. While the highest do se tier in this study is 
expected to be fully safe, based on preclinical and clinical studies 12,19, since this i s a first-
in-human study in acute stroke, a formal escalation to higher dose tiers is prudent.  
 
 
Figure 7.  This figure 
shows the 6 escalating 
tiers. Blue represents 1 
mA and purple shows 2 
mA of tDCS. Symptomatic 
ICH (SICH) in none of the 
three patients in a tier will 
result in escalation. 
However, SICH in one 
patient, [ADDRESS_35307] common 
reported adverse effects associated with tDCS.  
 
After randomization  and during  the stimulation , all patients will be monitored closely by a 
physician -investigator . NIHSS will be obtained at the end of  each 20 -minute stimulation 
cycle  and a visual inspection of the skin and rate degree of any potential erythema under 
the electrode  will be performed . Then, a tolerability form will be completed based on 
validated cutaneous, neurological, and pain items of the PRO -CTAE (Patient -Reported 
Outcomes version of the Common Terminology Criteria for Adver se Events) (Figure 8). 
49,50.  
After the stimulation, nursing neurologic assessments will be performed by 
[CONTACT_35767].  Specifically, patient s will be monitored for any signs of neurological 
worsening and will be queried on development of new or worsening neurological 
symptoms including headache , dizziness, numbness,  or weakness, etc. If any sign or 
symptom of neurological worsening is suspected, the patient will be immediately 
assessed by [CONTACT_21639] -call neurologist a nd an immediate brain imaging (CT or MRI) will be 
obtained. Neuro -checks will be performed at 1h and 2h after stimulation and then every 
[ADDRESS_35308] parenchymal images, non -invasive angiography, and perfusion 
studies and formal NIHSS assessment at 2-hour and 24 -hour following the end of the 
stimulation tier  as part of the study protocol . 
 

17 
 D.6. Study Visits and Data Acquisition  
D.6.1 Schedule of Events  
* Skin Inspection will be performed before each stimulation period   
D.6.2. Baseline Evaluation  
• Demographics (age, sex, race)  
• Last known well time  
• Past medical/surgical history including vascular diagnoses and risk factors (stroke, 
TIA, carotid stenosis , myocardial infarction, atrial fibrillation, peripheral arterial 
disease, hypertension, diabetes, dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_035])  
• Medications, including antithrombotics, antihypertensives, statins, anti -
arrhythmics       Family history of vascular disease;  
• Tobacco (including timing, duration, amount), alcohol, and illicit drug use;  
• Vital signs (systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood pressure, pulse, respi[INVESTIGATOR_862], oxygen saturation);  
• Premorbid global disability (modified Rankin Scale);   
• Neurological deficits severity (NIHSS);  
• Laboratory results (CBC, platelet count, glucose, lytes, INR, PTT, LFTs.  
D.6.3. During tDCS Treatment  
• NIH Stroke Scale (NIHSS),  
• Tolerability/AE Form – Technologist, Tolerability Questionnaire – Patient  
D.6.4. Early (2 Hours) After tDCS  
• NIHSS,  
• Multimodal MRI /CT 
• Interval serious adverse events  
• Interval medications/procedures  
D.6.5. Late (24 Hours) After tDCS   
• NIHSS 
• Multimodal MRI /CT 
• Interval serious adverse events  
• Interval medications/procedures   Baseline  End of each 20 -min 
stimulation cycle  2-hr 24-hr Day 4  Day 30  Day 90  
  1 2 3      
Consent           
History / Exam           
Routine Labs           
Vital Signs           
Patient tolerability form           
Technician tolerability form/Skin 
Inspection*          
Multimodal MRI  or CT           
NIHSS           
Modified Rankin Scale ( mRS )          
Barthel Index (BI)           
EuroQol (EQ-5D)          
AMC Linear Disability Scale           
Interval serious adverse events           
Concomitant/Interval 
medications/procedures           
18 
 D.6.6. Day 4  
• Modified Rankin Scale (mRS)  
• Interval serious adverse events  
• Interval medications/procedures  
D.6.7. Day 30  
• mRS (phone) ,  
• Interval serious adverse events  
• Interval  medications/procedures  
D.6.8. Day 90  
• NIHSS,   
• Modified Rankin Scale (mRS)  
• AMC Linear Disability Scale (granular disability)  
• Barthel Index (BI) (activities of daily living)  
• EuroQol ( EQ-5D) (health -related quality of life)  
• Interval serious adverse events  
• Interval medications/procedures  
D.6.9. Imaging Assessments  
• Baseline  
Emergent multimodal MRI  or CT  is currently acquired as the routine initial imaging study 
in all acute stroke patients at UCLA without contraindications such as the  presence of a 
pacemaker or metal implant.  A 1.[ADDRESS_35309] 
clinical MRI protocol includes Gradient Recall - Echo (GRE), DWI, FLA IR (Fluid -
Attenuated Recovery Image), PWI and MR angiography. The ADC (apparent -diffusion 
coefficient) values derived from DWI acquisition (b=0, 1000 s/mm2 applied in each of 
three principal gradient directions) will be used to delineate the volume of isc hemic core. 
The tissue with ADC values of ≤ 620 µm2/s will be considered ischemic core, indicative 
of tissue with advanced, irreversible bioenergetic compromise. FLAIR delineates early 
parenchymal signal abnormality associated with ischemia and slow retrograde flow in 
leptomeningeal collaterals appearing as FLAIR vascular hyperintensity (FVH) . The GRE 
sequence is used to evaluate the presence of intracranial hemorrhage and deoxygenated 
leptomeningeal collaterals appearing as GRE vascular hypointensity (GVH). PWI is 
acquired with sequential T2* -weighted (gradient echo) EPI [INVESTIGATOR_35746] g. Early 
in the time series, a bolus (0.1 mmol/kg) of MRI contrast material is rapi[INVESTIGATOR_35747] (5 
ml/sec through an 18 or larger gauge angiocatheter) using a power injector. The perfusion 
lesion volume (tissue at risk volume) will be the  region with Tmax  6sec (Tmax = the 
time delay from the arrival of contrast to its peak concentration at the tissue vasculature). 
52,53 Intracranial CEMRA (Contrast -Enhanced MRA) will identify large and medium vessel 
occlusion.   
In patients receiving CT, the standard clinical CT protocol includes non -contrast CT (NCCT), 
multiphase CT angiography, CT perfusion (CTP) processed through RAPID software. NCCT is 
used to rule out acute intracranial hemorrhage appearing as hyperdensity. The tissue with rCBF 
< 30% on CTP  will be considered ischemic core and the perfusion lesion volume (tissue at risk 
volume) will be the  region with Tmax  6sec. CT angiography (CTA) will identify large and 
medium vessel occlusion.   
 
19 
 • 2h and 24h Post -Stimulation  
Follow -up MR or CT imaging will be obtained 2h and 24h post -stimulation (supported by 
[CONTACT_35768]. research funds). MRI Imaging sequences will include 
DWI/FLAIR/GRE/PWI/CEMRA and CT imaging sequences will consist of NCCT/CTA/CTP . 
RAPID image processing software will be applied to the above images to quantify, at the 
baseline, 2h, and 24h time -points: 1) Ischemic Core volume, 2) Perfusion lesion volume, 
and 3) Penumbra volume (perfusion volume  - core volume). From these values, the 
following measures will be constructed: 1) Early penumbra preservation: Volume of 
baseline penumbra tissue not progressing to ischemic core at 2h; 2) Penumbral salvage: 
Volume of baseline penumbra tissue not progress ing to ischemic core at 24h; 3) Early 
collateral flow enhancement: Perfusion lesion volume at baseline – Perfusion lesion 
volume at 2h; 4) Sustained collateral flow enhancement: Perfusion lesion volume at 
baseline – Perfusion lesion volume at 24h; 5) Early  infarct growth: Ischemic core lesion 
volume at 2h – Ischemic core lesion volume at baseline; and 6) Final infarct growth: 
Ischemic core lesion volume at 24h – Ischemic core lesion volume at baseline. Additional 
location and extent of ischemic injury at ba seline, 2h, and 24h will be rated using the MRI 
ASPECTS scoring system, with regions considered involved if diffusion restriction is 
present in more than 20% of the region  or CT ASPCETS . 54,55 In patients receiving MRI, 
location and extent of FVH and GVH will be rated using the FVH -modified ASPEC TS and 
GVH modified ASPECTS scales.56 
D.6.10  Adverse Events  
D.6.10.1 Serious Adverse Events (SAEs)  
   All serious adverse events occurring during the 90 days of study participation will be 
recorded. A serious adverse event is any adverse event that is fatal, is life -threatening, is 
permanently or substantially disabling, requires or prolongs hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5186] n, or requires 
medical or surgical intervention to prevent one of the above outcomes.19  
D.6.10.2 Symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage  
   The lead safety endpoint adverse event is symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage (SICH), 
defined using the SWIFT PRIME trial criteria 55: an increase of 4 or more points on the 
NIHSS within 24 hours of stimulation associated with parenchymal hematoma type 1 
(PH1), parenchymal hematoma type 2 (PH2), remote intraparenchymal hemorrhage 
(RIH), subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), or intraventricular  hemorrhage (IVH). In 
addition, all hemorrhages, both symptomatic and asymptomatic, will also be separately 
classified and analyzed by [CONTACT_35769], as hemorrhagic infarction type 1 (HI1), 
hemorrhagic infarction type 2 (HI2), PH1, PH2, RIH, SAH, or I VH.[ADDRESS_35310] data on a wide range of safety 
20 
 endpoints and a wide range of measures of functional outcome, as is planned in this 
proposal. In making the selection of a primary safety endpoint, an emphasis was placed 
on ensuring patient safety throughout the course of the trial by [CONTACT_35770] (Symptomatic Intracranial Hemorrhage).  
D.6.10.3 Additional Adverse Events with Specific Interrogation  
    In addition to general screening for all serious adverse events and  focused elicitation 
of symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage events, the following events will be specifically 
interrogated for and recorded in the case report form s: skin redness, scalp rash, hair loss, 
seizure, headache, sensitivity to light, new ischemic  stroke, deep venous thrombosis, 
pulmonary embolism, pneumonia, acute MI.  
E. Safety Monitoring  
E.1. Data and Safety Monitoring Plan  
   The trial will be monitored by [CONTACT_35771] 
(DSMB). [CONTACT_35777] from department  of neurorehabilitation will lead the DSMB. 
DSMB will assess for the causal relationship of the serious  adverse  event  to the study  
treatment  as definite,  probable,  possible,  unlikely,  or unrelated.   
DSMB  will meet  at the completion  of each  dose  tier, review  all safety  data,  and 
determine  whether  the study  will proceed to the next dose tier. DSMB deliberations will 
be guided by: 1) a formal stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007]/escalation rule,  based on the occurrence of the lead 
safety endpoint, symptomatic intracranial hemorrhage  (SICH), and 2) The DSMB 
members’ clinical judgement upon review of all other safety  outcomes.  In addition, 
DSMB will monitor separately the patients who enroll in the study with a stroke scale [ADDRESS_35311] an increase in NIHSS of 2 
or more or which is disabling.  
Furthermore, Food and Drug Administration (FDA) will be notified if there is one 
occurrence of SICH prior to repeating the tier or escalating to a higher tier .  
E. 2. Statistical Design and Analyses  Plan  
E.2.1. Sample size  
   The study  sample size derives from the use of the 3+3, rule -based, modified Fibonacci, 
dose escalation design, with 3:1 randomization to active treatment vs sham control. There 
will be 6 dose tiers, reflecting  increasing intensity and duration of stimulation (Figure 7). 
The 3+3 study design (3 patients and 1 sham) with [ADDRESS_35312] 24 and potentially up to 48. The 3+[ADDRESS_35313] limited 
advantages when major toxicities are not expected. 59 Therefore, the rule -based, 3+3 
design remains the dominantly employed approach in current dose -escalation studies.  
We will take every step to avoid missing data by [CONTACT_35772] -up visits early in 
visit time windows and readiness to travel to the patient’s location to perform needed 
assessments. Should any missing data occur, primary analyses will be performed using 
multiple imputation, with sensitivity analyses including complete case and worst possible 
outcome analyses. [ADDRESS_35314] deviations, and 95% confidence 
intervals (CI). Ordinal and non -normally distributed variables (such as the NIHSS) will be  
characterized by [CONTACT_35773]. Baseline characteristics will be 
compared between the tDCS stimulation group with sham group to assess covariate 
balance.  Wilcoxon Rank -Sum tests will be used for continuous or ordinal variables; 
Fisher’s  exact tests and chi -square tests will be used for grouped or nominal categorical 
variables.   
E.2.3. Safety and Tolerability (Specific Aim 1)  
E.2.3.[ADDRESS_35315] (DSMB) will meet at the completion of 
each dose tier, review all safety data, and determine whether the study will proceed to 
the next dose tier. DSMB deliberations will be guided by: 1) a formal stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_007]/escalation 
rule, b ased on the occurrence of the lead safety endpoint, symptomatic intracranial 
hemorrhage (SICH), and 2) The DSMB members’ clinical judgement upon review of all 
other safety outcomes. The formal dose escalation rule uses SICH frequency to gate the 
occurrence  and pace of escalation through the 6 dose tiers. If no SICH occurs in the 3 
active patients at a dose tier, enrollment may escalate to the next dose tier. If one SICH 
occurs, 3 more active (and 1 more control) patient will be enrolled at that dose tier be fore 
escalation. If 2 SICHs occur at a dose tier, further study enrollment is held until detailed 
review by [CONTACT_4318] (Fig 6). In addition, whenever the formal SICH criteria for dose 
escalation has been met, the DSMB will formally meet, review the SICH data  and all other 
safety data, and advice regarding proceeding to the next tier, continuing at the current 
tier, or placing the study on hold.  
E.2.3.2. Primary Safety Endpoint Analysis  
   For the final statistical analysis of the primary SICH safety endpoint, a chi -square test 
will be used to detect differences in the rate of SICH between the active treatment and 
sham patients and higher and lower dose tiers. The treatment will be considered to  have 
exhibited adequate safety in the current trial to proceed to future, larger, pi[INVESTIGATOR_35748].  
E.2.3.3. Secondary Safety Endpoint s Analysis  
   In secondary safety endpoint analyses, the following will be compared between the 
active treatment and sham patients, and between higher and lower dose tiers, using chi -
squared tests: 1) Asymptomatic ICH by 24h (intracranial hemorrhage not associated with 
NIHSS worsening ≥ 4); 2) Early neurologic deterioration (worsening ≥ 4 on NIHSS during 
the 24 -hour period after stimulation, with or without intracranial hemorrhage); 3) All-cause 
mortality at day 90 (mRS); and 4) All serious adverse events.  
E.3.3. Tolerability Endpoint  Analysis  
    The lead tolerability endpoint is completion of the protocol -assigned stimulation 
treatment without early cessation due to cutaneous, neurologic, nociceptive or other 
adverse effects. Experience with tDCS in post -stroke patients indicates only infrequent 
cutaneous (itching, tingling) adverse effects are likely to occur. Accordingly, for the current 
study, a patient will be considered to have tolerated the procedure if at least 75% of the 
stimulus period was completed. The treatment will be considered genera lly tolerable if, 
among all enrolled patients, tolerated procedures are achieved in ≥90% of patients, 
assessed with a one -sided p value of 0.025. Secondary tolerability endpoints will be the 
22 
 rate and severity of cutaneous, neurological, and pain items of t he technician -filled (Figure 
7) and patient -filled tolerability forms 49, descriptively compared between active treatment 
and sham patients, and between higher and lower dose tiers.   
E.3.4. Feasibility Endpoint  Analysis  (Specific Aim 2)  
   A time -motion analysis and mock run -throughs will be conducted prior to first 
enrollment. Nonetheless, it is anticipated that processes to optimize rapid placement of 
the cap and electrodes will continue to improve with experience gained from initially 
enrolled pa tients. The predefined success threshold for feasibility will be median time from 
randomization to tDCS initiation ≤ [ADDRESS_35316] 10 enrolled patients.  
E.3.5. Exploratory Efficacy Endpoints  Analysis  (Specific Aim 3)  
E.3.5.1. Exploratory Imaging Biomarker Efficacy Endpoints  
   This study is underpowered to definitively determine efficacy, so all imaging efficacy 
analyses will be purely exploratory and descriptive. Imaging biomarker efficacy endpoints 
will be characterized in th e active and sham patients, and in higher and lower dose tiers, 
using means and 95% confidence intervals. The six imaging efficacy endpoints of 
greatest interest that will be explored are: early and late penumbral salvage, early and 
late collateral flow en hancement, and early and late infarct growth.  
E.3.5.2. Exploratory Clinical Efficacy Endpoints  
   This study is underpowered to definitively determine efficacy, so all clinical efficacy 
analyses will be purely exploratory and descriptive.  Four clinical ou tcome measures were 
selected based on their reliability, familiarity to the neurologic community, and adaptability 
for use in patients who have had a stroke. These endpoints are: the modified Rankin 
Scale (mRS), a rating of global disability; the Barthel I ndex (BI) , a measure of instrumental 
activities of daily living; the National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS), a measure 
of neurologic deficit severity; and the EuroQol (EQ -5D), an assessment of health -related 
quality of life; and AMC Linear Disa bility Scale, a granular degree of disability.  
Clinical efficacy endpoints will be characterized in the active and sham patients, and in 
higher and lower dose tiers. Early course clinical efficacy endpoints of greatest interest 
that will be explored are: 1) Normalized change in neurologic deficit from baseline to 24h 
(normalized delta NIHSS – linear variable, analyzed with means and 95% CIs; and 2) 
Degree of neurologic deficit at 24h (NIHSS – quasi -linear variable, analyzed with means 
and 95% CIs). Final o utcome clinical efficacy endpoints of greatest interest that will be 
explored are: 1) Degree of disability at 90 days, assessed across all 7 levels of the 
modified Rankin Scale – ordinal variable, analyzed with medians (IQRs) and means (95% 
CIs); 2) Functional independence (mRS 0 -2) at 90 days – binary variable, analyzed with 
rates and 95% CIs; 3) Granular degree of disability at 90 days (AMC Linear Disability 
Scale) – linear variable, analyzed with means and 95% CIs; and 4) Health -related quality 
of life (EQ -5D) – linear variable, analyzed with means and 95% CIs.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
References:  
1. Benjamin EJ, Blaha MJ, Chiuve SE, et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics -2017 Update: 
A Report From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2017.  
2. Campbell BC, Donnan GA, Lees KR, et al. Endovascular stent thrombectomy: the new 
standard of care for large vessel ischaemic stroke. Lancet Neurol. 2015;14(8):846 -854.  
3. Adeoye O, Hornung R, Khatri P, Kleindorfer D. Recombinant tissue -type plasminogen 
activator use for ischemic stroke in the [LOCATION_002]: a doubling of treatment rates over 
the course of 5 years. Stroke. 2011;42(7):1952 -1955.  
4. Saver JL, Goyal M, van der Lugt A, et al. Time to Treatment With Endovascular 
Thrombectomy and Outcomes From Ischemic Stroke: A Meta -analysis. JAMA. 
2016;316(12):[ADDRESS_35317] growth despi[INVESTIGATOR_35749]. J Neurointerv Surg. 2016;8(2):117 -121.  
6. Goyal M, Menon BK, van Zwam WH, et al. Endovascular thrombectomy after large -vessel 
ischaemic stroke: a meta -analysis of individual patient data from five randomised trials. 
Lancet. 2016;387([ZIP_CODE]):1723 -1731.  
7. Tymianski M. Novel approaches to neuroprotection trials in acute ischemic stroke. Stroke. 
2013;44(10):2942 -2950.  
8. Saver JL, Starkman S, Eckstein M, et al. Prehospi[INVESTIGATOR_5118] . N Engl J Med. 2015;372(6):[ADDRESS_35318] of citicoline on ischemic lesions as 
measured by [CONTACT_35774] -weighted magnetic resonance imaging. Citicoline 010 
Investigators. Ann Neurol. 2000;48(5):713 -722.  
10. Albers  WG. Endovascular Therapy Following Imaging Evaluation for Ischemic Stroke 3 
(DEFUSE 3). https://clinicaltrialsgov/ct2/show/[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] . 2017.  
11. Nogueira RG, Jadhav AP, Haussen DC, et al. Thrombectomy [ADDRESS_35319]. N Engl J Med. 2017.  
12. Woods AJ, Antal A, Bikson M, et al. A technical guide to tDCS, and related non -invasive 
brain stimulation tools. Clin Neurophysiol. 2016;127(2):[ADDRESS_35320] current stimulation of the human motor cortex. J Physiol. 
2005;568(Pt 1):291 -303.  
14. Nitsche MA, Nitsche MS, Klein CC, Tergau F, Rothwell JC, Paulus W. Level of action of 
cathodal DC polarisation induced inhibition of the human motor cortex. Clin Neurophysiol. 
2003;114(4):[ADDRESS_35321] 
current stimulation (tDCS): challenges and future directions. Brain Stimul. 2012;5(3):[ADDRESS_35322] current stimulation 
for rehabilitation after stroke. Neuroimage. 2013;75:[ADDRESS_35323] current stimulation over the anterior 
temporal areas boosts semantic processing in primary progressive aphasia. Ann Neurol. 
2016;80(5):693 -707.  
18. Wessel MJ, Zimerman M, Hummel FC.  Non -invasive brain stimulation: an interventional 
tool for enhancing behavioral training after stroke. Front Hum Neurosci. 2015;9:265.  
19. Bikson M, Grossman P, Thomas C, et al. Safety of Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation: 
Evidence Based Update 2016 . Brain Stimul. 2016;9(5):[ADDRESS_35324] 
current stimulation to stroke patients - A phase I current escalation study. Brain Stimul. 
2017;10(3):553 -559.  
21. Harukuni I, Bh ardwaj A. Mechanisms of brain injury after global cerebral ischemia. Neurol 
Clin. 2006;24(1):1 -21. 
22. Nakamura H, Strong AJ, Dohmen C, et al. Spreading depolarizations cycle around and 
enlarge focal ischaemic brain lesions. Brain. 2010;133(Pt 7):[ADDRESS_35325] depolarizations. Cerebrovasc Brain Metab Rev. 1996;8(3):[ADDRESS_35326] 
depolarizations after focal cerebral ischemia: relation to infarct growth and 
neuroprotection. J Neurosci. 2003;23(37):[ADDRESS_35327] current stimulation in a rat stroke model. J Neurol Sci. 
2014;342(1 -2):[ADDRESS_35328] current stimulation in acute experimental ischemic stroke. Stroke. 
2013;44(11):3166 -3174.  
27. Baba T, Kameda M, Yasuhara T, et al. Electrical stimulation of the cerebral cortex exerts 
antiapoptotic, angiogenic, and anti -inflammatory effects in ischem ic stroke rats through 
phosphoinositide 3 -kinase/Akt signaling pathway. Stroke. 2009;40(11):e598 -605.  
28. Kim SJ, Kim BK, Ko YJ, Bang MS, Kim MH, Han TR. Functional and histologic changes after 
repeated transcranial direct current stimulation in rat stroke  model. J Korean Med Sci. 
2010;25(10):[ADDRESS_35329] electrical current on intracranial 
arteries and the blood -brain barrier. J Neurosurg. 1974;41(5):582 -589.  
30. Iacoboni M. The role of premotor corte x in speech perception: evidence from fMRI and 
rTMS. J Physiol Paris. 2008;102(1 -3):31 -34. 
31. Aziz-Zadeh L, Iacoboni M, Zaidel E, Wilson S, Mazziotta J. Left hemisphere motor 
facilitation in response to manual action sounds. Eur J Neurosci. 2004;19(9):260 9-2612.  
32. Iacoboni M. Visuo -motor integration and control in the human posterior parietal cortex: 
evidence from TMS and fMRI. Neuropsychologia. 2006;44(13):[ADDRESS_35330] current stimulation in schizophrenia. 
Schizophr Res. 2016;174(1 -3):[ADDRESS_35331] current stimulation 
on social cognition in schizophrenia:  A preliminary study. Schizophr Res. 2015;165(2 -
3):[ADDRESS_35332] current 
stimulation on early auditory processing in schizophrenia: a preliminary study. J Neural 
Transm (Vienna) . 2017.  
36. Reis DJ, Berger SB, Underwood MD, Khayata M. Electrical stimulation of cerebellar 
fastigial nucleus reduces ischemic infarction elicited by [CONTACT_35775]. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 1991;11(5):810 -818.  
37. Reis DJ, Koby [CONTACT_35776] K, Yamamoto S, Golanov EV. Brief electrical stimulation of cerebellar 
fastigial nucleus conditions long -lasting salvage from focal cerebral ischemia: conditioned 
central neurogenic neuroprotection. Brain Res. 1998;780(1):161 -165.  
38. Yamamoto S, Golan ov EV, Reis DJ. Reductions in focal ischemic infarctions elicited from 
cerebellar fastigial nucleus do not result from elevations in cerebral blood flow. J Cereb 
Blood Flow Metab. 1993;13(6):1020 -1024.  
39. Zhou P, Qian L, Glickstein SB, Golanov EV, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_35750], Reis DJ. Electrical stimulation of 
cerebellar fastigial nucleus protects rat brain, in vitro, from staurosporine -induced 
apoptosis. J Neurochem. 2001;79(2):[ADDRESS_35333] focal ischemia. Brain Res. 
2001;912(1):[ADDRESS_35334] current stimulation 
(tDCS). In. Unpublished work.2017.  
42. Samdani AF, Dawson TM, Dawson VL. Nitric oxide synthase in models of focal ischemia. 
Stroke. 1997;28(6):1283 -1288.  
43. Huisa BN, Stemer AB, Walker MG, et al. Transcranial laser therapy for acute ischemic 
stroke: a pooled analysis of NEST -[ADDRESS_35335] -2. Int J Stroke. 2013;8(5):315 -320.  
44. Shuaib A, Bornstein NM, Diener HC, et al. Partial aortic occlusion for cerebral perfusion 
augmentation: safety and efficacy of NeuroFlo in Acute Ischemic Stroke trial. Stroke. 
2011;42(6):1680 -1690.  
45. Bahr Hosseini M WG, Hinman JD, Sharma LK, Rao NM, Star kman S, Yoo B, Scalzo F, 
Liebeskind DS, Saver JL,for the UCLA Penumbral Imaging Investigators. Prevalence of 
substantial salvageable penumbra in patients with large vessel occlusion who do not 
undergo endovascular therapy. In. European Stroke Organisation Conference (ESOC) 2017.  
46. Butcher KS, Parsons M, MacGregor L, et al. Refining the perfusion -diffusion mismatch 
hypothesis. Stroke. 2005;36(6):1153 -1159.  
47. Furlan AJ, Eyding D, Albers GW, et al. Dose Escalation of Desmoteplase for Acute Ischemic 
Stroke ( DEDAS): evidence of safety and efficacy 3 to 9 hours after stroke onset. Stroke. 
2006;37(5):1227 -1231.  
48. Hacke W, Albers G, Al -Rawi Y, et al. The Desmoteplase in Acute Ischemic Stroke Trial 
(DIAS): a phase II MRI -based 9 -hour window acute stroke thrombol ysis trial with 
intravenous desmoteplase. Stroke. 2005;36(1):66 -73. 
26 
 49. Basch E, Reeve BB, Mitchell SA, et al. Development of the National Cancer Institute's 
patient -reported outcomes version of the common terminology criteria for adverse 
events (PRO -CTCAE ). J Natl Cancer Inst. 2014;106(9).  
50. Dueck AC, Mendoza TR, Mitchell SA, et al. Validity and Reliability of the US National 
Cancer Institute's Patient -Reported Outcomes Version of the Common Terminology 
Criteria for Adverse Events (PRO -CTCAE). JAMA Oncol . 2015;1(8):1051 -1059.  
51. Powers WJ, Rabinstein AA, Ackerson T, et al. 2018 Guidelines for the Early Management 
of Patients With Acute Ischemic Stroke: A Guideline for Healthcare Professionals From 
the American Heart Association/American Stroke Associatio n. Stroke. 2018;49(3):e46 -
e110.  
52. Albers GW, Lansberg MG, Kemp S, et al. A multicenter randomized controlled trial of 
endovascular therapy following imaging evaluation for ischemic stroke (DEFUSE 3). Int J 
Stroke. 2017;12(8):[ADDRESS_35336] Score in acute stroke triage. 
Neuroimaging Clin N Am. 2005;15(2):409 -419, xii. 
55. Saver JL, Goyal M, Bonafe A, et al. Stent -retriever thrombectomy after intravenous t -PA 
vs. t-PA alone in stroke. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(24):2285 -2295.  
56. Mahdjoub E, Turc G, Legrand L, et al. Do Fluid -Attenuated Inversion Recovery Vascular 
Hyper intensities Represent Good Collaterals before Reperfusion Therapy? AJNR Am J 
Neuroradiol. 2017.  
57. Hansen AR, Graham DM, Pond GR, Siu LL. Phase 1 trial design: is 3 + [ADDRESS_35337]? Cancer 
Control. 2014;21(3):200 -208.  
58. Penel N, Isambert N, Leblond P, Fert e C, Duhamel A, Bonneterre J. "Classical 3 + 3 design" 
versus "accelerated titration designs": analysis of [ADDRESS_35338] New Drugs. 2009;27(6):[ADDRESS_35339]. 2009;101(10):708 -720.  
60. Little RJ, D'Agostino R, Cohen ML, et al. The prevention and treatment of missing data in 
clinical trials. N Engl J Med. 2012;367(14):1355 -1360.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 