Study Title: Preemie Prep For Parents (P3): Home Antenatal Prematurity Education  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Original: 12/14/2018  
Updated: 10/9/2023   
STUDY RATIONALE  
Background  
Obstetric (ACOG) and Pediatrics (AAP) practice guidelines recommend that parents at risk for premature birth 
receive information regarding premature birth and potential health outcomes The NICHD 2014 Periviable Birth 
Joint Workshop concluded that the curre nt process of providing information to parents at risk for premature 
birth needs improvements. Our  proposal evaluates a new and substantively different approach to when, where  
and how  prematurity education is provided to parents at risk for preterm birth. When : Anticipatory education is 
currently provided when the mother is in preterm labor, when time is short,  and emotions run high. Our 
approach initiates education several weeks before the decision point. Where : Information is currently provided 
in the hos pi[INVESTIGATOR_307], when families may be distracted or distressed and may not be together to discuss the 
information. Our approach provides information at home when parents can contemplate and discuss the 
information. How: Information is currently provided primarily ve rbally. Our approach provides multimedia 
information based on health literacy principles and developed by [CONTACT_763460].  
Preliminary studies : Our previous work has informed the direction of the proposed  work . 
First, we prospectively assessed effectiveness of bedside verbal information by [CONTACT_17801] a questionnaire 
post-counseling to 49 women hospi[INVESTIGATOR_763453]. Notably, knowledge of short -term outcomes (lung 
immaturity, brain -bleed, infections, retinopathy, and nutrition) was higher (89% vs 53%)  than knowledge of 
long-term outcomes (cerebral palsy, learning problems, behavior problems, chronic lung disease, blindness, 
and hearing impairment).  
Second,  we developed a printe d handout to augment verbal information. In a n RCT of 60 women hospi[INVESTIGATOR_763454],  the control group received verbal information from a clinician and the intervention group 
additionally received a printed handout. Knowledge of long -term outcome s was higher in the intervention 
group, (71% vs 45%, P=0.02). This evidence -based printed handout was recognized in the 2015 American 
Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) Periviability Practice Guidelines. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_763455], printed 
information has failed to have a wider impact due to difficulties in dissemination and scalability.  
We then developed the P3 mobile education  as multimedia information improves learning and digital tools 
decrease logistic challenges. Obstetricians in our hospi[INVESTIGATOR_763456] P3 education to 31 parents at 
the time of diagnosis of a risk factor for preterm birth. The P3 mobile education  was downloaded to the 
participant smartphone from Apple store or Google play. The median (range) GA at enrollment was 20 (18 -22) 
weeks. Four weeks after enrollment, 28 participants (18 mothers and 10 fathers) completed the final survey. 
GA at birth is known f or 15 of the 18 mothers, with 6 (40%) experiencing preterm birth between [ADDRESS_1046228] survey items and participant responses  Yes (%)  
Medical knowledge   
1. Did the app provide new information to you?  100 
2. Was some of the information given in the app important for you to know?  [ADDRESS_1046229] a premature infant?  100 
4. In your opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649], will this app benefit families?  100 
5. Did the app inform you about difficulties that a premature baby [CONTACT_763461]?  89 
Emotional health   
1. Did the app make you feel more aware of your risk for having a premature delivery?  93 
2. Did the app increase your anxiety unnecessarily?  14 
3. As time passed and you were familiar with the information provided, did the app increase your anxiety about having a 
premature infant later?  21 
Partnership and Advocacy   
1. Because of the app, did you ask more questions at your doctor visits?  43 
2. Because of the app, did you and your partner discuss pregnancy or prematurity issues?  86 
3. Did you share information given in the app with other family/friends (excluding a partner already enrolled in the 
study)?  57 
 
Theoretical frameworks and hypotheses.  Cognitive load theory suggests that an individual’s capacity to 
process information is finite and limited by [CONTACT_39359]’s initial processor of information referred to as 
“working memory.” The Dual Code Theory sug gests that humans have separate working memory for 
auditory/text information and for visual information. Using both routes increases uptake of information. The 
Theory of Multimedia Learning states that even when cognitive load is not an issue, people will learn more with 
a blend of combined media than from a single medium. Finally, according to the Health Belief Model, health 
behavior (decisions) stem from beliefs (knowledge), perceived benefits of and barriers to action, and self -
efficacy.  
Thus, we hypothe size that the multimedia P3 mobile education  will result in 1) higher parental knowledge and 
2) better preparation for decision making compared to a static, electronic ACOG educational handout .  
 
STUDY APPROACH  
Sample  
Participants will be recruited from the obstetric clinics at the Froedtert Lutheran Memorial Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (FLMH), 
which is the adult tertiary care hospi[INVESTIGATOR_763457] -located on the Milwaukee County campus with Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_471482] . FLMH is the primary teaching hospi[INVESTIGATOR_763458] e Medical College of Wisconsin and it has a multi -state 
referral base, a high -risk pregnancy center, fetal intervention program, and a fertility clinic.  
Inclusion criteria : Eligible participants will be ( 1) pregnant women , including pregnant minors aged 13  and 
above , (2) with presence of one of the following maternal preterm birth risk factors: history of spontaneous 
preterm birth, shortened cervical length, multiple gestation, fetal growth restriction, chronic hypertension, 
history of preeclampsia, and/or diabetes requiring medications, (3) with fetal GA between 1 4-21 weeks at 
enrollment to allow parents time to review the study information before birth, while also approaching a GA 
when neonatal resuscitation is an option (22 weeks), (4) who have a smartphone, and ( 5) who are able to read 
and speak English (the P3 mobile education  is currently only available in English). For all women  (or pregnant 
teenagers)  who are eligible and agree to participate, we will invite their partner to participate; howev er, partner 
participation is not required.  Partner is defined as  the mother’s primary  pregnancy support person; in the 
majority of cases this is the father of the baby . 
Exclusion criteria : Pregnancies with known significant birth defects will be excluded a s information provided to 
these parents is different.  
Aim 1: Determine the effect of the P3 app on NICHD -recommended parental prematurity knowledge.  
Study procedure  (Please see Appendix A) : 
Pre-enrollment preparation . 
1) The study team will be trained by a perinatal psychologist ([CONTACT_763466], see Letter of Support) to 
recognize participant anxiety and address or refer appropriately.  
2) Tutorials will be provided to familiarize prenatal obstetric providers with the st udy educational -aids, 
inclusion/exclusion criteria, and other study procedures.  
3) P3 mobile education  functionality will be upgraded based on feedback from the previous pi[INVESTIGATOR_48124] . [CONTACT_763467]’s UBITRIX team will incorporate the suggested changes.   A review of the upgraded content based on 
the principles of health literacy  will be performed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Barne kow (Families First LLC).  
4) Usability testing of the upgraded materials will be conducted with the general population, to determine users' 
understanding of specific words and concepts in the videos.   Please see PRO [ADDRESS_1046230], but recommendations will be provided on work -arounds or changes that could be made in the future.  
Enrollment and consent . 
1) The clinical research assistant (CRA) will screen daily obstetric clinic appointments to identify potentially 
eligible parents.  
2) The obstetric provider will introduce the study to eligible parents and refer interested parents to the CRA.  
3) The CRA will  meet with the parents and invite all eligible pregnant women  (or minors)  and present 
partners  to participate.   For partners who are not present at the time of the obstetric clinic appointments, the 
pregnant women  (or minors)  will be asked if they have a s upport person for this pregnancy.   If so, they are 
asked if they would be willing to provide this person's contact [CONTACT_3031].   If they offer the information, these 
partners will be contact[CONTACT_763462], with consenting proce ss through REDCap.  
4) As part of the consent process, parents will be provided detailed study information, the risks to 
confidentiality, the risk of heightened anxiety, the extent of researcher access to health records, as well as 
what will happen to data already collected should the participant withdraw from the study. Parents who decline 
participation will continue to receive standard pregnancy and prenatal care.   Participants will also be asked 
during the enrollment process if the CRA can add P3 study as a contact [CONTACT_763463], so that the CRA office 
number, the study phone number, and the study email are in the participants' phone.  
Randomization   
1) Pregnant women  (or minors)  who consent to participate will be randomized 1:1 to the P3 mobile education  
(intervention) or the link to electronic ACOG handout arm  (active control) , with assignment to be determined by 
[CONTACT_763464] -generated random assignment.  Block randomization will be used with 
random block sizes of [ADDRESS_1046231] will be generated using the R package blockrand  
2) Eligible partners who consent to participate will be assigned to the same intervention group as the pregnant 
participant, otherwise they will contaminate each other.  
3) Participants will receive either  links to ACOG education or be added as a user to  the P3 mobile education 
site via email or text to their smartphone .  The CRA will  then provide a brief tutorial and the study team contact 
[CONTACT_3031].  
Study Groups  
P3 mobile education  group   
Participants will then receive a schedule of automated text messages, with video links.  These videos and 
messages are based on information relevant to their gestational age.  The messages will be sent a maximum 
of two times per day.  If participants do not click on the link after 4 hours, they may receive a remind er 
message.  
The participants from this group will also be able to directly access the P3 website, where the videos and 
educational materials are housed, to use the educational videos  if they wanted to “binge watch”.  
The P3 mobile education group participan ts use of educational materials will be tracked on the HIPPA 
complaint P3 website. The site will not house any PHI information and each participant use of the site will be 
tracked using their study assigned number. Tracked information will include clicking  on the video link, which of 
the educational videos were watched , and for how long.  
Based on our tracking data, if there evidence of a technical malfunction  in our text -video link function,  such as 
the participant has only seen 10% or less of the videos  texted to them , the CRA may follow up with participants 
via phone or email to make sure they are still able to receive messages and access the videos.  
ACOG electronic handout group  
Participants will receive links to ACOG patient premature birth education rel ated handouts  
Data collection .  (Please see Survey Schedule in Section 52.)  
At baseline  (16-21 weeks) the CRA will administer the health literacy assessment , will ask participants to self -
administer the Entry Questionnaire , an anxiety measure , and a subjective global health measure , and will 
abstract maternal clinical data  and reproductive history  from the medical record.  
As pregnancy continues, REDCap will automatically send out questionnaires to participants at key time 
points:   the start of  their 25th, 30th, and 34th weeks.   These times will include Prematurity Knowledge 
Questionnaires  (specific to their gestational age), a Preparation for Decision Making scale , and an anxiety 
measure .   At these time points, if they do not complete the ques tionnaire the first day they are sent it, they will 
be sent an automatic reminder through REDCap for the next [ADDRESS_1046232] the participant by [CONTACT_648].    
At study comp letion, within two weeks of either preterm childbirth or completion of the 34 week questionnaire, 
participants will be asked to also complete the Educational -Aid Questionnaire . 
Participants will receive $20 for each completed follow -up assessment (up to $ 80) and entered into a lottery to 
win an additional $50 for every questionnaire they return the day they were sent it.  
Data will be collected and managed using the REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) system.   This 
system is a secure, web -based applica tion designed to support data collection for research. It provides data 
validation, audit trails, and automated export procedures to statistical packages. Branching logic and calculated 
fields can also be created in the system to support data entry.  
Study Measures    
Apart from the Newest Vital Sign, all measures will be self -administered by [CONTACT_4317].  
The Newest Vital Sign  is a validated health literacy scale that takes 3 minutes for a trained interviewer to 
administer. The participant is given a special ice cream label to review and is asked questions (by [CONTACT_2689]) to 
test understanding of words and numbers.   Because it can not be self -administered, this tool will only be used 
for the pregnant participant, as we know they will be in -person for intake.  
The Brief Health Literacy Screening  is a validated health literacy screening that in only one question is able to 
assess healt h literacy levels.  This tool will be used with the partner participant, as it can be self -administered 
(unlike the Newest Vital Sign) and partners may not be present at the obstetrician appointment to enroll in -
person.  
The PROMIS Global Health scale is a measure of physical, mental, and social health.  Its ten items are 
subjective self -report, and as such will be given to both the pregnant woman and her partner, though we have 
some information about the pregnant participants’ health from her medical recor d. 
The Entry -Questionnaire  will collect information regarding socio -demographics, mobile technology use, family 
relationships, and participant’s decision -making values.  
The Prematurity Knowledge Questionnaire  assesses knowledge of the information recommend ed by [CONTACT_763465].1 It consists of following knowledge domains: due date estimation, lowest GA 
necessary for survival, factors influencing preterm birth outcome, treatment options at periviable GA, long -term 
outcomes, short -term ou tcomes, and advocacy.   It consists of a combination of fill -in-the-blank, multiple choice, 
and true/false questions. The items were evaluated and revised through cognitive interviews, which rely on 
intensive verbal probing of participants by a trained inte rviewer to identify otherwise unobservable problems 
with item comprehension, recall, and other cognitive processes that can be remediated through question 
rewording, reordering, or more extensive revision. .  
The Educational -Aid Questionnaire will gather us er feedback regarding the assigned educational -aid, including 
whether the educational aid increased awareness of risk of preterm birth , influenced communication with the 
obstetric providers, influenced pregnancy communication with partner, whether their do ctor or the educational -
aid provided more prematurity information, ease of use, and encouraged parents to learn more information. 
The questionnaire for the P3 group has additional items regarding audiovisuals and the look of the app.  
Sample Size  
Based on our published data for knowledge of long -term outcomes, we expect average parent knowledge of 
seven long -term outcomes of 50% (SD 35%) in the ACOG group. In our population, English literacy is ~90% 
while ~80% possess smartphones.  With [ADDRESS_1046233] a 20% difference in 
knowledge, with power of 80% and α of 0.05. To allow for 10% attrition, 55 pregnant participants will be 
enrolled in each group.  
Recruitment Feasibility  
Our institutional Clinical Research Data Warehous e 2016 clinic patient population shows: 303 pregnancies with 
hypertension and preeclampsia, 302 with fetal growth restriction, 218 with multiple gestations, 87 with 
shortened cervix, 80 with history of preterm labor, 68 with pre -existing diabetes, and 23 w ith cerclage. These 
numbers indicate that goal recruitment is unlikely to be a problem. For the proposed study, we plan to enroll 
~10 women  (or minors)  per month to reach our target enrollment within [ADDRESS_1046234] access to the identifiers.  The P3 site is HIPPA compliant; 
however, we will not have PHI information on the P3 site as participa nts study ID numbers will be used.  
Data Analysi s 
[CONTACT_763468]  will perform 1) blinded scoring of the Prematurity Knowledge Questionnaire using prespecified 
rules for each response, and 2) blinded analysis with masked group assignment in the dataset.  The 
randomized design, the blinded scoring, and the blinded compari son of post -intervention NICHD  
recommended knowledge between the P3 and ACOG groups should achieve robust and unbiased results . The 
Educational -Aid Questionnaire responses and the P3 tracking data will be analyzed separately after 
completion of the other a nalyses . 
Statistical analyses will be conducted in SAS. The primary outcome is the knowledge score for long -term 
outcomes (cerebral palsy, learning problems, behavior problems, chronic lung disease, blindness, and hearing 
impairment), and the primary analy sis will use Student's t -test to compare the two groups on knowledge of 
long-term outcomes  at 25 weeks . We will use regression methods to examine relationships between 
knowledge and sociodemographic characteristics, health literacy level, and the mobile in tervention  use pattern 
captured by [CONTACT_941] P3 software. Additional planned analyses will compare knowledge at later time points and in 
the other NICHD -recommended domains, e.g. short -term outcomes, as well as differences between groups in 
preparation for decis ion-making scores and anxiety scores. We will also use regression methods to examine 
relationships between knowledge and sociodemographic characteristics, health literacy level, and the mobile 
intervention  use pattern captured by [CONTACT_941] P3 software . 
Aim 2: De termine the effect of the P3 mobile app on parental preparation for decision -making.  
Study procedure, participants, and data management are the same as described for Aim 1.  
Data collection.  Participant decision self -efficacy will be assessed at study entry  and exit . Preparation for 
decision -making and anxiety will be in conjunction with the knowledge questionnaire at 25, 30 and 34 weeks.   
Study measure s 
Decision Self -Efficacy Scale  is an 11 -item scale that measures self -confidence or belief in one’s abilities in 
decision -making, including shared decision -making.19 
Preparation for Decision Making scale  is a 10 -item scale that assesses how useful a decision -support 
intervention is in preparing  the respondent to communicate with their clinician about a health decision. It has 
been shown to discriminate between patients who did and did not find a decisional aid helpful with a difference 
of 0.6 points on a 1 -5 scale, and SD ≈1.0.21 It can be custo mized to represent the particular intervention and 
decision under consideration ; in this case, decisions about resuscitation, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_629178], and breastfeeding 
are focused on during appropriate time points.  
PROMIS Anxiety Computerized Adaptive Test (CAT)  measures general anxiety over the past seven days.20 
With CAT administration, participant responses guide the system’s choice of subsequent items to enable a 
highly precise score with just ~[ADDRESS_1046235] evide nce for 
validity in the general population and provide a T -score, where 50 (SD 10) corresponds to the US average.  
Sample size  
The analytic sample size of 100 provides 80% power to detect a difference of 0.6 points in Preparation for 
Decision Making (using SD=1.0), which was previously shown to be a meaningful difference for this scale. With 
50 partners enrolled, a within -couple difference in Preparation for Decision Making of 0.4 points will be 
detectable with 80% power if the within -couple correlati on is 0.[ADDRESS_1046236] -intervention at each time point across the 
two groups using Student’s T -test. Associations between participant preparation scores, their level of domain 
specific knowledge, and socio -demographics will be explored using regression analyses. The primary analysis 
will be focused on the pregnant women  (or minors) , with secondary analyses comparing between partners, and 
partners and women  (or minors)  within couples using paired T -tests.  
Addressing Missing Data.  
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_763459], we anticipate there will be some study 
dropout. If one member of a couple decides to drop out, we will try to retain the other me mber. We will attempt 
to describe differences among those who do and do not drop out, with the goal of characterizing the 
uncertainty created by [CONTACT_11368]. We will explore whether certain characteristics are more prevalent among 
participants who drop ou t, e.g., high anxiety or neonatal death.  
 
POTENTIAL CHALLENGES AND ALTERNATIVE STRATEGIES  
Our Clinical Research Data Warehouse information suggests [ADDRESS_1046237] all data in person in conjunction with participants’ 
scheduled prenatal visits. In order to minimize missing data, if we have been unable t o connect with a 
participant during a prenatal visit, we will allow self -administration through an emailed link to REDCap. Thus, 
there is a potential that a so -motivated parent may “cheat” in order to answer questions correctly. For all 
participants, we wi ll stress at study enrollment and before each assessment that they should not expect to 
know all of the answers and that the point of the study is for us to understand how to improve the educational 
tool, thus their honest answers will be most helpful. We will conduct sensitivity analyses to evaluate knowledge 
scores based on in -person vs. at home administration.  
 
EXPECTED RESULTS AND RESULTS DISSEMINATION  
We plan a multi -faceted dissemination approach including presenting at meetings, articles in professio nal 
journals, and targeted dissemination to patient and physician groups. Manuscripts describing study results will 
correspond to Aims 1 and 2.  
  
Appendix A: Flow of Study  
 
 
Potential  participants identified:  
• Screening OB cli nic appointments  
• Physician referral  
CRA provide study information to interested patients  
Consent  and Enroll  Refuse  Usual OB 
Care  
P3 Mobile Intervention  Group : 
• Text video messages  
• Access to P3 web site ACOG  Group:  
• Link s to ACOG 
premature birth handouts  
Assessments  
(See Survey Schedule)  
25 weeks  
30 weeks  
34 weeks  
Study ends at 34 weeks or preterm birth – whichever occurs first . Partner s follow same track 
as mother . Mothers consented in person, 
partners may be consent ed in 
person or remotely through 
REDCap.  