Title: Phase II Study of Proton Beam Irradiation for the 
Treatment of Unresectable Hepatocellular Cancer and 
Cholangiocarcinoma 
PROTOCOL:  09-131 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
Protocol Version No./ Date: 11.16.15
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer 
11.16.15 
Protocol Ver
sion Date:    Version 11.16.15  
DFCI Protocol #: 09-131.   
Title:  Phase II Study of Proton Beam Irradiation for the Treatment of Unresectab le Hepatocellular Cancer 
and Cholangiocarcinoma 
Principal Investigator: .  
Theodore S. Hong M.D. 
[LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (MGH) 
([PHONE_6646]) 
Coordinating Center: 
 MGH will be the coordinating center for this multi-center study.  All patients from all participating sites will be 
registered with QACT before beginning treatment.  Data will be coordinated by [CONTACT_317984]. 
MGH Co-Investigators:  
Co-Investigators  
Radiation Oncology Physics 
George Chen, Ph.D. 
Andrzej Niemierko, Ph.D. Thomas Bortfeld, Ph.D. 
Gabriel Duda, Ph.D 
Medical Oncology 
Andrew X. Zhu, M.D., Ph.D. 
Jeffrey Clark, M.D. 
Charles Fuchs, M.D. 
Matthew Kulke, M.D. 
Robert Mayer, M.D. 
David Ryan, M.D. 
Lawrence Blaszkowsky, M.D. 
Lipi[INVESTIGATOR_317960], MD 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
ii 
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidential. Do not di sclose or use except as authorized.Surgical Oncology 
Kenn eth 
Tanabe, M.D. 
Radiation Oncology Thomas F. DeLaney, MD 
Harvey Mamon, M.D., Ph.D. 
Jennifer Wo, MD  
Rakesh Jain, Ph.D 
Jonathan Schoenfeld, MD 
Lorraine Drapek, NP 
Interventional Radiology  
Ronald Arellano, M.D. 
Radiology  
Peter F. Hahn, M.D., Ph.D 
Participating Site Investigators: MD Anderson Cancer Center (MDACC) 
Site PI: [INVESTIGATOR_317961], MD 
Sam Beddar 
Prajnan Das, MD 
Marc Delclos, MD 
Milid Javle, MD Chris Garrett, MD 
Ahmed Kaseb, MD 
Sunil Krishnan, MD 
Kanwal Raghav, MD 
Rachna Schroff, MD 
Participating Site Investigators: University of  Pennsylvania Roberts Proton Facility (UPenn) 
Site PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_317962]-Josef, MD 
John Plastaras, MD, PhD 
Zelig Tochner, MD 
Stefan Both, PhD 
Weijing Sun, MD 
Nevena Damjanov, MD 
Maarouf Hoteit, MD 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.[ADDRESS_391301]
atistician:   
Beow Yeap, ScD. 
Multi-Center Program Manager:   
Study Coordinator:  
Responsible Data Manager:    
Funding:  
Thomas F. DeLaney, M.D., Principal Investigator; For correlative studies (at MGH only): Federal Share of program 
income earned by [CONTACT_228080][INVESTIGATOR_52123] C06 CA059267, Proton Therapy Research and Treatment 
Center  
Agent(s):   –Proton Beam Irradiation (no IND) 

Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
iv 
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidential. Do not di sclose or use except as authorized.Protocol Summary 
Principal/Ove ra
ll Investigator 
Theodore S. Hong M.D. 
Protocol Title 
A Phase II Study of Proton Beam Irradiation of Unresectable Primary Liver Tumors 
Funding 
For correlative studies (at MGH only): Federal Share of program income earned by [CONTACT_228080][INVESTIGATOR_282566] C06 CA059267, Proton Therapy Research and Treatment Center 
Specific Objective 
To determine the local control of proton beam radia tion for unresectable primary hepatoma (hepatocellular 
carcinoma or intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma) 
Background and Significance 
The efficacy of the current treatment (c hemotherapy, arterial embolization) of  unresectable hepatocellular cancer, 
and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma is poor. A recent study from Japan demonstrated impressive local control and 
survival rates for 122 unresectable hepatocellular cancer patients treated with proton beam irradiation.   
Protons are a charged form of radiation. Their biology is similar to x-rays, resulting in similar cell killing effects. 
The advantage of protons lies in their physical dose distribution. Because of the defined range of protons (i.e. the 
Bragg peak), dose distributions can be designed that conform more closely to the tumor volume. This results in a 
much greater ability to reduce radiation dose to non-target no rmal tissues, especially liver, and allows greater dose to 
be delivered to the tumor. 
With protons, high dose irradiation of hepatic lesions is feasible because of the marked reduction in normal hepatic 
irradiation. 
Recruitment 
Patients will be recruited from the surgical, medical and radiation oncology practices at [LOCATION_005] General 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], Brigham and Women's Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], Dana Farber  Cancer Institute, MD Anderson Cancer Center and 
University of Pennsylvania. Patients will not be paid fo r participating in this study. We expect to recruit 
approximately 90 patients over a 2-year period. Because DFCI/BWH does not have a proton center, patients from 
these institutions will be referred to MGH. 
Research Design and Methods 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
v 
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidential. Do not di sclose or use except as authorized.  This is a phase II research protocol designed to determine the local control with proton beam radiation therapy in the 
treatment of hepatocellular cancer and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.   
 
Risks and Discomforts 
 
Proton Beam Radiation Therapy  
 
Very likely : These symptoms usually recover in the first few weeks following completion of 
radiation therapy 
• Irritation, redness and discoloration of the skin in the radiation area. 
• Fatigue (tiredness) 
 
Likely 
 Decreased blood counts 
  Low platelet count 
 Elevated LFTs 
 Abdominal pain or cramps 
 Nausea 
 
Less likely 
 Diarrhea 
 Decreased/ loss of appetite 
 Vomiting 
 Slow wound healing 
 Weight loss 
 Indigestion 
 Gastritis 
 Radiation Esophagitis 
 Rib microfracture 
 
Rare  Damage to the liver which could result in inflammation and scarring of the liver. This could 
lead to jaundice and possibly cirrhosis. Efforts to prevent excessive liver irradiation will be 
made to minimize the chance of these side effects 
 While radiation can cause mucosal ulceration, other tissues may be damaged which may require surgery and may be life-threatening. 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
vi 
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidential. Do not di sclose or use except as authorized.   Stomach and bowel are protected well from excessive dose of radiation. However, overdosing 
the stomach or bowel can lead to ulceration or perforation. 
 Pain, inflammation or scarring of your kidneys, stomach and bowel. These organs are protected well from excessive dose of radiation.   Therefore, it is unlikely that patients will 
experience symptoms of injury to these organs  
 Nerve damage  
 Development of a new cancer resulting from treatment may happen many years after completing treatment 
 Spi[INVESTIGATOR_317963]. Therefore, pers ons with metal implants, such as surgical clips or 
pacemakers should not have an MRI. However, there are no known health risks associ ated with this exposure. 
People who feel uncomfortable in confined spaces (claustr ophobia) may feel uncomfortable in the narrow cylinder. 
The MRI makes loud banging noises as it takes images. Earp lugs can be used to reduce the noises. The MRI can be 
stopped at any time at the request of the patient.  
CT Scans : The radiation associated with these diagnostic radioactive drug and diagnostic x-ray studies will not 
adversely affect the treatment  of the patient’s disease. 
Reproductive risks: Because the treatment in this study can affect  an unborn baby, female patients should not 
become pregnant while on this study.  Female patients should also not nurse a baby [CONTACT_56035].    
 
Potential benefits 
The potential benefits of this treatment include shrinkage of the tumor, greater control of tumor growth, and possibly 
longer life. 
               SCHEMA  
 1.   REGISTER . 
 
 2.  TREATMENT:  Proton Beam Irradiation in 15 fractions.  Acute toxicity evaluation weekly during 
study treatment, and at 3 month follow up.  
 
 3.  FOLLOW-UP:  Evaluation for Tumor Response using RECIST Criteria.  Evaluation for acute and late 
toxicity per CTCAE v. 3.0 
 
Eligibility Criteria: 
1. Patients must have a biopsy proven  unresectable or locally recurrent cholangiocarcinoma, or a diagnosis of 
an unresectable or locally recurrent hepatocellular cancer using either pathology of the liver tumor or 
radiologic imaging and an elevated AFP.  For patients with a single tumor, lesion may be up to [ADDRESS_391302] single or multinodular tumors (up to 3). 
3. No prior liver directed radiation therapy. 
4. Patients are not candidates for surgery on the basis of tumor extent or medical condition. 
5. Patients must be [ADDRESS_391303] ECOG PS 0-2. 
7. If patient has underlying cirrhosis, only Child’s classification Group A or Group B patients should be 
included in this study. 
8. Patient must have adequate renal function; serum creatinine </=2 mg / dl. 
9. Expected survival must be greater than three months. 
10. Signed Informed Consent. 
 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
viii 
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidential. Do not di sclose or use except as authorized.  TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
SCHEMA                          vi 
 
1 :   O B J E C T I V E S                          1 
1.1 S t u d y  D e s i g n                        1  
1.2 P r i m a r y  O b j e c t i v e s                      1  
1.3 S e c o n d a r y  O b j e c t i v e s                     1  
 
2: BACKGROUND 
2 . 1   P r o t o n  B e a m  T h e r a p y                     1  
2 . 2   S t u d y  D i s e a s e                        3  
2 . 3   R a t i o n a l e                         4  
2 . 4   C o r r e l a t i v e  S t u d i e s  B a c k g r o u n d                   6  
 
3: PARTICIPANT SELECTION 
3.1  Eligibility Criteria                     6 3 . 2   E x c l u s i o n  C r i t e r i a                      8  
3.3  Inclusion of Women, Minorities and Ot her Underrepresented Populations      9 
 
4: REGISTRATION PROCEDURES 
4.1 General Guidelines for DF/HCC and DF/PCC Institutions          9 
4.2 Registration Process for DF/HCC and DF/PCC Institutions          10 
4.3 General Guidelines for Other Participating Institutions           11 
4.4 Registration Process for Other Participating Institutions           11 
 
5:  TREATMENT PLAN 
 5 . 1    T r e a t m e n t  P r o g r a m                      1 1  
 5 . 2   P r e - T r e a t m e n t  C r i t e r i a                     1 3  
 5 . 3   P r o t o n  B e a m  D e l i v e r y                     1 3  
 5.4  General Concomitant Medication and Supportive Care Guidelines        14 
 5 . 5   D u r a t i o n  o f  T h e r a p y                      1 4  
 5 . 6   D u r a t i o n  o f  F o l l o w  U p                     1 4  
 5 . 7   C r i t e r i a  f o r  R e m o v a l  f r o m  S t u d y                  1 4  
  
 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
ix 
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidential. Do not di sclose or use except as authorized.  6: EXPECTED TOXICITIES AND DO SING DELAY/DOSE MODIFICATIONS 
 6.1  Potential Toxicities                     15 
 6.2  Anticipated Toxicities                    15 
6 . 3   T o x i c i t y  M a n a g e m e n t                     1 7  
6 . 4   D o s e  M o d i f i c a t i o n s / D e l a y s                    1 7  
 
7: DRUG FORMULATION AND ADMINISTRATION             17 
8 :  C O R R E L A T I V E / S P E C I A L  S T U D I E S                  17 
8.1 C i r c u l a t i n g  B i o m a r k e r s                      1 7  
8.2 G e n o t y p e  T e s t i n g                       1 9  
9 :  S T U D Y  C A L E N D A R                       2 0  
10: MEASUREMENT OF EFFECT 
10.1 T o x i c i t y  a n d  C o m p l i c a t i o n s                    2 1  
10.2 Tumor Response – RECIST Criteria                21 
10.3 L o c a l  F a i l u r e                        2 1  
10.4 M a r g i n a l  F a i l u r e                       2 2  
10.5 N o d a l  F a i l u r e                        2 2  
10.6 D i s t a n t  F a i l u r e                       2 2  
10.7 O v e r a l l  S u r v i v a l                       2 2  
 
11: ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
11.[ADDRESS_391304] (IRB) Notification by [CONTACT_10670]         26 
11.7 Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_282567]           26 
 
12: DATA AND SAFETY MONITORING 
12.1 D a t a  R e p o r t i n g                       2 7  
12.2 S a f e t y  M e e t i n g s                       2 7  
12.3 M o n i t o r i n g                        2 8  
  
13: REGULATORY CONSIDERATION 
13.1 D e c l a r a t i o n  o f  H e l s i n k i                     2 8  
13.2 Patient Confidentiality                    28 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
x 
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidential. Do not di sclose or use except as authorized.  13.3 P r o t o c o l  R e v i e w  a n d  A m e n d m e n t s                  2 8  
13.4 I n f o r m e d  C o n s e n t                           2 9  
13.5 E t h i c s  a n d  G o o d  C l i n i c a l  P r a c t i c e  ( G C P )                    2 9  
13.6 S t u d y  D o c u m e n t a t i o n                          3 0  
13.7 R e c o r d s  R e t e n t i o n                          3 0  
13.8 Multi-center Guidelines                         30 
 
14: STATISTICAL CONSIDERATION 
 1 4 . 1   S t u d y  D e s i g n / E n d p o i n t s                     3 1  
 1 4 . 2   S a m p l e  S i z e / A c c r u a l  R a t e                    3 1  
1 4 . 3   S t r a t i f i c a t i o n  F a c t o r s                      3 2  
1 4 . 4   A n a l y s i s  o f  S e c o n d a r y  E n d p o i n t s                  3 2  
1 4 . 5   R e p o r t i n g  a n d  E x c l u s i o n s                    3 2  
 
1 5 :  P U B L I C A T I O N  P L A N                      32 
1 6 .  R E F E R E N C E S                         33 
17: APPENDICES 
Appendix I  
P e r f o r m a n c e  S t a t u s  C r i t e r i a                      3 5  
Appendix II 
D a t a  a n d  S a f e t y  M o n i t o r i n g  P l a n                    3 6
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer   
11.16.15 
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
1 1. OBJECTIVES 
1.1    Study Design  
This is a phase II research protocol designed to de termine the local control with proton beam radiation 
therapy in the treatment of unresectable pr imary hepatocellular carcinoma or intrahepatic 
cholangiocarcinoma. 
1.2 Primary Objectives 
To demonstrate 2 yr LC of >80% with proton beam irradiation for unresectable  hepatocellular cancer.  
This will be benchmarked against 2 yr LC of ~55% fo r tumors > 3cm in size with radiofrequency ablation. 
1.[ADDRESS_391305] committed to build dedicated proton therapy centers 
such as the Francis H. Burr Proton Therapy Cent er (FHBPTC) at the [LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] 
(MGH), the MD Anderson Proton Treatment Center,   the Loma Linda University Medical Center proton therapy facility, and others. Several more proton th erapy centers are in the final planning stage. 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
2 Figure O-1. Proton (Bragg peak and modulated 
Peak) and [ADDRESS_391306] a finite 
range dependent upon the initial proton 
energy. Therefore, the depth dose 
characteristics of the two beams are 
qualitatively different (see Figure O-1). 
Protons lose their energy in tissue mostly 
by [CONTACT_317985]; however, a small 
fraction of energy is transferred through 
nuclear collisions. The energy loss per unit 
path length is relatively small and constant 
as the proton traverses the tissue until near the end of the proton range where the residual energy is lost over a 
short distance (approximately 0.7 cm in width at 80% of the maximum dose) and the proton comes to rest, 
resulting in a distinctive sharp rise in the tissue absorb ed dose (energy absorbed per unit mass) - known as the 
Bragg peak (see the curve labeled "unmodulated proton beam" in Figure O-1). In physical terms, the magnitude 
of the transfer of energy to tissue per 
unit path length traversed by [CONTACT_317986]. The low 
dose region between the entrance and 
the Bragg peak is called the plateau of 
the dose distribution and the dose there 
is 30-[ADDRESS_391307] of targets, ablation of the 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_317964]. For the 
irradiation of larger targets/tumors 
the beam energy is modulated - 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
3 several beams of closely spaced energies (ranges) are superimposed to create a region of uniform dose over 
the depth of the target. These extended regions of  uniform dose are called "spread-out Bragg peaks" 
(SOBP). This is shown in Figure O-1 as the “modulated proton beam”. For comparison, Figure O -[ADDRESS_391308] common prim ary cancer of the liver. The disease has a dismal 
five-year survival rate of less than 5%. Hepatocellular carcinoma is an infrequent cancer in developed 
countries. However, its incidence has substantially in creased in Japan during the past three decades and 
slight increases have been reported in the United Ki ngdom and [LOCATION_009]. In the Un ited States, an increase in 
the number of cases from 1.[ADDRESS_391309] two decades [1]. 
The age-specific incidence of this cancer has pr ogressively shifted toward younger patients. 
Cholangiocarcinomas are an uncommon malignancy, with an incidence of 1 to 2 cases per 100,000 population in the [LOCATION_002] and constituting approximately 2% of all reported cancers [2].  Untreated 
bile duct cancers are rapi[INVESTIGATOR_317965] 6 months to a year of 
diagnosis.  Death usually results from liver failure or  biliary sepsis [2].  Long-term survival is highly 
dependent on the effectiveness of surgical therapy but many patient s are not candidates for resection 
because of the local extent of disease [2]. 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.[ADDRESS_391310] included transarterial 
chemoarterial embolization (TACE), ra diofrequency ablation, or system ic chemotherapy/targeted therapy 
with few long-term survivors. TACE is useful in pa tients with multiple lesions, but is not considered an 
ablative approach.  Similarly, systemic therapy is does not produce more than anecdotal complete 
responses.   
 
Most published data combines hepatocellular cancer and cholangiocarcinoma, including reporting of 
disease control and survival outcomes for both histologies together.  However, emerging data for HCC 
reported by [CONTACT_317987] a differen ce in overall survival an d local control from the 
combined historical data for this histology14.  Thus, this study will further investigate outcomes for HCC, 
while describing the same outcomes for cholangiocarcinoma separately, informing future trials. 
 
Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is the most commonly employed ablative technique for non-surgical 
candidates at many institutions.  Radiofrequency ablation refers to a method of tumor ablation by [CONTACT_317988].  Generally, a 14-gauge 
electrode is placed into the tumor.  Delivery of electromagnetic energy in  the form of high-frequency (~400 
MHz) alternating current causes ionic agitation and th e generation of heat due to friction. Coagulative 
necrosis of hepatic tissue is achieved when temperatur es greater than [ADDRESS_391311] as a 
heat sink and limit the efficacy of th erapy.  Treatment of dome lesions near the diaphragm carries the risk 
of diaphragmatic perforation and treatment of deep lesions near bowel loops may be associated with bowel perforation. Radiofrequency ablation can be highly effective for small lesions, with local control of 75% or 
greater. However this local control falls off steeply beyond 3-5 cm in maximum diameter. In one study by 
[CONTACT_317989], colorectal metastases less than 2.5 cm had a recurrence risk of 21.6% [4].  This risk increased 
to 52.8% if the tumor was 2.6-4.0 cm and as high as 68.1% for tumors > 4 cm.  Local control for RFA at 2 
years was 55%. 2 year overall survival for both groups is. 50% .  For radiofrequency ablation to more 
clearly impact survival, this local control will need  to improve.  Recurrences after RFA are frequently 
marginal. 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.[ADDRESS_391312] a 4-year survival of 20% 
and no late hepatic toxicity [5]. Total radiation doses were determined by [CONTACT_317990] 50% of the isocenter dose.  If 33% of the normal liver receive d 50% of the dose, the patient was 
treated to 66 Gy, if 33% to 66% of the liver received 50% of the dose the patient received 48 Gy and if 
66% of the liver received 50% of the dose the patient received 36 Gy. Treatment wa s given daily at 1.8 Gy 
per fraction five days per week. Several subsequent  reports from the University of Michigan group 
provided more quantitative information regarding both dose-response of liver cancer and dose-volume 
sparing effects of normal liver tissue[5-9]. They estimated using maximum likelihood analysis that for 
b.i.d. fractionation with 1.5Gy per fraction the TD 50 dose for radiation-induced  liver disease for primary 
hepatobiliary cancer is about 40Gy when the whole liver is irradiated. When half of the liver is irradiated 
the TD 50 increases to 80Gy, and when less than 1/[ADDRESS_391313] recently been reported by 
[CONTACT_317991] (183 patients) and Taiwan (93 patients)[10-12]. These studies demonstrated that the overall median survival could also be significantly improved with higher doses. The chief cause of 
mortality was progression of underlying severe cirrhosis and not tumor or treatment related causes.  
 
Given these promising results in otherwise incurable malignancies, the MGH group undertook a Phase I 
study to evaluate the use of high dose conformal proton beam irradiation for selected patients with 
hepatocellular cancer, cholangiocarcinoma and hepatic metastases.  The dose escalation was based on a 
model based on the amount of radiation that the normal liver received, or equivalent uniform dose (EUD) 
to the liver.  The eligibility criteria were 1-[ADDRESS_391314] less than 6 cm in size, Childs A/B, and no 
extrahepatic disease. Patients were treated with ga ted proton beam therapy using 4D treatment planning 
techniques. Generally, patients have been treated to a dose of 45-75 Gy (RBE) in 15 fractions.  The study was a dose escalation trial based on liver EUD. The dose that each patient was treated to was based not 
only on the liver EUD at each step but had to comply  with protocol defined normal tissue constraints 
(bowel, chest wall).  To date, there have been no local  failures or radiation-induced liver disease through [ADDRESS_391315] decided to proceed with a modification of the 
approach taken by [CONTACT_317992] (13).  Investigators at Tsukuba have treated 165 patients (192 
tumors) with a similar 15 fraction protocol to a median dose of 72 Gy.  Patients with tumor sizes of 10 cm 
or greater were allowed on the study. Central tumors (within 2 cm of the porta hepatis) were treated to 66 
Gy in 22 fractions because of conc erns of toxicity. Local control at 5 years was an impressive 86.9%.  
Local control at 2 years was 90%. However 5 yr OS was only 23%, highlighting the out of field 
progression and comorbidities in these patients.  In this study, we propose a treatment schedule of 15 
fractions of proton beam radiation with an expected 2 yr LC of > 85 %.  Because we anticipate treating 
large tumors generally greater than 3 cm, we will seek  to improve upon a RFA local control rate of ~ 50% 
to 80% with proton beam therapy.   
 
2.4  Correlative Studies Background  
Preclinical and clinical work in the Steele Lab and elsewhere has identified the stromal-derived factor 1 
alpha (SDF1 α) as an attractive candidate for biomarker of resi stance to various therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014], but its role after 
proton beam radiation therapy is unknown. Based on findings from preliminary studies, we propose here to 
evaluate the changes in blood circulating SDF1 α and circulating myeloid cells before, during and after a 
three-week schedule of proton beam radiation therapy,  and to explore potential associations between the 
changes in these biomarkers and resistance to treatment. In exploratory studies, we will evaluate several 
other cytokines using multiplex protein array (Meso-Scale Discovery, Inc.). 
 
Circulating cell populations will be evaluated by [CONTACT_317993]-based flow cytometr y. Protein concentration 
in plasma will be measured using ELISA kits for SDF1  and MSD multiplex kits for cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, 
IL-8 and TNF- ) vascular growth factors (VEGF, sVEGFR1, PlGF and bFGF). These techniques have 
been used in the Steele Lab for over 8 y ears to evaluate patients’ samples.   
3.  PARTICIPANT SELECTION  
3.[ADDRESS_391316] meet the following criteria on screen ing examination to be eligible to participate in the 
study: 
 
3.1.[ADDRESS_391317] 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
7 single or multinodular tumors (up to 3).  There must  be no evidence of extrahepatic tumor.  Portal 
vein involvement or thrombosis is allowed. 
3.1.[ADDRESS_391318] one dimension (longest diameter to be recorded) as 
>20 mm with conventional techniques or as > [ADDRESS_391319] had prior chemotherapy, targeted biological therapy (ie sorafenib, etc…), 
surgery, transarterial chemoembolization (TACE), radiofrequency ablation, or cryosurgery for their disease.  5-fluorouracil, capecitabine and sorafenib must be discontinued prior to 
study entry, with no wash-out period required.    Nitrosoureas and  mitomycin C must be 
discontinued at least [ADDRESS_391320] be greater than three months. 
3.1.6   ECOG performance status <
2.  
3.1.[ADDRESS_391321] 
be obtained within two weeks prior to study registration date: 
 Absolute neutrophil count >  750/mcL 
 Platelets >  25,000/mcL 
 Total bilirubin ≤  4.0 X institutional upper  limit of normal 
 AST (SGOT)/ALT (SGPT) <  6.0 X institutional upper limit of normal 
 Creatinine </= 2mg/dl or  creatinine clearance >  60 mL/min/1.73 m2 (Calculated per 
Cockroft & Gault formula) for subjects with creatinine levels above institutional 
normal. 
3.1.[ADDRESS_391322] be determined for all study participants at the time of eligibility 
analysis.  Note albumin and PT/INR are required for Child-Pugh classification; these labs should 
be drawn with other labs required for eligibility analysis. 
 
  
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
8 Table 1:  Child-Pugh classification of liver function  
 
Score   1 2  3 
Acites   Absent Slight to moderate Severe 
Encephalopathy  Absent Slight to moderate                     Severe 
Serum albumin  >3.5 g/dl 3-3.5 g/dl <3 g/dl 
Serum bilirubin  <2 mg/dl 2-3 mg/dl >3 mg/dl 
Prolongation of prothrombin time <4 seconds 4-6 seconds >[ADDRESS_391323] agree to use adequate contraception (hormonal or barrier method of bi rth control; abstinence) prior to study entry 
and for the duration of study participation. Female patients of child bearing potential must also have a negative serum pregnancy test. 
 Should a woman become pregnant or suspect she is pregnant while participating in this 
study, she should inform her treating physician immediately. 
3.1.[ADDRESS_391324] 5 years: cervical cancer in situ , and basal cell or squamous cell carcinoma of the skin.  
 
3.1.[ADDRESS_391325] no serious psychiatric illness/social situations which would limit compliance 
with study requirements.  
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.[ADDRESS_391326] had chemotherapy (other than 5-fluorouracil, capecitabine, or sorafenib) or 
radiotherapy within 4 weeks (6 weeks for nitrosoureas or mitomycin C) prior to entering the 
study or those who have not recovered from adve rse events (with the ex ception of anticipated 
chronic late effects from chemotherapy not exp ected to be exacerbated by [CONTACT_54615]) due to 
agents administered wi thin the timeframes described in 3.1.3 above. 
3.2.8   Patients may not be receiving any other study agents. 
3.2.9  Uncontrolled intercurrent illness including, but not limited to ongoing or active infection, 
symptomatic congestive heart failure, unstable angina pectoris, cardiac arrhythmia,  
3.2.10 Individuals with a history of a different mali gnancy are ineligible except for the following 
circumstances; They have been disease-free for at least 5 years and are deemed by [CONTACT_317994].  
3.2.11     Because no dosing or adverse event data are currently available on the use of high dose liver              
radiation participants <[ADDRESS_391327] the inclusion and exclusion criteria to either over or under-represent women, 
minorities, or underrepresented populations. 
 
4. REGISTRATION PROCEDURES 
4.1  General  Guidelines for DF/HCC and DF/PCC Institutions 
 Patient Entry 
Patients must be registered with the DF/HCC Qua lity Assurance Office for Clinical Trials (QACT) 
(  prior to the start of treatment. Any patient not registered to 
the protocol prior to the start of treatment will be ineligible.  The following information will be provided to 
the QACT: 
- Registering physician (PI [INVESTIGATOR_317966]) name, telephone number, and pager number 
- Protocol name [CONTACT_114040], and Date treatment begins 
- Patient name, Date of birth, Patient ID number,  Primary physician, Primar y treatment institution,  
Confirmation of eligibility 
- Copy of signed consent form.  
- Patient must start treatment within 1 month of registration 
 

Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
10 DF/HCC institutions will register eligible particip ants with the QACT central registration system. 
Registration must occur prior to the initiation of therapy. Any participant not registered to the 
protocol before treatment begins will be consider ed ineligible and registration will be denied.  
 
A member of the study team will confirm eligibility criteria and complete the protocol-specific 
eligibility checklist.  
Following registration, participants may begin protocol treatment.  Issues that would cause treatment 
delays should be discussed with the Principal Investigator.  If a participant does not r eceive protocol 
therapy following registration, the participant’s protocol status must be changed. Notify the QACT Registrar of participant status changes as soon as possible. 
 
4.2  Registration Process for DF/HCC and DF/PCC Institutions 
The QACT registration staff is acces sible on Monday through Friday, fro m 8:00 AM to 5:[ADDRESS_391328] registration line at  and follow the instructions for registering 
participants after hours.   
The registration procedures are as follows: 
1. Obtain written informed consent from the participant prior to the performance of any study 
related procedures or assessments. 
2. Complete the protocol-specific eligibility checklist using the eligibility assessment documented in the participant’s me dical/research record. To be eligible for regis tration to the study, the 
participant must meet each inclusion and exclusion criteria listed on the eligibility 
checklist.  
3. Fax the eligibility checklist(s) and all pages of the consent form(s) to the QACT at 
  
4. The QACT Registrar will (a) validate eligibility, (b ) register the participant on the study, and 
(c) randomize the participant when applicable.  
5. The QACT Registrar will send an email confirma tion of the registration and/or randomization 
to the person initiating the registration im mediately following the registration and/or 
randomization.  

Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
11 4.3  General Guidelines for Other Participating Institutions   
    Please see section 5.7 of th e Data Safety Monitoring Plan.  
 
4.4    Registration Process for Other Participating Institutions 
Please see section 5.7 of the Data Safety Monitoring Plan.  
 
5. TREATMENT PLAN  
5.1 Treatment Program 
 
5.1.1 Assessments During Treatment 
- Vital Signs: Pulse, Blood Pressure , Temperature obtained weekly  
- Lab tests: CBC with diff (WBC, HGB, PLT, ANC , ALC), Liver and renal function tests (SGOT, 
SGPT, Total Bilirubin, Alkaline Phosphatase,  Creatinine, BUN and Creatinine Clearance 
calculated with Cockroft and Gault formula), LDH and Tumor markers (CEA, CA 19-9, alpha 
fetal protein) will be obtained weekly during treat ment on study days 1, 8, [ADDRESS_391329] once per week by a physician and a radiation oncology nurse while 
undergoing radiation treatment and will be assessed for acute toxicity. 
 
5.1.2     Radiation Therapy 
 
   [IP_ADDRESS]   Pre-planning and Simulation Procedures 
Prior to radiation planning, patients will under go placement of fiducial seeds according to 
institutional procedures.  If placement of fiducials is contraindicated in a patient, or if a 
patient is deemed too high risk for implanting procedure, the patient may proceed with 
study participation without fiducials at th e discretion of the treating investigator. 
 
[IP_ADDRESS]   Treatment Planning 
Patients will undergo an abdominal 4D CT scan in the treatment position. Treatment planning will be done on a 4D CT-based planning system. If the motion of the GTV is 
less than or equal to 10mm, an ITV will be defined.  If the motion is greater than 10mm, 
gating or deep inspi[INVESTIGATOR_317967] (DIBH)  will be used.  For proton treatments, the 
patient will be in a customized immobilization device in the appropriate position. The treatment planning CT is to be performed with the patient in this device. The radiation 
oncologist will define the target and the non-target tissues/structures of interest on each 
section and specify the radiation dose cons traints for each of th e sensitive structures 
(uninvolved liver, kidney, large and small bo wel, stomach, spi[INVESTIGATOR_1831]). The treatment 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.[ADDRESS_391330] and/or MRI.  Clinical Target 
Volume (CTV) expansion will be 0.5-1 cm at treating physician’s discretion.  The PTV 
shall be defined relative to the CTV on the basis of lateral uncertainties alone in the range 
of 0.5 to 1.0 cm.  (Adjustments shall be made within the beam-design algorithm to take 
into account differences, if any, between th e margins needed to account for uncertainties 
along the beam direction (range uncertain ties) and those included in the lateral 
uncertainty defined PTV.) 
 
[IP_ADDRESS]    Dose Fractionation and Specification  
Proton treatments will be delivered at the Fran cis H. Burr Proton Therapy Center at the 
[LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_181397] a 240 MeV cyclotron. At MDACC, proton 
treatments will be delivered at the MDACC Proton Therapy Center using a 250 MeV 
synchrotron.  At the Roberts Proton Facility at the University of Pennsylvania, proton treatments will be delivered using a 230 MeV cyclotron.  All treatments will be 
administered as one daily fraction, 5 days per week over 3 weeks. The RBE for proton 
irradiation is set at 1. 1. Thus, the dose unit, Gy (RBE), is proton dose in Gy X RBE of 1. 
1. Based on the analysis of the results of th e University of Michigan  liver protocol there 
were no cases of liver toxicity for the average liver dose less than 30 Gy delivered in 1.5 Gy per fraction. In our protocol we intend to use 15 fractions, 5 daily fractions per 
week .  
 
For peripheral tumors the total dose will be as follows: 67.5 Gy (RBE)  (NTD 81 Gy10, 101 Gy3 ) in 15 fractions 
 For central tumors (within 2 cm of porta hepatis), fractionation will be as follows: 
58 Gy (RBE)  (NTD 67 Gy10, 79.6 Gy3) 
 Underdosing of the PTV will be permitted to maintain normal tissue constraints as 
described below.  However 90% of the PTV should receive the prescription dose. Dose 
de-escalation will be permitted to maintain a liver EUD below 20 Gy (RBE) and a mean liver dose <
 24 Gy (RBE).  If dose is de-escalated to below 45 Gy (RBE), the patient will 
be removed from study and referred as  appropriate for further management. 
 
Normal Tissue Constraints: 
Spi[INVESTIGATOR_317968]: 30 Gy (RBE) 
Stomach max dose: 42 Gy (RBE) 
Bowel (including duodenum, small bowel, large bowel) max dose: 45 Gy (RBE) 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
13 Kidney V14 (volume receivi ng 14 Gy (RBE) < 30%) 
Liver-GTV: EUD <  20 Gy (RBE), mean dose <  24 Gy (RBE)- whichever is lower. 
Heart Max dose: 45 Gy (RBE), V40<10% 
Chest Wall: no more than 2ccs may receive >60 Gy (RBE) 
 
The deviations in dose constraints described above are considered planning deviations 
only and will not constitute protocol deviations. Treatment plans that include minor 
planning deviations may be delivered as part of this protocol. Treatment plans that 
include major planning deviations may be delivered on this protocol with the review and 
approval of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_317969].  All relevant DVH data regarding doses to 
critical structures will be maintained in the study database for analysis. 
 
Treatment will be administered on an outp atient basis. Expected toxicities and 
potential risks as well as  dose modifications for are described in Section 6 
(Expected Toxicities and Dosing Delays/Dose Modifications). No investigational or commercial agents or therapi[INVESTIGATOR_163854]'s malignancy. 
 
5.2 Pre-treatment Criteria  
              Baseline staging requirements: 
 All assessments must be completed within [ADDRESS_391331] or surgeon. 
5.2.2  Laboratory evaluation: CBC with diff (WBC, HG B, PLT, ANC, ALC), Liver and renal function 
tests (SGOT, SGPT, Total Bilir ubin, Alkaline Phosphatase, Creatinine, BUN and Creatinine 
Clearance calculated with Cockroft and Gault fo rmula), LDH and Tumor markers (CEA, CA 19-9, 
alpha fetal protein)   sodium, potassium, chloride, carbon dioxide, , calcium, phosphorous,PT/INR, 
Albumin, Child-Pugh classification, and tumor ma rkers (CEA, CA 19-9, alpha fetal protein). Lab 
tests must be completed within [ADDRESS_391332] scan to exclude non-hepatic disease or metastases. 5.2.5   Hepatic MRI is 
required if any lesion is difficult to visualize and/or measure on the Abdominal/Pelvic CT scan.   
 
5.3  Proton Beam Delivery  
All charged particle treatment will be  given with the patient at the Francis H. Burr Proton Therapy Center, 
MD Anderson Proton Therapy Center, or the University of Pennsylvania Roberts Proton Facility.  Film or 
digital images will be take n prior to each treatment in  accordance with the proton center's standard practice 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
14 for all patients. These images are used to verify the position of the patient and the aperture.  These images 
are permanently stored electronically for each patient. Respi[INVESTIGATOR_317970] 
(DIBH) is recommended to account for respi[INVESTIGATOR_317971] > 10mm.  Treatment may 
start any day of the week except Friday. 
 
5.[ADDRESS_391333] instances be co mpleted within 3 weeks of the start of treatment (15 
consecutive hospi[INVESTIGATOR_317972]). This may be ex tended if patients require a break from treatment. 
Criteria for break would include any G3 or G4 toxicity . All labs will be assessed by [CONTACT_317995]. All patients experiencing any of the following events will be taken off treatment: 
 Disease progression, 
 Intercurrent illness that prevents further administration of treatment, 
 Unacceptable adverse event(s), 
 Participant decides to withdraw from the study, or 
 General or specific changes in the participant's condition render the participant 
unacceptable for further treatment in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_80021]. 
5.[ADDRESS_391334] and recorded in the study-specific case report form (CRF). Alternative care options will 
be discussed with the participant, if applicable. 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.[ADDRESS_391335] 
immediately notify the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_317973], MD at  
 
 
6. E
XPECTED TOXICITIES AND DO SING DELAYS/DOSE MODIFICATIONS   
6.1  Potential Toxicity  
Radiation side effects are typi[INVESTIGATOR_317974] (during radiation and up to 3 months after radiation) and those that occur later (>[ADDRESS_391336]-radiation). Common acute radiation side 
effects include fatigue, skin irritation or erythema, elev ated liver function tests, nausea, low platelet count, 
decreased blood counts, abdominal pain or cramps , decreased/ loss of appetite, vomiting, slow wound 
healing, weight loss, indigestion, gastritis, radiation esophagitis, and diarrhea. Typi[INVESTIGATOR_897], these side effects 
can be controlled with medication.  
Late side effects that are unlikely to occur but would include rib microfracture, nerve damage, 
inflammation and scarring of liver , mucosal ulceration and tissue damage, ulceration or perforation of 
stomach/ bowel, pain, inflammation, or scarring of kidneys, stomach and bowel, development of new cancer,  hepatic injury (hepatitis), renal injury, gastric, bowel obstruction and sp inal cord injury. Another 
rare but serious late side effect is the development of second tumors. It is hoped that proton radiation will substantially reduce both acute and late side effects by [CONTACT_317996].  
 
Dose delays and modifications will be made using the following recommendations. Toxicity assessments 
will be done using NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE v3.0) which is 
available at http://ctep.cancer.gov/reporting//ctc html
).  
 If possible, symptoms should be managed symptomatically. In the case of toxicity, appropriate medical 
treatment should be used (including anti-emetics, anti-diarrheals, etc.). 
 All toxicities that are Grade [ADDRESS_391337] of the adverse events and potential risks associated with the agents administered in this study appear 
below and will determine whether dose delays and modifications will be made or whether the event 
requires expedited reporting in addition  to routine reporting.  
 CAEPRs for Proton Beam Radiotherapy to the Liver 
Very likely : These symptoms usually recover in the first few weeks following completion of 
radiation therapy 
• Irritation, redness and discoloration of the skin in the radiation area. 
• Fatigue (tiredness) 
 
Likely 
 Decreased blood counts 
  Low platelet count 
 Elevated LFTs 
 Abdominal pain or cramps 
 Nausea 
 
Less likely 
 Diarrhea 
 Decreased/ loss of appetite 
 Vomiting 
 Slow wound healing 
 Weight loss 
 Indigestion 
 Gastritis 
 Radiation Esophagitis 
 Rib microfracture 
 
Rare  Damage to the liver which could result in inflammation and scarring of the liver. This could 
lead to jaundice and possibly cirrhosis. Efforts to prevent excessive liver irradiation will be 
made to minimize the chance of these side effects 
 While radiation can cause mucosal ulceration, other tissues may be damaged which may require surgery and may be life-threatening. 
 Stomach and bowel are protected well from excessive dose of radiation. However, overdosing the stomach or bowel can lead to ulceration or perforation. 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
17  Pain, inflammation or scarring of your kidneys, stomach and bowel. These organs are 
protected well from excessive dose of radiation.   Therefore, it is unlikely that patients will 
experience symptoms of injury to these organs  
 Nerve damage  
 Development of a new cancer resulting from treatment may happen many years after completing treatment 
 Spi[INVESTIGATOR_1828] 
6.[ADDRESS_391338] radiation toxicities during the course of treat ment are self-limited and resolve with a treatment 
break.  Therefore, any Grade 3 or 4 acute toxicity will result in a treatment break until it resolves to Grade 2 
or less, with the exception of labs. All labs will be assessed by [CONTACT_317997]. If a participant experiences a Grade 3 or 4 hematological toxicity, the participant is allowed to receive a colony stimulating factor to aid in the resolution.  
6.4  Dose Modifications/Delays 
Grade 3 or 4 acute toxicity will result in a treatment break until it resolves to Grade 2 or less,  with the exception of any Grade 3 Baseline labs that fit the eligibility criteria. Thrombocytopenia will only result in 
a treatment break if it becomes a Grade 4. All labs w ill be assessed by [CONTACT_317998] t clinically significant and treatment will be held at 
their discretion. If a treatment break of > 14 days is needed, the patient will be removed from study. 
7.  DRUG FORMULATION AND ADMINISTRATION: Not applicable 
8. CORRELATIVE/SPECIAL STUDIES 
 
8.1 Circulating Biomarkers 
Participation in the correlative blood sample studies  will be offered to study participants at MGH only. 
 
Based on findings from preliminary studies, we propose here to evaluate the changes in blood circulating 
SDF1 α and circulating myeloid cells before, during, and after a three-week schedule of proton beam 
radiation therapy, and to explore potential associations between the changes in these biomarkers and resistance to treatment. In exploratory studies, we will evaluate several other cytokines using multiplex 
protein array (Meso-Scale Discovery, Inc.). 
 
8.1.[ADDRESS_391339] 7-10 ml blood will be excluded or used for other 
analysis. The following 8 ml will be collected in  an EDTA tube. The EDTA tube with the blood 
sample will be shipped in wet ice within 2 hours  of drawing for further processing at Steele 
Laboratory at MGH.  We will analyze the correlation between plasma SDF1 α and circulating 
myeloid cells with multiple measures of outco me (ORR, TTP, OS) in advanced liver cancer 
patients after proton beam radiation therapy.  
 
8.1.2  Collection 
To this end we will measure circulating biomarkers  
(i) pretreatment 
(ii) during proton beam radiation therapy at days 1, 8, [ADDRESS_391340] day of radiation treatment 
(iii) one month post-completion of the proton beam radiation treatment; and  
(iv) at the time of disease progression 
 
Samples will be collected at the following time points- 
a. Prior to the start of therapy b.  Within [ADDRESS_391341] radiation treatment.  
d. 1 month after completion of therapy. 
e.  following  radiologic progression   
 
8.1.3  Shippi[INVESTIGATOR_317975] 
1. Study Number at the DF/HCC 
2. Patient number on the study 
3. Patient’s initials 
4. Treating physician’s name 
5. Date of collection 
6. Date of shippi[INVESTIGATOR_317976] a sealable  container and placed in a box with the necessary 
information. The box should  be marked Biohazard.  
 
  
 
 

Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.[ADDRESS_391342] be completed 
within 6 weeks of study entry. All study assessments should be administered +/- 3 days of the protocol-specified 
date, unless otherwise noted. 
Data Set  Prior to 
Study Entry Weekly Visit During Radiation TherapyAt Follow-Up (3) 
Age X   
Sex X   
H&P (including clinical assessment of ascites and 
encephalopathy at baseline and 
follow up) X                    X X 
Toxicity Assessment X X X 
Vital Signs (pulse, blood pressure, temperature)  X  
CBC with diff (WBC, HGB, PLT, ANC, ALC) X X  
PT/INR, Albumin, Child-Pugh 
classification X  X 
Renal Function Tests (BUN, creatinine, calculated creatinine 
clearance per Cockroft & Gault) X X  
Liver Function Tests (SGOT, SGPT, T bili, Alk Phos) & LDH X X X 
Tumor markers (CEA, CA 19-9) Alpha Fetal Protein X X X 
Beta-HCG 
(women of child-bearing 
potential) X   
Tumor Measurement X  twice yearly (1) 
Abdominal and Pelvic CTand/or hepatic MRI X  twice yearly (1) 
Thoracic CT X  twice yearly 
Peripheral Blood for correlative studies (optional) X X (2) X (2) 
 
Notes: 
(1) Imaging and tumor measurements in follow up are required for study data twice yearly.  Additional imaging studies may be obtained for clinical follow up at the discre tion of the treating clinicians.   For study participants 
who receive follow up care at institutions other than the treating institution, im aging reports and scans must be sent 
to the treating institution to be included in the study data set. 
(2) Peripheral blood will be obtained with clinical labs at pretreatment, during proton beam radiation therapy at 
days 1, 8, [ADDRESS_391343] day of radiation treatment. (this blood draw is optional and will be offered to study 
participants at MGH only) 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
21 (3) Follow up assessments will be due at 1, 3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24, 30, 36, 42, 48, 54, and [ADDRESS_391344] 
treatment, with a visit window of +/- 3 weeks for the 1 month follow up and+/- [ADDRESS_391345] treatment. Each follow-up examination will consis t of interval history and  physical examination, 
toxicity assessment, liver function tests, LDH, PT  INR, albumin, Child-Pug h classification and tumor 
markers (CEA , CA 19-9,alpha feta protein).  Base line and follow up physical examination will include 
clinical assessment of encephalopathy and ascites for calculation of Child-Pugh Score.  Assessment of the liver tumor by [CONTACT_76964]/ or MRI will be performed at time of abdominal imaging twice yearly for two years 
and then yearly for three years. Chest CT will be obta ined twice yearly for two years and then yearly for 
three years.  Additional imaging studies may be obtained for clinical follow up at the discretion of the 
treating clinicians.  For study participants who receive follow up care at institutions other than the treating 
institution, imaging reports and scans must be sent to the treating institution to be included in the study data 
set. 
 
10. MEASUREMENT OF EFFECT   
10.1  Toxicity and Complications 
 Acute and late morbidity of radiation treatment will be scored using the Common Terminology Criteria for 
Adverse Events 3.0 (CTCAE 3.0; see Appendix 11)  
 
 
 
10.2   Tumor Response: RECIST Criteria 
 Complete Response (CR): Disappearance of entire lesi on, with no additional ev idence of disease Partial 
Response (PR): At least a 30% decrease in the sum of  the longest diameter (LD) of the primary lesion, 
taken as reference the baseline sum LD. 
 
 Progressive Disease (PD): At least a 20% increase in  the LD of the lesion, taken as the reference the 
smallest sum LD recorded since the treatment star ted or the appearance of one or more new lesions 
 
Stable Disease (SD): Neither sufficient shrinkage to qu alify for PR nor sufficient increase to qualify for PD, 
taking as reference the smallest sum LD since the treatment started. 
 
10.3  Local Failure 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
22 Local failure is defined as: evidence of tumor growth /regrowth in any direction beyond that present of the 
pre-treatment imaging studies in the treated lesion(s).   Intrahepatic recurrence elsewhere in the liver is 
defined as any new lesion in the liver.  The imaging studies are to be comparable in technical factors. 
 
10.4   Marginal failure 
 Marginal failure is defined as appearance of tumor growth at the margin of the target volume 
 
10.5   Nodal failure 
 Failure in regional lymph nodes: porta-hepatis, para-aortic, diaphragmatic. 
 
10.[ADDRESS_391346] follow-up for patients still alive.  
11. ADVERSE EVENT REPORTING REQUIREMENTS  
 
Adverse Events 
As above, the CTCAE 3.0 will be used to grade all acute and late radiation effects and Adverse Events.   
 
Report of Adverse Events to the IRB 
Adverse events will be reported to each  site’s IRB in accordance with the local  IRB guidelines.  All adverse events 
will also be reported to the Coordinating Center and all pa rticipating sited as described in the attached Data and 
Safety Monitoring Plan (Appendix III). 
 
11.1      General  
Adverse event collection and reporting is a routine part  of every clinical trial. This study will use the 
descriptions and grading scales found in the NCI Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events 
version 3.0 (CTCAE v3.0) that is available at http://ctep.cancer.gov/reporting//ctc.html  
 
Information on all adverse events, whether reported by [CONTACT_2299], directly observed, or detected by 
[CONTACT_5292], laboratory test or other means, will be collected, recorded, followed and reported as 
described in the following sections.   
Adverse events experienced by [CONTACT_317999], throughout the study, and within [ADDRESS_391347] study treatment. Participants who 
experience an ongoing adverse event or related to a study procedures and/or study treatment beyond [ADDRESS_391348]-study event(s) that might reasonably be related 
to participation in this study. The investigator shou ld notify the IRB, the Coordinating Center and any other 
applicable regulatory agency of an y unanticipated death or adverse even t occurring after a participant has 
discontinued or terminated study participation that may reasonably be related to the study.  
 
11.2  Definitions  
11.2.1  Adverse Event (AE) 
  
An adverse event is any undesirable sign, symptom or medical condition or experience that develops or 
worsens in severity after starting the first dose of  study treatment or any procedure specified in the 
protocol, even if the event is not considered to be related to the study.   
Abnormal laboratory values or diagnostic test re sults constitute adverse events only if they induce 
clinical signs or symptoms or require treatment or further diagnostic tests.  
 
11.2.2  Serious adverse event (SAE) 
 A serious adverse event is an undesirable sign, symptom, or medical condition which: 
 is fatal or life-threatening; 
 requires or prolongs inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]; 
 results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity; 
 constitutes a congenital anomaly or birth defect; or 
 jeopardizes the participant and requires medical  or surgical intervention to prevent one of 
the outcomes listed above.  
Events not considered to be serious adverse events are hospi[INVESTIGATOR_5315]: 
 routine treatment or monitoring of the studied indication, not associated with any 
deterioration in condition, or for elective procedures 
 elective or pre-planned treatment for a pre-existing condition that did not worsen 
 emergency outpatient treatment for an even t not fulfilling the serious criteria outlined 
above and not resulting in inpatient admission 
 respi[INVESTIGATOR_4594] 
 
11.2.3 Expectedness  
 Adverse events can be 'Expected' or 'Unexpected’.  
 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
24 [IP_ADDRESS] Expected adverse event 
Expected adverse events are those that have been previously identified as resulting from 
administration of the treatment.  For the purposes of this study, an adverse event is considered 
expected  when it appears in the protocol and/or  informed consent document as a potential risk.   
 
Refer to Section 6.1 for a listing of expected  adverse events associated with the study 
treatment.   
 
[IP_ADDRESS]. Unexpected adverse event 
  
For the purposes of this study, an adverse event is considered unexpected  when it varies in nature, 
intensity or frequency from information provided in the protocol and/or informed consent 
document as a potential risk.   
 
11.2.4 Attribution  
Attribution is the relationship between an adverse event or serious adverse event and the study treatment. Attribution will be assigned as follows: 
 
 Definite – The AE is clearly related
 to the study treatment. 
 Probable – The AE is likely related  to the study treatment. 
 Possible – The AE may be related  to the study treatment.  
 Unlikely - The AE is doubtfully related  to the study treatment. 
 Unrelated - The AE is clearly NOT related  to the study treatment. 
 
 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.[ADDRESS_391349] with the participant. All adverse events will be 
recorded on the appropriate study-sp ecific case report forms (CRFs).  
 
11.4 Reporting Adverse Events  
 
For multi-site trials where a DF/HCC investigator is serving as the principal investigator, each participating 
investigator is required to abide by [CONTACT_102841]/HCC.  The study must be 
conducted in compliance with FDA regulations, local safety reporting requirements and reporting 
requirements of the principal investigator. 
 
Each adverse event will be assessed to determine if it meets the criteria for serious adverse event. If a 
serious adverse event occurs, expedited reporting w ill follow local policies, and federal guidelines and 
regulations as appropriate.  
 
It is the responsibility of the participating investigator  to notify the Principal Investigator, and the local IRB 
of all serious adverse events as required in the protocol.   
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_317977] (e.g., safety reports, Actio n Letters) to all participating investigators as described in the attached 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) as soon as the information becomes available.  
 
11.5     Coordinating Center Notification by [CONTACT_10670]  
 
  11.5.1 Serious Adverse Ev ent Reporting Requirements 
 
All events meeting the criteria for Serious Adverse Event (see Section 11.2.2) that occur after the 
initial dose of study treatment, during treatment, or within  [ADDRESS_391350] be 
reported to the DF/HCC Overall Principal Investigator  [INVESTIGATOR_317978].  This includes events 
meeting criteria outlined in Section 11.2 as well as the following: 
 Grade 2 (moderate) and Grade 3 (severe) events that are unexpected and at least possibly related/associated with the intervention. 
 All Grade 4 (life-thr eatening or disabling) events that are unexpected or not specifically listed in 
the protocol as not requiring reporting 
 All Grade 5 (fatal) events while the participant is enrolled and ac tively participating in the trial 
OR when the event occurs within [ADDRESS_391351] study intervention. 
Note
: If the participant is in long-term follow-up, re port death at the time of continuing review. 
 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.[ADDRESS_391352] re port each serious adverse event, re gardless attribution, to the DF/HCC 
Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_874] 1 business day of learning of the occurrence. In the event that the participating 
investigator does not become aware of the serious adverse event imme diately (e.g., participant sought 
treatment elsewhere), the participating investigator is to  report the event within [ADDRESS_391353] awareness of the adverse event. Report serious adverse events 
by [CONTACT_318000]: 
   
  
With
in the following 1-[ADDRESS_391354] (IRB) Notification by [CONTACT_318001] (or Protocol Chair) and to the local IRB according to the local IRB’s policies and procedures in 
reporting adverse events.  
 
The Principal Investigator (or Protocol Chair) will repo rt adverse events and serious adverse events from all 
participating sites to the DFCI IRB according to the IRB’s policies and proced ures in reporting adverse 
events.  
 
11.7   Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_317979] l Investigator (or Protocol Chair) and to local Risk 
Management any subject safety reports or sentinel ev ents that require reportin g according to institutional 
policy. 

Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.[ADDRESS_391355]. Louis (ATC).  ATC will 
maintain the de-identified image data for analysis by [CONTACT_318002].  Treatment 
plans for all patients will be sent electronically to the ATC .The treatment planner or the physicist who 
performs the initial review of the plan will be resp onsible for transmitting these data.   Please see 
section 12.3.1 for more information.  
 
12.2  Safety Meetings 
 
The DF/HCC Data and Safety Monitoring Committee (DSM C) will review and monitor toxicity and accrual 
data from this trial. The committee is composed of clinical specialists with experience in oncology and who 
have no direct relationship with the study. Information th at raises any questions about  participant safety will 
be addressed with the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_36749]. 
 
The DSMC will meet quarterly and/ or more often if required to re view toxicity and accrual data.  
Information to be provided to the committee may include:  up-to-date participant accrual; all grade [ADDRESS_391356] been reported; summary of all deaths while being treated and 
during active follow-up; any response information; audit results, and a summary provided by [CONTACT_3476]. Other information (e.g. scans, laboratory values) will be provided upon request.  
 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
28 12.3  Monitoring 
Involvement in this study as a participating investigator im plies acceptance of po tential audits or 
inspections, including source data verification, by [CONTACT_282594] 
(or Protocol Chair) or DF/HCC. The purpose of these audits or inspections is to examine study-related 
activities and documents to determine whether these activities were conducted and data were recorded, analyzed, and accurately reported in accordance with the protocol, institutional policy, Good Clinical 
Practice (GCP), and any applicable regulatory requirements.  
 
All data will be monitored for timeliness of subm ission, completeness, and adherence to protocol 
requirements. Monitoring will begin at the time of participant registration and will continue during 
protocol performance and completion.  
 
12.3.[ADDRESS_391357] three patients treated at each site will 
be reviewed by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_317980]’s PI.  As described above, plans will be 
submitted to the ATC for this protocol.  The plans will be sent to the ATC upon approval by [CONTACT_47806], and the PI [INVESTIGATOR_1238]/or Participating Site PI [INVESTIGATOR_317981]. 
 
13. REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS  
13.1 Declaration of Helsinki 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_317982] U.S. FDA requirements 
 
13.2 Patient Confidentiality 
The investigators will ensure that patient anonymity is maintained.  
 
13.3  Protocol Review and Amendments 
This protocol, the proposed informed consent and all forms of participant information related to the study (e.g., advertisements used to recruit partic ipants) and any other necessary documents must be 
submitted, reviewed and approved by a properly constituted IRB governing each study location.  
Any changes made to the protocol must be submitted  as amendments and must be approved by [CONTACT_309029] (DF/HCC) IRB prior to implementation. Any changes in study conduct must be reported to the 
IRB. The Principal Investigator (or Protocol Chair) will disseminate protocol amendment information 
to all participating investigators.  
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.[ADDRESS_391358] be signed and 
dated by [CONTACT_98901]’s legally authorized representative, and by [CONTACT_98902].  If the patient does not speak English, an interpreter will be made available 
and the treating institution’s policy for obtaining research consent from non-English speaking 
patients will be followed.  The informed consent process will be documented in the patient’s medical 
record.  The participant must be given a copy of the signed and dated consent document. The original signed copy of the consent document must be retained in the medical record or research file.  
 
13.5  Ethics and Good Clinical Practice (GCP) 
This study is to be conducted according to the following considerations, which represent good and 
sound research practice: 
 ICH Consolidated Good Clinical Practice: Guidelines (E6) 
www fda.gov/cder/guidance/iche6 htm
  
 US Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) gove rning clinical study conduct and ethical 
principles that have their origin in the Declaration of Helsinki 
 Title 21 Part 11 – Electronic Records; Electronic Signatures www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx 02/21cfr11 02.html
 
 Title 21 Part 50 – Protection of Human Subjects www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx 02/21cfr50 02.html
  
 Title 21 Part 54 – Financial Disclosure by [CONTACT_143054].access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx 02/21cfr54 02.html
  
 Title 21 Part 56 – Institutional Review Boards www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx 02/21cfr56 02.html
  
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
30  Title 21 Part 312 – Investigational New Drug Application 
www.access.gpo.gov/nara/cfr/waisidx 02/21cfr312 02.html   
 State laws 
 Institutional research  policies and procedures www.dfhcc harvard.edu/clinical-research-
support/clinical-research-operations-cro/policies-and-procedures  
It is understood that deviations from the protocol  should be avoided, except when necessary to 
eliminate an immediate hazard to a research particip ant. In such case, the deviation must be reported 
to the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_317983].  
 13.[ADDRESS_391359] all 
observations and other data pertinent to the study for each research participant. This information enables 
the study to be fully documented and the study data to be subsequently verified.  
Original source documents supporting entries in the case report forms include but are not limited to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2553], clinical charts, laboratory  and pharmacy records, recorded data from automated instruments, 
microfiches, photographic negatives, microfilm or magnetic media, and/or x-rays.  
 
13.[ADDRESS_391360] be retained for the maximum period required by [CONTACT_318003].  
13.8  Multi-center Guidelines 
This protocol will adhere to the policies and requi rements of the Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center. 
The specific responsibilities of the Principal Investigator (or Protocol Chair), Coordinating Center, 
and Participating Institutions are presented in the Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center Multi-Center Data and Safety Monitoring Pl an (see Appendix II). 
 The Principal Investigator/Coordinating Center is responsible for distributing all Safety Reports 
to all participating institutions for submission to their individual IRBs for action as required. 
 Mechanisms will be in place to ensure quality as surance, protocol complia nce, and adverse event 
reporting at each site.  
 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.[ADDRESS_391361] 80% at 2 years. The null hypothesis is based on a 2-year local control rate of 
55% following treatment of tumors >3cm with radiofrequency ablation (RFA), as discussed in 2.3.   However, the 
local control tends to much poorer in certain subgroups, including tumors unable to be treated by [CONTACT_318004], thus 55% is used as an upp er bound for the sample  size considerations.  
 
14.1 Study Design/Endpoints 
The primary endpoint is local control at  [ADDRESS_391362] 30 of 
them will be alive at 2 years for the evaluation of lo cal control assuming a 2-year overall survival of 50%. 
The number of evaluable patients is a conservative as sumption based on the historical RFA data and the 
Tsukuba proton data (13) showing a 2-year overall survival in the range of 50-70%. Analysis of 30 patients 
alive at 2 years will achieve 94% power to detect a local control rate of 80% if at least 21 of them were free 
of local failure. The decision rule is associated with 7% probability for accepting the proton protocol is associated with improved lo cal control when the true rate is only 55% at [ADDRESS_391363] follow-
up. A minimum follow-up of 2 years will be required, while patients who die or drop out of the protocol 
prior to 2 years will be censored at that date.
 
 
14.2    Sample Size/Accrual Rate  
The accrual goal was previously revised to 60 patients in  order to preserve high power  for detecting a slightly 
smaller but clinically signifi cant increase in local cont rol to 80% at [ADDRESS_391364] th at meets the requirements of the Inte rnational Committee of Medical Journal 
Editors. A full report of the outcomes will be made public  no later than three (3) years after the end of data 
collection.  
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
33 16. REFERENCES  
 
1. El-Serag, H.B. and A.C. Mason, Rising incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in the [LOCATION_002].  N Engl 
J Med, 1999. 340(10): p. 745-50. 
 
2. Fong, Y., N. Kemeny, and T. Lawrence, Cancer of the Liver and Biliary Tree , in Principles and Practice of 
Oncology , V. DeVita, Hellman, S., Rosenberg, S., Editor. 2001. 
 
3. Landis SH, Murray T, Bolden S, Wingo PA.  Cancer Statistics, 1998 .  CA Cancer J Clin 48:6-29. 1998. 
 4. Solbiati L, Livraghi T, Goldberg SN, et al.  Percutaneous Radio-freequency ablation of hepatic metastases 
from colorectal cancer: Long-term results of 117 patients.   Radiology, 2001.  221:159-166. 
 
5. Dawson, L.A., et al., Escalated focal liver radiation and concurrent hepatic artery fluorodeoxyuridine for 
unresectable intrahepatic malignancies.  J Clin Oncol, 2000. 18(11): p. 2210-8. 
 
6. Dawson, L.A., et al., Analysis of radiation-induced liver disease using the Lyman NTCP model.  Int J Radiat 
Oncol Biol Phys, 2002. 53(4): p. 810-21. 
 
7. Dawson, L.A., R.K. Ten Haken, and T.S. Lawrence, Partial irradiation of the liver. Semin Radiat Oncol, 
2001. 11(3): p. 240-6. 
 8. McGinn, C.J., et al., Treatment of intrahepatic cancers with radiation doses based on a normal tissue 
complication probability model. J Clin Oncol, 1998. 16(6): p. 2246-52. 
 
9. Lawrence, T.S., et al., The use of 3-D dose volume analysis to predict radiation hepatitis.  International 
Journal of Radiation Oncology, Biolog y, Physics, 1992. 23(4): p. 781-8. 
 
10. Park, H., et al., Dose-response relationship in local radiotherapy for hepatocellular carcinoma.  Int J Radiat 
Oncol Biol Phys, 2002. 54(1): p. 150-155. 
 
11. Cheng, J., et al., Radiation-induced liver disease after three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy for 
patients with hepatocellular carcinoma:  dosimetric analysis and implication.  Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys, 
2002. 54(1): p. 156-162. 
 12. Cheng, J.C., et al., Radiation-induced liver disease after radiotherapy for hepatocellular carcinoma: 
clinical manifestation and dosimetric description. Radiother Oncol, 2002. 63(1): p. 41-5. 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
   
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
34  
13. Tokuuye, K, et al.  Gastrointestinal Malignancies  in Proton and Charged Particle  Radiotherapy, T.F. 
DeLaney and H.M. Kooy, Editors.  2007. 
 
14. Bujold, A, et al. Sequential Phase I and II Trials of Stereotactic Body Radiotherapy for Locally Advanced 
Hepatocellular Carcinoma, J. Clin Oncol. 2013. In press.  
 
 
Phase II Study of Protons for Liver Cancer    11.16.15 
CONFIDENTIAL 
This document is confidentia l. Do not disclose or use except as authorized. 
 
35 17. APPENDICES  
Appendix I: Performance Status Criteria 
 
 
ECOG Performance Status Scale 
  
Karnofsky Performance Scale 
Grade Description Percent Description 
0 Normal activity. Fully active, able to carry 
on all pre-disease performance without 
restriction. 100 Normal, no complaints, no evidence of 
disease. 
90 Able to carry on normal activity; minor 
signs or symptoms of disease. 
1 Symptoms, but ambulatory. Restricted in physically strenuous activity, but 
ambulatory and able to carry out work of a 
light or sedentary nature (e.g., light 
housework, office work). 80 Normal activity with effort; some signs 
or symptoms of disease. 
70 Cares for self, unable to carry on normal activity or to do active work. 
2 In bed < 50% of the time. Ambulatory and capable of all self-care, but unable to carry 
out any work activities. Up and about 
more than 50% of waking hours. [ADDRESS_391365] of his/her needs. 
50 Requires considerable assistance and 
frequent medical care. 
3 In bed >50% of the time. Capable of only limited self-care, confined to bed or chair 
more than 50% of waking hours. 40 Disabled, requires special care and 
assistance. 
30 Severely disabled, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_374]. Death not imminent. 
4 100% bedridden. Completely disabled. 
Cannot carry on any self-care. Totally 
confined to bed or chair. 20 Very sick, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_374]. 
Death not imminent. 
10 Moribund, fatal processes progressing rapi[INVESTIGATOR_375].  
5 Dead. 0 Dead. 
 
  