A Therapeutic Workplace to Address Poverty and Substance Use
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]
March 7, 2023
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 1 of 14 
 Date: March 7 , 2023 _    
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_338030]: IRB00160297  
 
JHM IRB  - eForm A  – Protocol  
 
  
• Use the section headings to write the  JHM  IRB eForm A , inserting the appropriate material 
in each. If a section is  not appli cable, leave heading in and insert N/A.  
• When submitting JHM IRB eForm A (new or revised) , enter the date submitted to the field at 
the top of JHM  IRB eForm A . 
 
****************************************************************************** *********** ******* *** 
 
1. Abstract  
Alcohol  addiction is a chronic relapsing disorder. High magnitude and long -duration voucher -based 
abstinence reinforcement  is one of the most effective treatments for alcohol and drug addiction  and can 
maintain abstinence  over extended period s of time, but practical methods of implementing these 
interventions are needed. Workplaces could be ideal and practical vehicles for arranging and maintaining 
abstinence reinforcement over long time periods. Our research on a model Therapeutic Workplace h as 
shown that employment -based abstinence reinforcement , in which participants must provide alcohol - or 
drug-free urine samples to maintain maximum pay , can maintain alcohol and drug abstinence. Now we 
need to develop effective and economically sound metho ds to arrange long -term exposure to 
employment -based abstinence reinforcement. We are proposing to evaluate the effectiveness and 
economic benefits of a Wage Supplement Model of arranging long -term exposure to employment -based 
abstinence reinforcement. Und er this model, successful Therapeutic Workplace participants are offered 
abstinence -contingent wage supplements if they obtain and maintain competitive employment. 
Governments have used wage supplements effectively to increase employment in welfare recipie nts. The 
Wage Supplement Model harnesses the power of wage supplements to promote employment, while 
simultaneously using the wage supplements to reinforce alcohol abstinence. The intervention will combine 
[ADDRESS_417848], Individual  Placement and Support (IPS) supported employment, 
and abstinence -contingent wage supplements. IPS is a supported employment intervention that has been 
proven effective in promoting employment in adults with severe mental illness. Under this model, 
partici pants will be exposed to the Therapeutic Workplace to initiate alcohol abstinence and establish job 
skills. To promote employment and prevent relapse to alcohol use, participants will receive IPS Plus 
Abstinence -Contingent Wage Supplements. A randomized tr ial will evaluate the effectiveness and 
economic benefits  of the Abstinence -Contingent Wage Supplement Model in promoting employment and 
sustaining alcohol abstinence in homeless adults with alcohol use disorder (N=130). Participants will be 
enrolled in th e Therapeutic Workplace for [ADDRESS_417849] the following Specific Aims:  
Primary Aim   
• Biologically -Verified Alcohol Abstinence . Assess the effectiveness of IPS Plus Abstinence -
Contingent Wage Supplements in promoting biological ly-verified alcohol abstinence during the 
intervention.  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 2 of 14 
 Secondary Aims  
• Self-Reported Alcohol Use . Assess the effectiveness of IPS Plus Abstinence -Contingent Wage 
Supplements in reducing self -reported  alcohol use during the intervention.  
• Employment . Assess the effectiveness of IPS Plus Abstinence -Contingent Wage Supplements in 
promoting  employment  during the intervention . 
• Post-Intervention Effects.  Assess the effectiveness of IPS Plus Abstinence -Contingent Wage 
Supplements in promoting alcohol abstinence and  employment after the intervention ends . 
• Economic A nalyses . Assess the costs, cost -effectiveness , and cost -benefit of I PS Plus Abstinence -
Contingent Wage Supplements.   
3. Background  
 Alcohol and drug addiction are often  chronic problems that persist for many  years and sometimes 
throughout a person’s lifetime (Dennis & Scott, 2007; McLellan et al., 2000; Moos & Moos, 2007; Vaillant , 
1996, 2003) . Treatments can promote abstinence in some patients, but relapse is common after treatment  
(Etter & Stapleton, 2006; Knapp et al., 2007; Lancaster et al., 2006; Sees et al., 2000; Tonstad et al., 2006; 
Veilleux et al., 2010) . Many individuals achieve periods of abstinence that last a year or more, but still 
relapse (Galai et al., 2003; Shah, Galai et al., 2006; Vaillant, 1996, 2003) . Developi[INVESTIGATOR_338031]. This project seeks to develop a long -term treatment to address the chronic relapsing 
nature of alcohol addiction.  
Treating Homeless Adults  with Alcohol Use Disorder  
 This project will focus on homeless adults  with alc ohol use disorder . Few populations are beset 
with the constellation of problems that afflict homeless individuals (Fischer & Breakey, 1991b) . At the heart 
of much of this misfortune are staggering rates of alcoholi sm (Breakey et al., 1989; Fazel et al., 2008; 
Fischer & Breakey, 1991b; Toro et al., 1995) . Estimates show that as much as half of homeless adults 
have current alcohol use disorders (Fazel et al., 2008) . Treatment of alcohol use disorder  in the homeless 
is complicated by [CONTACT_338039] (Fischer & Breakey, 1991a; Toro et al., 1995)  including 
"extreme poverty; underutilization of public entitlements; isolation from family, friends, and other support 
networks; frequent contact [CONTACT_338040]; and poor general health (Fischer & Breakey, 
1991a) .” The Institute of Medicine identified the homeless as a group in need of specialized interventions 
that are tailored to their unique characteristics and needs (IOM 1990) , including housing, income and 
employment (Zerger, 2002) . 
 Studies have experimentally evaluated interventions for homeless adults who used drugs and/or 
alcohol, but few studies hav e focused exclusively on homeless adults  with alcohol use disorder. Early 
projects supported by [CONTACT_338041].  A few treatments were found to be effective (Lam et al., 1995; 
Milby [CONTACT_2297]., 1996; Sosin et al.,  1995) , but most controlled studies failed to show clear effects of 
experimental treatments relative to control conditions  ( Lapham et al., 1995; Smith et al., 1995; Stahler, 
1995; Wright & Devine, 1995) , and both dropout and relapse to substance use were common (Orwin et al., 
1999; Zerger, 2002) . More recent  interventions for homeless, substance -dependent adults have had mixed 
effects (Fitzpatrick -Lewis et al., 2011; Hwang et al., 2005 ; de Vet et al., 2013) . One recent and well -
controlled study investigated  intensive and long -term Chronic Care Management that combined 
motiv ational enhancement therapy , relapse prevention counseling , and onsite medical, addiction, and 
psychiatric services . This intensive approach  did not affect drug and alcohol use in a general population of 
drug and alcohol users, in the subset of alcohol use rs, or in a subset of homeless adults (Saitz et al., 
2013) . Housing first interventions that provide housing to homeless adults  with alcohol use disorder  can be 
cost effective, however, their effects are directly relat ed to the duration of the housing provided and the 
effects of housing on alcohol use have not been experimentally demonstrated (Larimer et al., 2009) . 
Overall, although some treatment s have shown promise, the exper imental result s have been mixed and it 
is un clear which treatments are effective and best suited to the needs of this population.  
Behavioral Economic Incentives in the Treatment of  Homeless Adults with Alcohol Use Disorder  
 Behavioral economic incentive treatments for drug and alcohol dependence have a strong 
theoretical and empi[INVESTIGATOR_338032].  
 Theoretical and empi[INVESTIGATOR_338033] . Behavioral  economic incentive  interventions are rooted in 
research  that suggests that alcohol addiction is operant behavior  that is maintained and modifiable by [CONTACT_338042]   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 3 of 14 
 consequences (Bigelow & Silverman, 1999) . Consequences that increase behavior are called reinforcers, 
commonly referred to as incentives . Operant research shows that the value of incentives decreases as the 
delay to the incentive increases (Bickel et al. 2014).  Benefits of health behaviors like alcohol abstinence 
are delaye d, which may ex plain why alcohol abstinence do es not always maintain without special 
interventions. Behavioral economic incentive interventions are designed to bridge the gap between health 
behaviors and their delayed health benefits. They provide immediat e incentives for health behaviors to 
increase their frequency.  Seminal  studies by [CONTACT_338043] (Co -investigator) showed that alcohol use in “ chronic  
alcoholics” could be reduced by [CONTACT_338044] (Bigelow et al., 
1975 ; Bigelow and Liebson, 1972 ). 
 Application of behavioral principles to the treatment of homeless adults . Miller offered incentives to 
alcohol -dependent adults contingent on the provision of alcohol -free breath samples (Miller et al., 1974) , 
including in a study with “skid row alcoholics” (Miller, 1975) . Milby  [CONTACT_338045] -contingent housing and work therapy  could promote abstinence in homeless, cocaine -
dependent adults (Milby [CONTACT_2297]., 1996, 2000, 2010) . A behavioral treatment that applied  the Community 
Reinforcement Approach , incentives for attendance, and housi ng contingent on alcohol -free breath 
samples was effective in promoting alcohol abstinence in homeless adults (Smith et al., 1998) . A study by 
[CONTACT_338046] ( Co-PI) and his colleagues sh owed that access to paid employment in a model “therapeutic 
workplace” contingent on alcohol -free breath samples increased alcohol abstinence relative to a condition 
in which access to paid employment was offered independent of breath -alcohol results (Koffarnus et al., 
2011) . These studies show that behavioral treatment s can be effective in homeless adults. However, like 
other treatments, behavioral treatments have not reliably produced long -term abstinence, employ ment or 
housing that persists after the intervention ends.  
A Therapeutic Workplace to Address the Chronic Nature of Drug Addiction  
 We propose to develop a novel incentive -based treatment for homeless  adults  with alcohol use 
disorders  designed to promote long-term employment and abstinence from alcohol . Interventions in which 
patients receive incentives contingent on providing objective evidence of alcohol or drug abstinence may 
be the most effective psychosocial addiction treatments (Castells et al., 2009; Dutra et al., 2008; Knapp et 
al., 2007; Pi[INVESTIGATOR_297794]., 2007) . One of the most effective incentive interventions is voucher reinforc ement  in 
which patien ts receive monetary vouchers  for providing drug -free urine samples (Higgins et al., 1991) . 
Voucher reinforcement can increase abstinence from alcohol and a wide range of drugs (Lussier et al., 
2006) . The Co-PI (Silverman) and others (Castells et al., 2009)  have shown that voucher reinforcement 
can increase drug abstinence in injection drug users (Silverman et al., 1996a, 1998) ; and that high value 
vouchers can initiate abstinence in refractory drug users (Dallery et al., 2001; Silverman et al., 19 99). As 
with other treatments, many patients relapse to alcohol or drug use after abstinence incentives are 
discontinued. To address this, Silverman ( Co-PI) and colleagues have used  abstinence reinforcement as a 
maintenance intervention and showed that su stained voucher reinforcement could maintain drug 
abstinence for a year (Silverman et al., 2004) .  
The Therapeutic Workplace . The need for high magnitude and long duration abstinence 
reinforcement raises an obvious practical problem: How can high magnitude and long duration 
reinforcement be financed? Silverman and his colleagues developed the Therapeutic Workplace to 
address this problem. The essential features of the intervention are simple: Participants are hired a nd paid 
to work, as in typi[INVESTIGATOR_338034]. To promote abstinence, participants must provide objective evidence of 
drug and/or alcohol abstinence to maintain access to the workplace and maximum pay. The approach 
does not require an independent source of fun ds to address abstinence, but instead harnesses the 
reinforcing effects of wages to reinforce abstinence. Since employment can be sustained for years, this 
approach offers the potential advantage of maintaining high magnitude employment -based abstinence 
reinforcement over long periods of time.  
Phases of treatment . The Therapeutic Workplace was originally designed to treat low -income, 
unemployed drug -dependent women. Since many women lacked job skills (Silverman et al., 1995) , we 
designed two phases of treatment. During Phase 1, each patient's "job" was to participate in a stipend -
supported training program designed to establish job skills and initiate abstinence. Once participants 
initiated abs tinence and acquired skills, they progressed to Phase 2 and were hired as data entry 
operators  (Silverman et al., 2005) . Employment -based abstinence reinforcement is maintained throughout 
both phases.  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/[ADDRESS_417850] could 
initiate (Silverman et al., 2001)  and maintain drug abstinence for 4 years (Aklin et al., 2014 ; Silverman et 
al., 2002)  in pregnant/ postpartum methadone patients . 
Other studies showed that employment -based abstinence 
reinforcement could promote  drug abstinence in injection 
drug users (Holtyn et al., 2014; Silverman et al., 2007) , 
and could promote adherence to naltrexone in opi[INVESTIGATOR_2480] -
dependent adults (DeFulio et al., 2012; Dunn et al., 2013; 
Everly et al., 2011) . Particularly relevant to this application, 
the Therapeutic Workplace has been shown effective in 
promoting  alcohol  abstinence  in homeless al cohol -
dependent adults (Koffarnus et al., 2011) . The adjacent 
figure shows outcomes from [ADDRESS_417851] on drug  or alcohol abstinence and 
naltrexone adherence ( asterisks ). Values above the bars show the amount of increase produced by [CONTACT_338047]; all were sig nificant  (See Silverman et al., 2012) . 
Scientific Premise: A critical challenge . Most controlled studies conducted with s ubstance 
abusing homeless adult s have failed to show clear effects of experimental treatments relative to control 
conditions. Our research shows  that a year -long exposure to employment -based abstinence reinforcement 
effectively sustain s drug abstinence throughout a year of employment (DeFulio et al., 2009) , but many 
participants relapsed in the year after the employment -based abstinence reinforcement ended (DeFulio & 
Silverman, 2011) . This suggests that we may need to maintain employment -based abstinence 
reinforcement over  an extended time to prevent relapse in some patients. The proposed research seeks to  
develop cost -effective ways of arranging long -term employment -based reinforcement  to support recovery . 
Models to Arrange Long -Term Employment -Based Abstinence Reinforceme nt 
 We developed  three models to maintain employment -based abstinence reinforcement  (Silverman, 
Holtyn and Morrison, in press; Appendix) . Under all models, individuals enroll in Phase 1 to initiate 
abstinence and establish skills. The models differ in how employment -based reinforcement is maintained.  
 The Social Business Model.  Under the Social Business model, Phase 1 graduates are hired as 
employees in a social business. A social business, a concept that won Muhammad Yunus the Nobel Prize , 
exists to addres s the needs of low -income people (Weber & Yunus, 2010; Yunus & Weber, 2007) . We 
estab lished a Therapeutic Workplace Social B usiness, Hopkins Data Services , to maintain employment -
based abstine nce reinforcement. Our exper ience suggests that the Therapeutic Workplace Social 
Business can be feasible (Silverman et al., 2005) and effective (Aklin et al., 2014) , but it may have limited 
capacity and is difficult to scale up relative to our other models . 
 The Cooperative Employer Model.  Under the Cooperative Employer model, a community employer 
hires Phase [ADDRESS_417852] used wage supplements to increase 
employment in welfare recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840] (Berlin, 2007; Michalopoulos, 2005; Riccio et al., 2010) . This model 
harnesses the power of wage supplements to promote employment, while simultaneously using the wage 
supplements to reinforce alcohol abstinence. We have used abstinence -contingent wage suppl ements in 
occasional participants who obtain employment while participating in the Therapeutic Workplace 
(Silverman et al., 2002) . 
Development and Evaluation of the Abstinence -Contingent Wage Supplement Model  
 The W age Supplement Model could expand employment opportunities and provide a financially 
viable  means of arranging employment -based abstinence reinforcement as a long -term intervention. 
However, we must address three challenges  of this model : 1) incorporate a method to increase 
employment; 2) evaluate the effectiveness of abstinence -contingent wage supplements in maintaining 
abstinence; and 3) assess the economic costs and benefits of abstinence -contingent wage supplements. 
Several innovative components of the proposed project designed to address these challenges are 
described here.  
 

 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 5 of 14 
  Individual Placement and Support (IPS).  Increasing employment is critical to facilitate the success 
of the Therapeutic Workplace’s Abstinence -Contingent Wage Supplement Model. Empl oyment 
interventions for unemployed drug users have been ineffective (Magura et al., 2004; Svikis et al., 2012)  
and behavioral interventions for homeless cocaine -dependent (Kertesz et al., 2007)  or alcohol -dependent 
(Smith et al., 1998)  adults have failed to affect long -term employment outcomes. Therapeutic Workplace 
participants are employed at significantly higher r ates after participation in the Therapeutic Workplace than 
before, but still only ab out 20% of participants work fulltime after Therapeutic Workplace participation 
(Sigurdsson et al., 2011) . To increase employmen t, we will combine the T herapeutic Workplace with the 
IPS model of supported employment. IPS was designed to promote employment in persons with severe 
mental illness. Under IPS, employment specialists establish relationships with potential employers, and 
work with particip ants to identify available jobs, prepare applicatio ns, apply for positions, and support 
participants during employment. IPS has been shown effective in increasing employment in the U.S. and 
several other countries (Bond et al., 2012) . IPS produced significant increases in employment in a subset 
of individuals with severe mental illness and a substance use disorder (Mueser et al., 2011)  and in 
homeless adults with psychiatric or substance abuse problems (Rosenheck & Mares, 2007) . We will adapt 
IPS to promote employment in participants after they initia te abstinence and acquire job skills in the 
Therapeutic Workplace.  
 Wage supplements to increase employment . Our research shows that participants, including 
homeless alcohol -dependent  adult s (Koffarnus et al., 2013) , will not attend our training program or work 
consistently without incentives (Koffarnus et al., 2013; Koffarnus, DeFulio et al., 2013; Silverman, 
Chutuape et al., 1996; Wong et al., 2004a; W ong et al., 2004b) . To increase motivation of participants to 
engage in IPS and obtain employment, participants will earn wage supplements for maintaining 
employment. Wage supplements can promote employment in welfare recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840] (Berlin, 2007; 
Michalopoulos, 2005; Riccio et al., 2010) . Given the failure of previous employment interventions for 
unemployed drug and alcohol users, combining IPS and wage supplements is warranted and could 
increase employment in this difficult population.  
 Abstinence contingency in provision of wage supplements to prevent relapse.  Our research shows 
that employment alone is not sufficient to maintain abstinence. In the most relevant st udy (DeFulio et al., 
2009) , after completing Phase 1, participants who initiated cocaine abstinence were hired in our Phase 2 
data entry business for one year and randomly assigned to two groups. Employment Only  participants 
could work independent of their urinaly sis results . Abstinence -Contingent Employment  participants had to 
provide drug -free urine samples to work and maintain maximum pay. During Phase 2, Abstinence -
Contingent Employment  participants provided signif icantly more cocaine -negative samples than 
Employment Only  participants (79.3% and 50.7%, respectively). Based on this study, we expect that many 
participants who become employed will relapse to alcohol use when employment -based abstinence  
reinforcement is  discontinued. To sustain abstinence, participants who become employed will earn 
abstinence -contingent wage supplements as long as they continue to abstain from alcohol use. If a 
participant obtains employment, the participant will receive wage supplements  ($8/hr for a maximum of 40 
hours per week) for verified employment.  The maximum amount in wage supplements will be available as 
long as the participant continues to abstain from alcohol use .  
 Utilization of a wearable alcohol biosensor . To facilitate dis semination of this intervention, we will 
use a wearable alcohol biosensor  to monitor  alcohol use. Wearable alcohol biosensors are devices that 
can be passively worn by [CONTACT_338048] a continuous measure of alcohol 
use. NI AAA recently announced the winners of the Wearable Alcohol Biosensor Challenge , which was 
issued to stimulate public and private investment in development and refinement of these devices 
(www.challenge .gov/challenge/ a -wearable -alcohol -biosensor/). The proposed research will select the most 
appropriate biosensor from the available options. For example,  the Secure Continuous Remote Alcohol 
Monitor (SCRAM) is an ankle bracelet that  can be worn continuously, including in th e shower, and includes 
features that allow for detection of removal and tampering . It provides an estimate of blood alcohol 
concentration by [CONTACT_338049], and also measures  changes in skin 
temperature and skin reflectivity, wh ich are used to detect device removal and tampering. These data are 
stored on the bracelet and transmitted wirelessly via a modem. Transmitted data are encrypted and stored 
in a web -based system called SCRAM NET, which  research staff can access to monitor a lcohol use . 
BACtrack Skyn is a wrist bracelet that also provides an estimate of blood alcohol concentration by 
[CONTACT_338049]. The bracelet can measure changes in skin temperature, which 
can be used to detect removal or tamperin g. Data are stored on the bracelet and can be transmitted 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/[ADDRESS_417853] tha t costs of IPS plus abstinence -contingent wage supplements will be comparable to 
buprenorphine maintenance (Schackman et al., 2012)  and less expensive than extended -release 
naltrexone (Kennedy et al., 2011). W e will assess the costs, cost -effectiveness , and cost -benefits of IPS 
Plus Abstinence -Contingent Wage Supplements. Du nlap and Zarkin (Co -Is), experts in economic analyses, 
will conduct these analyses.  
 
4. Study Procedures  
a. Study design, including the sequence and  timing of study procedures    
Study Participants  
 Participants will be recruited from the Chemical Dependency Unit (CDU), an inpatient treatment 
program on the Johns Hopkins Bayview Campus that treats ~300 homeless adults with alcohol use 
disorder per year  and the Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center (JHBMC) that treats ~180 homeless 
adults with alcohol use disorder per year. We may recruit from additional programs that serve homeless 
adults. We may recruit via  internet -posted  notices  and newspaper advertis ements  using our study flyers  
and/or information sheets , and on social media platforms using our online advertisement scripts . We will 
use recruitment procedures that we used previously to successfully recruit  homeless alcohol -dependent 
adults (Koffarnus et al., 2011) .  
Therapeutic Workplace  and Job -Skills Training  
 To increase the chance that we engage participants, u pon enrollment, participants will be invited  to 
participate in a [ADDRESS_417854] used similar induction procedures in our prior studies to successfully engage 
participants. Participants will be able to earn $[ADDRESS_417855] every weekday for 3 weeks , and can earn about 
$32/weekday for participating in our job -skills training program.  Participants will be taught about the 
Therapeutic Workplace. Some or all of the training may be given through a computer -based traini ng 
program. We may also evaluate the effectiveness of the training  program by [CONTACT_338050]. We may re -administer the test at the 
end of the intervention to measure retention.   Each Therapeutic Workplace p articipant wil l have a  
participant ID, which will be  used to enter participant drug and alcohol testing results into our therapeutic 
workplace software, automatically implement any responses to drug and/or alcohol use based on testing 
results, and to automatically calculate participant daily pay based on compliance with drug and/or alcohol 
contingencies.  Participants will be required to wear their wearable alcohol biosensor  (SCRAM or BACtrack 
Skyn) , which will record transdermal  alcohol concentrations . Participants will be given separate care and 
use information about their wearable alcohol biosensor . Participants who wear a SCRAM bracelet will need 
to come  to the Therapeutic Workplace  (about every 30 days) so that the  data store d on their bracelet can 
be transmitted to SCRAM NET and accessed by [CONTACT_79553]. Participants who wear a BACtrack Skyn 
bracelet will need to transmit the data stored on their bracelet via Bluetooth using a smartphone.  At the end 
of Phase 1, participa nts will be randomly assigned to groups.  
Experimental Design  
 Participants (N = 1 30) will be randomly assigned to a Usual Care  Control or IPS Plus Abstinence -
Contingent Wage Supplements group. Computerized urn randomization (Wei & Lachin, 1988)  will balance 
groups on characteristics that may influence outcome: (1) percent of days abstinent from alcohol 
(assessed by [CONTACT_338051]; ≥ rolling median, Y/N); (2) 
evidence of opi[INVESTIGATOR_338035] ( Y/N); (3) completed 
high school or obtained a GED (Y/N) ; and (4) gender (male/female) . Participants will be stratified by 
[CONTACT_338052]. High 
school completion or GED should be associated with  employment . Participants will be stratified by [CONTACT_338053] a key biological factor that may influence outcome.  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 7 of 14 
 Individual Placement and Support  (IPS) & Abstinence -Contingent Wage Supplement Group  
 This group will receive the full intervention being evaluated in this study for 6 months . 
 Individual Placement and Support (IPS).  After Phase 1,  participants will be offered the IPS model of 
supported employment for  6 months . IPS involves rapid job search, promotes  competitive employment , 
and provides job supports and benefits counseling.  
Abstinence -contingent wage supplements . Participants in this group will receive abstinence -
contingent wage suppleme nts. Before obtaining employment, participants will earn wage supplements for 
participating in  IPS sessions  and for completing tasks prescribed by [CONTACT_338054] (e.g., developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a worker 
profile, applying for jobs, and completing interviews). The incentive system i s designed to encourage 
participants to engage in about 4 hours of IPS each weekday and to allow participants to earn about $ 200 
per week.  We may  offer bonus incentives to increase some job -seeking behaviors (e.g., completing job 
applications). We may also  evaluate the effectiveness of those bonus incentives, for example, by [CONTACT_338055] s. 
Once a participant becomes employed, participants will be able to earn up  to $8 per hour for a maximum 
of 40 hours per week  for working in a competitive job . To maintain long -term alcohol abstinence , 
participants will be required to wear their alcohol biosensor  and to provide  alcohol negative  transdermal 
alcohol concentration r eadings to earn the maximum in wage supplements. $ 8 per hour was selected 
because that amount was effective in our prior research (Silverman et at., 2005).  
Abstinence monitoring  using SCRAM  or BACtrack Skyn .  Each participant will be paid for wearing 
a wearable alcohol biosensor (SCRAM or B ACtrack Skyn) . SCRAM will measure transdermal alcohol 
concentrations every [ADDRESS_417856] (about every 30 days) so that  data stored on their bracelet  can be transmitted to 
SCRAM NET and accessed by [CONTACT_79553]. BACtrack Skyn can measure transd ermal alcohol 
concentrations every second . Temperature will be recorded to capture potential tampering or device 
removal. Data recorded by B ACtrack Skyn wil l be transferred w irelessly via Bluetooth to a secure portal 
operated by B ACtrack. If participants  do not have a smartphone that is capable of transmitting  the data  
via Bluetooth , we may provide them  with one to use during their study participation.  Partic ipants will need 
to remove their BACtrack Skyn bracelet to shower or bathe. Participants  must receive permission to 
remove their bracelet by [CONTACT_338056] a photo or video of themselves  wearing the bracelet  after 
they put it back on. Bracelet remo val can not exceed 6 0 minutes. To earn the maximum in wage 
supplements, participant’s transdermal alcohol concentrations must not test positive for alcohol  at any 
point between the last and the current data transmission.  
Resetting the wage supplement value . If a participant removes  their wearable alcohol biosensor  
without permission or provides a transdermal alcohol concentration reading that is positive for alcohol , the 
value of the wage supplement will be reduced to $ 1 per hour. The value of the wage supp lement will be 
increased by $ 1 per hour for every day that  the participants wear their wearable alcohol biosensor  and 
provide transdermal alcohol concentration readings that are negative for alcohol . 
Usual Care  Control  Group  
 Participants assigned to the Usual Care Control  group will be offered counseling and referrals to 
employment and treatment services, and will be paid (see below) for wearing a wearable alcohol biosensor 
(SCRAM or BACtrack Skyn) for [ADDRESS_417857]  complete d an inpatient alcohol detoxification at the Chemical 
Dependency Unit (CDU)  or will be referred to treatment at the CDU , if necessary . The CDU is a 20 -bed 
inpatient acute detoxification program for drug and/or alcohol ad diction.  
 We will provide appropriate referrals to address patient needs in the areas of housing, and mental 
and med ical health.  Most importantly, we will assist patients in finding shelter/housing and encourage 
them to use Therapeutic Workplace earnings to  pay for shelter.  We will attempt to guide patients to seek 
available social service benefits, and to utilize Baltimore City's network of emergency shelters, transitional 
shelters, and motel placements, as needed.  We may provide participants with transpor tation via Lyft or 
Uber , and cover t ransportation costs , when  participants  are traveling to and from our research unit.   
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/[ADDRESS_417858].  Criminal records are a major barrier to competitive 
employment in homeless adults. To help participants p repare for competitive employment, we may 
collaborate with community partners (e.g., Maryland Legal Aid) who offer free legal assistance to 
participants. This assistance typi[INVESTIGATOR_338036], processing 
petitions fo r expungement of criminal records, and other free services approved by [CONTACT_338057]. 
Participants are notified by [CONTACT_338058], and that participation is 
voluntary. We may collect data to describe and evaluate the exp ungement process so we may better 
understand legal barriers to employment in homeless adults. The data we would collect are  the types of  
offenses participants have on their public records  (i.e., records available to potential future employers) , the 
number of convictions on record,  which records are eligible or ineligible for expungement, whether  
petitions for expungement are  filed by [CONTACT_338057] , whether  petitions for expungement are granted or 
require a hearing, and how long it takes for  participants to  have their records expunged.  We may publish 
an article to describe the expungement process and de -identified data of our participants.  All data that we 
collect and publish on the criminal histories of our participants will be data that are publicly avail able. 
Verification of employment.  To gain verified and objective records of employment, we may get an 
objective measure of each participant's employment history  by [CONTACT_338059]'s earnings history 
using federal Form SSA -7050 -F4 (10 -2016) UF, REQ UEST FOR SOCIAL SECURITY EARNINGS 
INFORMATION. Participants and research staff will complete this form and have the participant's earnings 
history sent to our research unit.  Our research unit will pay for the costs of this service.  We may request 
these d ocuments one or more times . We will take the following steps to protect this sensitive information in 
our study databases: (1) when storing a completed form, we will redact name, date of birth, and social 
security number from the written document and label  the document with an ID number; (2) keep paper 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_14953] a locked file cabinet in a locked office and never keep documents out while unattended by 
[CONTACT_3647]; and (3) only enter relevant information into the database (i.e., information about when 
participants worked, how much they earned, and what type of employment they had) . The risks associated 
with collecting this information are explained on the consent form.  
b. Study duration and number of study visits required of research participant s. 
 Participant s will be invited to enroll in  Phase [ADDRESS_417859] current therapy 
stopped.  
NA 
e. Justification for inclusion of a placebo or non -treatment group.  
NA 
f. Definition of treatment failure or participant  removal criteria.  
Participants will be removed from the study if they threaten the safety of CLH staff or other 
research participants, or of any other persons on the Johns Hopkins Bayview Campus.  
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 9 of 14 
  
g. Descrip tion of what happens to participant s receiving therapy when study ends or if a 
participant ’s participation in the study end s prematurely.  
Throughout the study, participants will be given referrals to services they might need (e.g., drug 
counseling, housing , medical, or employment services).  
 
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion criteria : a) 18  to 55 years old; b) homeless  at the time of intake  as defined by [CONTACT_338060] -Vento Homeless Assistance Act ( lacked a fixed, regular, and adequate nighttime residen ce 
including  staying in a shelter, on the street, in an abandoned house or building, a car, or a park ); c) 
unemployed; d) meet DSM V criteria for alcohol use disorder ; and e) interested  in obtaining employment. 
Exclusion criteria: a) report current suicida l/homicidal ideation ; b) currently have nickel or other metal 
allergies, deep vein thrombosis, or leg ulcers where the SCRAM bracelet should be placed . Individuals 
excluded from the study will be linked with appropriate care as needed.   
 
6. Drugs/ Substances/  Devices  
a. The rationale for choosing the drug and dose or for choosing the device to be used.  
NA 
b. Justification and safety information if FDA approved drugs will be administered for non -FDA 
approved indications or if doses or routes of administration or participant  populations are 
changed.  
NA 
c. Justification and safety information if non -FDA approved drugs without an IND will be 
administered.  
NA 
 
7. Study Statistics  
a. Primary outcome variable . 
 Biologically -Verified Alcohol Abstinence (primary aim). Assess the effe ctiveness of IPS Plus 
Abstinence -Contingent Wage Supplements in promoting biologically -verified alcohol abstinence during the 
intervention . We will assess  the number  of days of alcohol abstinence (based on transdermal alcohol 
concentrations) during the 6 months after random assignment . Primary Hypothesis:  Our primary 
hypothes is is that IPS Plus Abstinence -Contingent Wage Supplements will promote alcohol abstinence 
during the intervention after random assignment relative to Usual Care Control .  
 
b. Secondary ou tcome variables.  
 Self-Reported Alcohol Use ( secondary  aim). Assess the effectiveness of IPS Plus Abstinence -
Contingent Wage Supplements in reducing self -reported  alcohol use  during the intervention . We will use 
three self -report measures of alcohol use (b ased on TLFB) during the 30 days prior to each of the 6 
monthly assessments during the year after random assignment. We will assess:  1) the percent of days 
abstinent from alcohol; 2 ) the average number  of standard drinks per drinking day ingested ; and 3 ) the 
percent of heavy drinking days (≥[ADDRESS_417860] drinks per day for men and ≥[ADDRESS_417861] drinks per day for 
women) . Hypothesis:  We expect that  IPS Plus Abstinence -Contingent Wage Supplement participants will 
have less  self-reported alcohol use during the inte rvention after random assignment relative to Usual Care 
Control . 
 Employment (secondary aim) . Assess the effectiveness of IPS Plus Abstinence -Contingent Wage 
Supplements in promoting employment  during the intervention . We will assess  the number of days  
participants are employed during the 30 days prior to each of the 6 monthly assessments during the 
intervention  after random assignment.  Hypothesis:  We expect that IPS Plus Abstinence -Contingent Wage 
Supplements will increase employment during the interventio n after random assignment relative to Usual 
Care Control.  
 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/[ADDRESS_417862]-Intervention Effects ( secondary a im). Assess the effectives of IPS Plus Abstinence -
Contingent Wage Supplements in promoting employment and abstinence from alcohol  after the 
intervention ends . We will compare the groups on self -reported measures of alcohol use  and employment  
at 6- and 12 -month follow -up assessment time points after the intervention ends . Hypothesis:  We expect 
that IPS Plus  Abstinence -Contingent Wage Supplements  may need to be m aintained to promote long -term 
employment and abstinence  from alcohol , and thus alcohol abstinence and employment may not be 
sustained after the intervention ends.   
 
Economic Outcome Measures  
Costs of Treatment (secondary a im). Assess the costs of treatme nt for Usual Care  and IPS Plus 
Abstinence -Contingent Wage Supplements.  We will assess the total cost per participant in both study 
group s. Hypothesis:  We expect that treatment costs for IPS Plus Abstinence -Contingent Wage 
Supplements  will be higher per per son relative to Usual Care  due to the IPS and wage supplements and 
because we expect that IPS Plus Abstinence -Wage Supplement participants will have greater treatment 
engagement.  
Cost-Effectiveness (secondary a im). Assess the cost -effectiveness of I PS Plus  Abstinence -
Contingent Wage Supplements . Separate cost -effectiveness analyses will be conducted for the outcomes 
of alcohol use, employment, and homelessness. We will assess incremental cost -effectiveness ratio 
(ICER) by [CONTACT_338061]. The estimated ICER can be interpreted as dollars spent per unit of desired outcomes 
gained.  Hypothesis:  We expect that IPS Plus Abstinence -Contingent Wage Supplements  will yield better 
ICERs for all measures.   
Cost-Benefit (secondary a im). Assess the cost -benefit of I PS Plus Abstinence -Contingent Wage 
Supplements . We will perform a Cost -Benefit Analysis (CBA) to examine the monetized benefits relative to 
costs for the two groups . The economic outcomes are employment, crime, subsidized housing, and health 
care utilization. Hypothesis:  We expect that IPS plus Wage Supplement will yield greater economic 
benefi ts in the 18-month post random assignment  time period relative to the costs of Usual Care .  
 
c. Statistical plan including sample size justification and inte rim data analysis.  
Power Analysis  
The primary outcome measures will be analyzed with a longitudinal binominal  regression model 
using generalized estimating equations  (GEE; Diggle & Diggle, 2002) . We used Liu and Liang (Liu & 
Liang, 1997)  to determine the total N required to detect 
differences between groups with 80% power. The 
adjacent figure shows the to tal number of participants (N) 
that would be required to detect a difference of 15% 
between the Usual Care Control  and the IPS Plus 
Abstinent -Cont ingent Wage Supplement with the monthly 
assessments . The figure shows possible percentages for 
the Usual Care Control  group because that value affects 
the sample size required. Fifteen percent is smaller than 
any difference in any Therapeutic Workplace study in 
which we promoted alcohol abstinence in homeless 
adults or cocaine abstinence in methadone patients (see 
figure in “ Significance Section”). The horizontal red lines 
show the number of participants planned b ased on  the number of participants randomized to the two 
groups without (top dashed red line) and after adjusting for the anticipated rates of missing dat a (10% 
missing, bottom solid red line). Based on this analysis, we need to randomize 130 participants (dashed red 
line) to ensure that we have sufficient sample sizes after adjusting for the rates of missing data. After 
adjusting for missing data (10% miss ing), this would yield a sample size of  117 participants ( 130 
participants x 0.90 collected assessments = 117 participants ). The adjusted sample size of 117 
participants (solid red line) is a little more than the maximum number of required participants .  
Main Statistical Analyses   
Main analysis . All measures assessed repeatedly will be analyzed with a longitudinal binominal  
regression model. Within -person correlated outcomes will be handled using GEE  (Zeger et al., 1988 ). 
Measures assessed once will be analyzed using logistic regression. The magnitude of effect for both 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80020406080100120140
Liu and Lang (1997)Adjusted for
Missing DataUnadjusted
Possible Percentages for Usual Care ControlRequired Sample Size (N)
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007   
Page 11 of 14 
 regression and GEE will be expressed using odds ratios with 95% CI. Analyses will include all 
randomized participants as intent -to-treat, and will be ad justed for pre -specified covariates used for 
stratification (Pocock et al., 2002). Tests will be two -sided and , because we have one primary outcome, 
alpha will be set at [ADDRESS_417863] assumptions regarding missing data (MAR, rather than MCAR).  If it appears 
that the missing data are MNAR, then we wil l fit pattern mixture models as described by [CONTACT_173499] & 
Gibbons (1997).  
Missing data . We expect to collect > 90% of assessments . Our approach to handle missing data 
will be to impute all missing values as the adverse outcome (e.g., alcohol  positive). Model parameter 
estimates from this approach will be compared to a method without imputation. If these methods yield 
differing results, conclus ions will need to be tentative, but results from both approaches will be reported in 
publications. To investigate sensi tivity to missing values, participants with and without missing values will 
be compared by [CONTACT_338062]. If rates of missingness are higher than expected, 
we may use multiple imputation (Rubin, 1996) or pattern mixture models ( Hedeke r & Gibbons, 1997) to 
obtain unbiased estimates of treatment effects.  
Consideration Of Sex And Other Variables In Moderating The Outcomes  
We will conduct analyses to identify biological and other variables that moderate the outcomes of 
employment and alcoh ol abstinence. We will examine  efficacy differences as a function of four variables 
assessed prior to random assignment by [CONTACT_338063]: 1) Percent  
of days abstinent from  alcohol (based on transdermal alcohol concent rations) prior to random assignment. 
2) Opi[INVESTIGATOR_2573] - and cocaine -negative urine samples from the assessment  prior to random assignment. 3) 
Completed high school or obtained a GED ; and 4) gender (male/female).   Alcohol use and opi[INVESTIGATOR_2573]/cocaine 
use prior to random assignment should be associated with higher rates of alcohol use and lower rates of 
employment during the [ADDRESS_417864] of fitting this interaction. For more discussion, see Pocock et al . (2002).  
We wil l conduct similar analyses to i dentify variables that moderate outcomes on employment and 
alcohol  use during the follow -up year after the interventions have  ended. We will examine differences in 
outcomes during the follow -up year as a function  of three variables assessed at the end of the intervention 
period by [CONTACT_338063]: 1) Percent days abstinent from alcohol 
from the last 3 months  under the study interventions; 2) percent of opi[INVESTIGATOR_2573] - and cocaine -negat ive urine 
samples from the last 3 monthly assessments under the study interventions; 3) Highest hourly wage that 
each participant earned during the year after random assignment.  We expect that alcohol and 
opi[INVESTIGATOR_2573] /cocaine use during the last [ADDRESS_417865] estimates of intervention activities following an activity -based 
approach (Dru mmond et al., 2005 ; Gold et al., 1996 ; Zarkin, Dunlap et al., 2004; Zarkin et al., 2005; 
Zarkin, Dunlap, et al., 2008). The total cost per participant of each intervention will be the sum of  the cost 
for (1) staff labor, (2) building space, (3) wage supplements , and (4) supplies or materials. The total 
intervention cost for each participant is the cost per activity multiplied by [CONTACT_338064]. Taking t he mean across participants in an intervention yields the 
mean per participant cost of that intervention. Treatment attendance will be captured in the modified 
Economic Form 90 AIR/ED. Standard addiction treatment costs will be drawn from the litera ture (e .g., 
Zarkin et al., 2004 ). 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/[ADDRESS_417866] -Effectiveness Analysis (CEA) methodology (e.g., Zarkin et al.,1996, 
1997, 2008 ; Dunlap et al., 2010) will combine the cost estimates (above) wit h intervention effectiveness 
measures. Separate cost -effectiveness analyses will be conducted for alcohol use, employment, and 
homelessness. The incremental cost -effectiveness ratio (ICER) is calculated by [CONTACT_338065]. The estimated ICER can be 
interpreted as dollars spent per unit of desired outcomes gained (e.g., $300 per day abstinent). To gauge 
ICER sampling uncertainty, we will calculate the CI via nonparametric b ootstrap methods (Indurkhya et al., 
2001; Briggs et al., 2006). We will estimate cost -effectiveness acceptability curves (CEAC) using 
nonparametric bootstrap methods (e.g., Dunlap, et al., 2010; Zarkin et al., 2008). The CEACs show the 
probability that a t reatment is cost -effective as a function of the policy maker’s intrinsic 
valuation/willingness to pay for the clinical outcome.  
Cost-Benefit . We will perform a Cost -Benefit Analysis to examine the monetized benefits relative to 
costs for the two study  cond itions. The key economic outcomes are employment, crime, and health care 
utilization assessed through the modified Economic Form 90 AIR/ED. The unit costs of these  outcomes 
will be drawn from literature and public data sources (e.g., Zarkin et al, 2010 ). 
Sensitivity Analysis . We will conduct sensitivity analyses to assess whether the economic results are 
affected by [CONTACT_338066]. We will perform one -way sensitivity analyses in which we 
examine the effect of changing one of the model parameter s while holding all other parameters constant. We 
will perform n-way sensitivity analyses in which n parameters of the model are varied jointly, holding other 
parameters constant.  
Norther n Michigan University  
[CONTACT_338069] and his team are at Northern Michigan University and will see and handle de -
identified data for this protocol. The Northern Michigan University IRB has determined that [CONTACT_338070] team's 
part in the research (analyzing de -identified data) is exempt. The letter from the Northern Michiga n University 
IRB is uploaded below.  
Here is NMU's Scope of Work for this project. Northern Michigan University will assist in prepar ing 
the data for analyses, and preparing and submitting manuscripts for publication and presentation. Forrest 
Toegel is an A ssistant Professor at Northern Michigan University. Under [CONTACT_338070]'s supervision, research 
assistants will work with research staf f at Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine to prepare the study 
data for analyses, and summarize and graph data for re ports, publication, and presentation.  
d. Early stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_004].  
The protocol will be stopped if the Data Safety Monit oring Board recommends that the protocol be 
stopped due to unexpected rates of adverse events related to the protocol.  
 
8. Risks  
a. Medical risks, li sting all procedures, their major and minor risks and expected frequency.  
There is essentially no risk above thos e of normal daily living associated with the training or work 
in the Therapeutic Workplace , with participation in the Individual Placement and Support program , with 
obtaining employment in community workplaces, with the incentive program, or with the data collection 
procedures used in these studies . 
Side effects may occur from wearing a SCRAM bracelet. These include sores, open wounds, 
bruising, skin irritation and redness. Individuals who  currently have nickel or other metal allergies, deep 
vein thrombosis , or leg ulcers  may be more likely to experience side effects of wearing SCRAM.  
Side effects may occur from wearing a BACtrack Skyn bracelet. T hese include skin irritation  and 
redness . 
 
b. Steps taken to minimize the risks.  
We will take several steps to minim ize the risks associated with wearing SCRAM. P articipants will 
be taught how to clean around and underneath their SCRAM bracelet s to minimize t he risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_338037] . Study staff will inspect the area surrounding participants’ bracelets for ski n redness, sores, 
bruising, or irritation when participants attend the research site to transmit the data stored on their 
bracelet s. The bracel et may be loosened or switched to the other ankle. Participants who experience 
sores, open wounds, or severe brui sing, irritation or redness will be seen by [CONTACT_1003], who will 
determine whether the participant may continue wearing SCRAM.    
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/[ADDRESS_417867] confidentiality, all research participants are identified by [CONTACT_338067] 
(Participant  IDs) consisting of their initials and sequentially -assigned participant numbers on most forms 
and data files, and not by [CONTACT_2249]. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_338038] a locked container, and 
kept in a locked, secured area when not in use. All r esearch data are stored in locked areas accessible 
only to research staff and are not left unattended. Documents with confidential information are shredded 
before being discarded. Confidential information is never given to anyone outside of the research pr ogram 
without the explicit written permission of the research participant. Only selected designated staff members 
are approved to give confiden tial information out after obtaining explicit written permission from the 
participant. All research staff are tra ined in these procedures. We collect only general information about 
participant activities, legal and illegal. We do not collect information ab out specific illegal acts. In addition 
to these procedures, all persons who visit or work at the Center for Learn ing and Heatlh are required to 
sign a confidentiality agreement, in which they agree not to disclose any confidential information that they 
may become aware of in the course of their time at the center. All participants are also invited to take a 
break and  leave the workplace when visitors come to the Center for Learning and Health. To further 
protect confidentiality, we will obtain a confidentia lity certificate from NIH to protect data collected in this 
study.  Finally, to protect the confidentiality of pa rticipants who become employed in a community job, we 
will not interact with an employer unless the participant gives explicit written permissi on. 
c. Plan for reporting unanticipated problems or study deviations.  
Unanticipated problems or study deviations wil l be reported based on the guidelines of the Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine IRB.  
 
d. Legal risks such as the risks that would be asso ciated with breach of confidentiality.  
There are risks that the confidential information we collect could be reve aled to people not involved 
in the research such as a friend, relative, or an outside organization.  This could be embarrassing to the 
participa nt if the participant wanted to keep participation in the study secret.  The legal risks are limited 
because we co llect only general information about participant activities, legal and illegal.  We do not collect 
information about specific illegal acts.  Thus , the risks associated with the assessments are not greater 
than the risks associated with routine psychological examinations or tests.  
 
e. Financial risks to the participant s. 
There are no financial risks above those of normal daily living.  Each participant  is responsible for 
ensuring that the earning of incentives  is reported properly to relevant government or privat e agencies and 
for determining whether or not the earning s will affect any benefits they might receive from those 
agencies.  
9. Benefits  
a. Descriptio n of the probable benefits  for the participant and for society . 
Benefits for the participant. All participants wi ll have access to training in skills that could be 
useful in obtaining employment. Training will be provided in typi[INVESTIGATOR_007], keypad, general compute r use, 
reading, math, GED preparation, and the use of Microsoft computer applications . IPS supported 
employment w ill be provided to help participants become employed.  Since all participants in this study 
will be unemployed at the start of the study, this experience could help prepare participants for 
employment.  
All participants will receive monetary incentives for participating in the Therapeutic Workplace 
during the first month of the study. Participants in the IPS Plus Abstinence -Contingent Wage 
Supplem ents group will get abstinence -contingent incentives for engaging in IPS supported employment 
and for obtaining a nd maintaining competitive employment. These incentives should increase 
participation in the Therapeutic Workplace, development of job skills, employment, and abstinence from 
alcohol. The earnings and payments could also have the benefit of providing a mea ns of purchasing 
things that the individual would not otherwise be able to afford, including housing.  
 Benefits for society . The study will eva luate the effectiveness, cost -effectiveness, and cost -
benefit of IPS Plus Abstinence -Contingent Wage Supplements in increasing employment and promoting 
long-term alcohol abstinence. This novel intervention could be an effective and economically sound 
means  of promoting long -term alcohol abstinence and employment in homeless adults with alcohol use 
disorder, a populat ion at considerable risk for a range of adverse outcomes including HIV because of 
 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/[ADDRESS_417868]  induc tion period for 1 week, where they can earn $20 every weekday or a total of 
$100. Participants who complete the induction period will be invite d to enroll in the Therapeutic Workplace  
for about 3 weeks, where they can earn about $ 32/weekday  for participati ng in our job skills training 
program. In total, participants will be able to earn $ 580 in Phase 1.  
 Phase 2 Abstinence -Contingent Wage Supplem ents. Participants in the Abstinence -Contingent 
Wage Supplement group will be able to earn wage supplements of up  to $8 per hour for up to 40 hours 
per week for 2 4 weeks. In total, participants in the Abstinence -Contingent Wage Supplement group will be 
able to earn up to $ 7,680  in wage supplements.  
 Participant payment for wearing alcohol biosensor . Participants can earn daily pay  for wearing 
their wearable alcohol biosensor. Participants can earn $0.25 per hour for wearing their alcohol biosensor 
and can e arn a $[ADDRESS_417869] receive permission to remove their bracelet by [CONTACT_338068] a photo or video of themselves  wearing the brace let after they put the bracelet back on.  In 
total, participants could earn a maximum of $11 per day for wearing t heir biosensor.  
Participant payment for assessments . Assessments will be conducted for all participants at 
intake to determine eligibility and  characterize the population , immediately prior to random assignment, 
every 30 days throughout the 6-month interv ention evaluation period after random assignment and then at 
6 and 12 months after the end of the intervention evaluation period.  Participants will be paid $30 for the 
intake and monthly assessment s during the 1-month training  period and the 6-month interv ention 
evaluation period, and $50 for the assessment s conducted 6 and 12 month s after the end of the 
intervention evaluation period . In total, participants will be able to earn up to $ [ADDRESS_417870] the optional 
opportunity to earn incentives  for referring people who are interested in  the study.  If a referral attends the 
initial screening appointment and completes the necessary assessments, the  participant who referred the 
person will receive up to $20.  If a referred person enrolls in the main study, the participant who referred 
the person will receive up to $40 for making the referral.  
Device Return . To help ensure that participants return the ir wearable alcohol biosensor  bracelet s 
after their study participation ends, participants will be able to earn $100 for returning the bracelet  to our 
staff.  
 
11. Costs  
a. Detail costs of study procedure(s) or drug (s) or substance(s) to participant s and identif y 
who will pay for them.  
There will be no costs to participants for any services or treatment provided in this study.  All 
procedures in the st udy will be paid for out of grant funds.  