Cover Page: ECT Current Amplitude and medial temporal lobe engagement ( MH111826 ) 
 
Study Registry ID: [REMOVED]  
 
Document Date: November 24, [ADDRESS_911085] series with right unilateral (d’Elia) electrode placement (28). Subjects were 
randomized and blinded to 600, 700, and [ADDRESS_911086] randomization was 
completed with a random number generator prior to study initiation with a 1:1:1 ratio for each study arm. As 
determined by [CONTACT_77886], 500  mA pulse amplitudes compromised efficacy. Subjects received clinical, 
neuropsychological, and imaging assessments pre - (V1), mid - (after the sixth ECT treatment, V2) and post -
ECT (within one week of finishing the ECT series, V3). If subjects were non -responsive to the assigned pulse 
amplitude (< 25%  reduction in from baseline HDRS 24 at the second visit), subjects then received bitemporal (BT) 
electrode placement (800  mA, 1.0 milliseconds (ms) pulse width) for the remainder of the ECT series (29). 
 Subjects received ultrabrief  pulse width (0.3  ms) until a planned interim data analysis (n = 47) to ensure 
that the experimental arms were equipoise with the active comparator. The analysis demonstrated a trend 
towards the lower efficacy of the 600  mA arm. We subsequently increased t he pulse width from ultrabrief (0.3  ms) 
to brief (1.0  ms) all treatment arms for the remainder of the study (n = 15). The rationale for the increased pulse 
width, as approved by [CONTACT_7681] (NIH) and the study Data Safety Monitoring B oard 
(DSMB), was to improve the efficacy of the lower amplitude arm. The strength -duration curve established that 
lower pulse amplitudes required longer pulse widths to elicit neuronal activation potential (30, 31) . Thus, we 
reasoned that the increased pulse width may improve the neuronal activation potential and the antidepressant 
efficacy of the [ADDRESS_911087] session determined individual seizure thresho lds with subsequent treatments provided at 
six times the seizure threshold with similar adjustments to pulse train duration and frequency across all amplitude 
arms (32). Further adjustments to charge were permitted to ensure adequate seizure morphology and duration 
based on clinical  judgment. Motor, electroencephalographic, and heart rate parameters were recorded for each 
treatment. The treating anesthesiologist determined the appropriate dose of methohexital, a general anesthetic, 
and succinylcholine, a depolarizing neuromuscular bl ocker.   
 
Statistical Analyses  
Clinical and demographic variables were assessed with chi -square or one -way analysis of variance. For the 
primary outcomes (change in HDRS 24 and HVLT -R retention raw score), we performed a full longitudinal model 
with an unstructured repeated measures cova riance matrix on subjects who completed the study in the assigned 
treatment arm. Missing values for the depression and cognitive variables (14% of values) were imputed using 
regression multiple imputation with five iterations (33). We completed imputation for seven subjects that did not 
complete the final post -ECT assessment and for sparse missing cognitive  values. When a subject had all their 
values imputed for a variable, then that subject was removed from the analysis of that variable . In addition, we 
performed a separate analysis with subjects receiving bitemporal electrode placement between V2 and V3. For 
depression outcomes, the dependent variable was HDRS at each visit and the independent variables included 
progress ( time within the ECT series: pre -, mid -, and post -ECT), amplitude, age, sex, pulse width and the 
following interactions: progress/amp litude, progress/sex, and progress/pulse width. For primary cognitive 
outcomes, the dependent variable was HVLT -R retention scores at each visit with the same model plus the Test 
of Premorbid Functioning Standard Scores as an additional covariate. In addit ion to our primary cognitive 
outcome, we assessed secondary outcomes for the additional cognitive measures using the same cognitive 
statistical model. Follow -up contrasts included the following: 1)  longitudinal changes within each amplitude (e.g., 
HDRS 24 differences in 600  mA subjects between V1 and V2) ; 2) amplitude contrasts during the mid - and post -
ECT assessments (e.g., HDRS 24 differences 600 and 700  mA at V2); 3) sex differences; and 4) pulse width 
differences . The amplitude contrasts were averaged for  sex and pulse width with Tukey’s method for multiple 
pairwise comparisons.  
 