0 
  
 
 
Protocol for : Understanding and Addressing the Social Determinants of 
Health for Families of Children with Sickle Cell Anemia within Pediatric Hematology (SCA WE CARE)  
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
Date:    4/8/2019  
 
Statistical Plan :  pages 13 -15 
 
 
 
PIs:   Patricia Kavanagh, MD  
         p atricia. [EMAIL_6054]  
        Arvin Garg, MD  
        [EMAIL_6055]   
  
1 
  
Understanding and Addressing the Social Determinants of Health for Families of Children with Sickle Cell Anemia within Pediatric Hematology (SCA WE CARE) 
Table of Contents  
Specific Aims/Objectives  ............................................................................................................................... 1 
Background and Significance  ........................................................................................................................ 2 
Preliminary Studies  ....................................................................................................................................... 4 
Design and Methods  ..................................................................................................................................... 4 
Study Design  ............................................................................................................................................. 4 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  ....................................................................................................................... 5 
Patient Selection  ....................................................................................................................................... 5 
Description of Study Treatments or Exposures/Predictors  ....................................................................... 6 
Definition of Primary and Secondary Outcomes/Endpoints  ..................................................................... 7 
Data Collection Methods, Assessments, Interventions and Schedule  ...................................................... 8 
Study Timeline  ........................................................................................................................................ 11 
Adverse Event Criteria and Reporting Procedures  ..................................................................................... 12 
Data Management Methods  ....................................................................................................................... 12 
Quality Control Method  .............................................................................................................................. 13 
Data Analysis Plan  ....................................................................................................................................... 13 
Statistical Power and Sample Considerations  ............................................................................................. 14 
Study Organization  ...................................................................................................................................... 15 
Multiple Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_307316]  ..................................................................................... 15 
Overall structure of the study team, by [CONTACT_307340]  ................................................................................. 18 
References  .................................................................................................................................................. 18 
 
Specific Aims/Objectives  
Although pediatric professional guidelines are now recommending medical providers screen for social 
determinants of health (SDoH), there is no evidence to date that SDoH screening improves the health of 
pediatric patients and studies have fallen short of exploring its impact on the health of children with medical complexity, including children with sickle cell anemia (SCA) . The proposed mixed -methods study 
aims to understand the implemen tation of a previously tested, efficacious SDOH screening and referral 
intervention in the outpatient pediatric hematology setting; qualitatively assess possible mechanisms for such interventions on improving child health; and obtain population -specific empi[INVESTIGATOR_307317] 
a large -scale clinical trial.  
2 
  
Our specific aims  are to:  (1) Implement WE CARE in two pediatric hematology clinics in order to field 
test key study logistics  and understand the facilitators and barriers to implementation and accelerate its 
adoption;  (2) Obtain population -specific empi[INVESTIGATOR_307318] a large -scale 
multi -site cluster RCT of WE CARE that will definitely assess its impact on improving health outcomes for 
children with SCA; and  (3) Qualitatively asse ss possible mechanisms linking social determinants of health  
interventions to improved health outcomes.  
Background and Significance  
Social determinants of health are key drivers of health and health disparities, beginning in childhood.  
The social determinants of health (SDoH) – the social circumstances in which people are born, work, live, 
and age –  affect disparities in risk and health outcomes through a myriad of physiological and behavioral 
pathways.2,23- [ADDRESS_376137] estimated that up to 70% of variation in health outcomes is attributable to 
SDoH.27 SDoH such as unmet material needs (e.g., food insecurity), has been linked to detrimental 
health and healthcare utilization outcomes, including higher rates of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602].28-[ADDRESS_376138] segment of the 
population in the [LOCATION_002] (US) with racial/ethnic minority children disproportionately affected.33 
Childhood is a particularly vulnerable period for the imprinting of harmful environmental exposures associated with poverty and its related adverse social determinants (e.g., food insecurity, housing instability, parental unemployment, and lack of high -quality childcare)
24,31,[ADDRESS_376139] 
been designated as a priority population for health care policy given their high healthcare need and 
utilization4,36 compared to healthy children.  Overall, approximately one in five children in the US has a 
medically complex condition.5  
The medical system is increasingly recommending routine SDoH screening at healthcare visits . 
Although addressing SDoH has long been a goal of the US public health system, it was not a key priority 
in the delivery of medical care until recently when the World Health Organization (WHO) and National Academy of Medicine (NAM) emphasized the need for clinicians and health systems to address SDoH within the context of healthcare visits.
37-39 In 2016, the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) became 
the first medical organization to recommend screening for SDoH at pediatric visits,[ADDRESS_376140]. Garg’s  
(study PI)  WE CARE instrument as an example of an evidence -based screening tool. In addition, the 
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services invested $[ADDRESS_376141] developed value -based payment models 
that provide additional payments for patients identified as having unmet social needs, such as housing,42 
thereby [CONTACT_307341].  
 
The Problem: There is no evidence that SDoH screening improves child health, and the underlying 
mechanisms for how SDoH screening may improve health remains unexamined. Although there is 
strong epi[INVESTIGATOR_307319],
28-30 there is no evidence, to date, demonstrating the success of SDoH screening and referral 
interventions on improving child health.  Two recent studies offer promising preliminary results: one 
demonstrating increased parental report of excellent/very good child health in primarily healthy 
children; the other demonstrating improvement in blood pressure and cholesterol levels in adults.14,43  
 
In addition, the underlying mechanisms by [CONTACT_307342] 
3 
 child health are also currently unknown. Understanding the processes linking SDoH interventions and 
health outcomes has the dual benefit of contributing to our scientific knowledge of SDoH and informing treatment targets in future intervention studies. Since SDoH burden falls disproportionately on those with lower socioeconomic status and on racial/ethnic minority families, it will be critical to examine 
these processes within diverse samples. Given the significance of this emerging field, the NIH is 
convening a workshop on SDoH screening and referral interventions and its future research directions in 
May 2018.
3 
  
Children with sickle cell anemia are the ideal population in which to study how SDoH interventions 
may improve health.  Sickle cell disease affects approximately 100,000 people in the US, primarily those 
of African and Hispanic descent.15,44 Sickle cell anemia (SCA) is the most severe form and represents 
approximately 60% of the sickle cell population.1 Manifestations of SCA, including sepsis and painful 
vaso -occlusive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841], begin in infancy and expected survival is approximately 45 years, nearly 30 
years less than for African Americans overall.15 Use of daily antibiotic prophylaxis in children with SCA 
until age 5 years reduces mortality, especially in early infancy.18,19 Guidelines also recommend that 
hydroxyurea (HU) be offered to children with SCA beginning at 9 months of age.45 46 However, adherence 
to therapi[INVESTIGATOR_307320] .47 One study of >2,800 eligible children with SCA found that 
only 18% had prescriptions filled for antibiotic prophylaxis for ≥300 days, far short of the recommended 
daily intake.48 In addition, a study of a state Medicaid program showed that only 41% of children 
prescribed HU were adherent, defined as supplied (from pharmacy records) to cover at least 80% of 
days in a year.49 A recent meta -analysis found mixed findings regarding the possible mechanisms 
underlying low rates of medication adherence among children with sickle cell disease, with medication barriers (e.g., competing demands) having the strongest effect size.
[ADDRESS_376142] children with SCA live in impoverished households. A multicenter clinical trial found that children with SCA live in households with a median income of $6,250.
16 Another study also demonstrated that over 90% of families of children with sickle 
cell disease have at least one unmet material need.17 Although not yet examined empi[INVESTIGATOR_3675],  per 
Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs model (see C1)51 it is very likely that difficulties related to adverse SDoH, 
such as food or housing insecurity, likely impede parents’ ability to adhere to treatment plans52 by 
[CONTACT_307343].[ADDRESS_376143] of an evidence -informed SDoH 
screening and referral intervention on improving child health outcomes due to its significant morbidity; most children with SCA live in impoverished households;
16 and the known association between poverty 
and SDoH that likely impacts parental disease management.  
 
 
Significance : Our proposal has significant potential to inform the burgeoning SDoH interventional 
research field, transform current clinical practice and improve health outcomes for medically complex 
children . Although medical organizations and payers are increasingly recommending routine SDoH 
screening in medical practices,1,37- 39 there is an absence of clinical trials on SDoH screening and referral 
interventions that assess health outcomes. This study addresses this clinically - and policy -relevant 
research gap by [CONTACT_307344] (such as those with SCA), and exploring its impact on healthcare utilization and outcomes. Studies and practice guidelines for SCA, to date, primarily focus on pharmacologic interventions, as opposed to modifying 
social and environmental contributors to disease. While the contribution of social adversity and socioeconomic factors to the morbidity and mortality of SCA has been demonstrated,
[ADDRESS_376144] they 
carefully considered the processes through which SDoH impacts child health outcomes. Our mixed -
4 
 methods findings will inform whether, and how, to provide SDoH screening on a larger scale in the 
future. It will also add significantly to the sickle cell disease implementation science field since there is a great need for this type of research given the paucity of prior dissemination and implementation studies in children with SCA.
56 More broadly, the knowledge gained from this proposal is likely to be directly 
translatable and applicable not only to SCA but also to other medically complex conditions. From a 
societal perspective, this proposal has great significance, as approximately one in five children in the US 
has a medically complex condition such as SCA,5 and these children are a priority population for 
healthcare policy given their high healthcare need and utilization.4,36 Given the near universal reach of 
child healthcare,57 this proposal has significant public health implications.  
Preliminary Studies  
Family -centered approach for addressing SDoH for low- income children utilizing existing clinical 
infrastructure: the WE CARE Model . Our extensive groundwork13,53 has demonstrated that a family -
centered screening and 
referral intervention that 
relies on parental desire for 
assistance administered 
during pediatric preventive care visits led to increased provider referrals for, and parental receipt of, community resources. WE CARE (W ell-Child care visit, 
Evaluation, Community 
Resources, Advocacy, 
Referral, Education) was 
efficacious in connecting families to community resources and resulted in higher parental employment, receipt of fuel assistance and childcare, and lower odds of living in a 
homeless shelter,
13 thereby [CONTACT_307345]. 
Ongoing work is providing a better understanding for the barriers (e.g., staff burden, lack of time and/or 
resources) and facilitators (e.g., clinic culture and leadership) for implementing this relatively simple 
intervention in general pediatric practice. This is necessary given the well- known challenge of 
incorporating efficacious innovations into routine medical practice.[ADDRESS_376145] targeted parents with healthy children.  
Design and Methods  
Study Design  
Study 1 (Aim 1):  The implementation of a practice -based social determinants of health screening and 
referral intervention in two pediatric hematology clinics to field test key study logistics and 
understand the facilitators and barriers to implementation and accelerate its adoption  
Two of our four proposed pediatric hematology clinical sites will be randomized to implement WE CARE 
as standard of care for SCA patients.  At baseline and every six months throughout the study period, the 
[LOCATION_011] Medical Center -based team (hereafter termed the core research team) will conduct  focus Our team has conducted extensive groundwork to develop and implement a 
family -centered system for SDoH screening and referral in safety -net 
pediatric primary care clinics.16,30,[ADDRESS_376146] crafted and validated a 
screening tool for six material needs and tested it among parents at general pediatric clinics. Given its reliance on existing clinical processes and infrastructure (i.e. no additional staff), we have purposefully measured 
implementation metrics in our recent studies. We have developed a system 
and feasible workflow (with documented acceptability for providers, staff, and parents) for administering the tool in the primary care setting. This work 
documented that use of the tool results in identification of unmet SDoH 
needs for which parents desire help, elicits referrals by [CONTACT_307346], and leads to actual receipt of services by [CONTACT_3654]. We 
have also developed simple, easy -to-use community resource sheets to 
address each type of social need.  
 
5 
 groups  with stakeholders (e.g., clinical and administrative staff) at each of the four pediatric hematology 
clinic sites  to better understand the barriers and facilitators to implementation of WE CARE.   The site PI  
[INVESTIGATOR_307321].   Before beginning each  focus gr oup, the [LOCATION_011] 
Medical Center PIs and members of their  research team will meet with clinic stakeholders at their staff 
meetings and provide an overview of the study.   The [LOCATION_011] Medical Center -based team  will conduct 
focus groups with pediatric hematology clinic staff every six months throughout the study period.   
 
Study 2 (Aim 2):  Obtaining population -specific empi[INVESTIGATOR_307318] a 
future large -scale cluster RCT of WE CARE for children with SCA  
For this study, we will be conducting a pi[INVESTIGATOR_307322]. Two of our four proposed pediatric hematology 
clinical sites ([LOCATION_011] Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], Connecticut Children’s Medical Center, Hasbro Children’s 
Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (HCH) and Yale -New Haven Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]) will be randomized to implement WE CARE as 
standard of care for SCA patients. To assign the sites to either the control or the intervention group, we 
will first fix the number of sites to each group (i.e. 2 sites per group) and then assign sites to group using 
the random function for the uniform distribution in SAS 9.4.  
 
Study 3 (Aim 3):  Qualitatively assess possible mechanisms linking SDoH interventions to improved 
health outcomes, such as increasing a parent’s ability to manage their child’s disease through 
medication adherence  
The [LOCATION_011] Medical Center -based team  will conduct individual in -depth, semi -structured interviews with 
English - and Spanish -speaking parents of children aged ≤12 years who receive medical care for SCA at 
the two control  sites (i.e., those in which the WE CARE intervention is not implemented).   
 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria  
 Staff (e.g., physicians, nurses, front desk) at the outpatient hematology sites who are able to 
converse in English or Spanish, and are 18 years of age or older.  
 English - or Spanish -speaking parents and caregivers of children with SCA aged 0 -12 who receive 
care at one of the four study sites  and take daily penicillin or hydroxyurea . 
Exclusion Criteria 
 Staff at the  four sites who are unable to converse in English or Spanish or are under 18 years of 
age.  
 Parents < 18 years of age, parents with children with SCA who are 13 years of age or older, 
parents whose child does not take daily penicillin or hydro xyurea, foster parents,  caregivers who 
speak neither English nor Spanish, and caregivers previously enrolled in the study.  
 
Patient Selection  
Study 1 (Aim 1): The implementation of a practice -based social determinants of health screening and 
referral intervention in two pediatric hematology clinics to field test key study logistics and 
understand the facilitators and barriers to implementation and accelerate its adoption  
The site PI [INVESTIGATOR_307321] . The BMC -based team will provide an 
information sheet about Aim [ADDRESS_376147] time to 
consider the consent and come to the focus groups ready with questions regarding the consent.  Before 
beginning the focus groups, the study PIs (Garg and Kavanagh) and members of the research team will 
meet with clinic stakeholders at their staff meetings and provide an overview of the study. All eligible 
participants will be told that taking part in the research is voluntary and that the decision to not take 
part will not result in any loss of benefits to which they are entitled to or effect their employment. We 
[ADDRESS_376148] that there 
will be staff turnover during the study and we will be in regular communication with the medical 
director to monitor and make sure the research team is aware of this.  
  
Study 2 (Aim 2): Obtaining population -specific empi[INVESTIGATOR_307318] a 
future large -scale cluster RCT of WE CARE for children with SCA  
Eligible study participants will be identified by [CONTACT_307347]. We will also ask front desk personnel to assist us in identifying potential subjects, if they are 
willing, and, in some sites, to assist in handing out informational flyers . If a family is identified as likely to 
meet eligibility criteria,   a member of the study team will approach potentially eligible parents in a 
private location at the practice, such as an exam room. If the parent is eligible for the study, a study 
team member will review the study with him/her. . 
   
Study 3 (Aim 3): Qualitatively assess possible mechanisms linking SDoH interventions to improved 
health outcomes, such as increasing a parent’s ability to manage their child’s disease through 
medication adherence  
Families will be enrolled from the two control sites (i.e., those in which the WE CARE intervention is not 
implemented). A research assistant at the two control sites will coordinate recruitment efforts, which 
will include telling potentially -eligible families about the study and conducting initial eligibility screening. 
Families who are both eligible and interested in participating will be scheduled for an interview, which 
will occur in the hematology clinic on the same day as a future  routine medical visit to decrease 
participant burden. Study participants will be engaged in the interview only once; therefore, we will not 
need to retain participants in this study.  
 
Description of Study Treatments or Exposures/Predictors  
WE CARE SDoH Screening and Referral intervention : WE CARE is a relatively simple intervention that has 
two key components: (1) the WE CARE SDoH Screening Survey and (2) SDoH Community Resource 
sheets.  The intervention will be fully implemented at two of four study sites, after which subjects will be 
enrolled to collect the outcomes described on pages 7 -8, Definition of Primary and Secondary 
Outcomes/Endpoints.  
  
Table 1. Summary of the WE CARE Components.  
Key Components:  Description  
WE CARE SDoH Screening Survey (see 
attachments)  Administered at all visits  
Identifies 6 unmet material needs and parent desire for 
assistance with:  childcare, employment, food security, 
utilities (heating/cooling, water, electricity) , housing, 
inadequate education 
3rd grade reading level; 0.[ADDRESS_376149] reliability of original 
survey69 
SDoH Community Resources  One-page information sheets listing available resources  
5th grade reading level  
  
Component 1: WE CARE SDoH Screening Survey.  The survey consists of 12 questions designed to: (1) 
briefly identify 6 unmet material needs (e.g., childcare, employment, food security, household heat, 
7 
 housing inadequate education) by [CONTACT_6270] -report (e.g., “Are you employed?”) and (2) using a family -
centered approach, determine whether parents would like assistance with each problem (i.e. “If no, do 
you want help?”). Parents wanting help will receive a resource referral (see below). The survey has been 
translated into Spanish. Because it is a component of the practice -wide implementation of the WE CARE 
SDoH screening and referral program, t he survey will be given at all visits by [CONTACT_307348] —not solely to caregivers who 
enroll in the study . The front desk staff and/or research staff will instruct parents to complete the 
screener. Clinic staff will be trained to review the WE CARE SDoH survey at visits and to provide 
community resource information sheets to parents with needs (see below). The completed surveys will 
be scanned into the EHR.  
  
Component 2: Family Resource Book . The Family Resource book will contain one -page information 
sheets listing community resources (e.g., food pantries) and their contact [CONTACT_3031] (e.g., telephone 
number) for each specific material need (e.g., food insecurity). Information sheets will be specific to 
each site and written at, or below, the 8th grade level.[ADDRESS_376150] (EHR) , as done in previous studies . 
 
Definition of Primary and Secondary Outcomes/Endpoints  
Because qualitative research is by [CONTACT_307349], we have not defined outcomes for the  focus 
group discussions with practice staff ( Aim 1);  however,  we will use the Promoting Action on Research 
Implementation in Health Services (PARIHS) framework to guide these discussions about facilitators  and 
barriers to WE CARE implementation. Key areas of exploration will be  (1) evidence: attitudes and beliefs 
about evidence of the WE CARE system; (2) context: organizational, systemic, and sociopolitical features 
that promote or hinder implementation of WE CARE; and (3) facilitation: attributes of the facilitation 
that supported or impeded the implementation, and needed adaptations.  
  
Primary outcomes for  Aim 2  include the following:  
• Identification of unmet needs and provision of referrals . Previously utilized forms will be used 
during baseline and follow -up questionnaires to measure whether practitioners provided 
families resource handouts.  
• Parental enrollment in community -based resources . Baseline and follow -up questionnaires to 
measure enrollment in community resources.  
• Process measures. Data will be collected on adherence to clinic visits (appointments kept, 
cancelled, and no -show). We will collect data on medications adherence in two ways. First, we 
will collect laboratory markers that are commonly affected by [CONTACT_302460], including hemoglobin and 
hemoglobin F levels, white blood cell and absolute neutrophil counts, and MCV. We will also 
collect data on prescriptions written and filled for HU and penicillin through EHR review  and 
parent report . 
• Health outcomes : Data on vaso -occlusive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841], acute chest syndrome and sepsis will be 
collected from the EHR  at 6-month - and 12 -month follow -up. Quality of life will also be assessed 
through both the PedsQL,  which has been validated in children with sickle cell disease  and is 
responsive to change,  and the  PedsQL  Sickle Cell Disease Module.  
• Healthcare utilization outcomes : Data on emergency department visits, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], and 
clinic visits will be collected from the EHR  at baseline and [ADDRESS_376151] chosen 
8 
 emergency department visits as our primary outcome because it has been extensively, and 
commonly, used as a measure of lack of outpatient care and non -adherence to treatment 
regimens in this population.  We will also calculate ED reliance (clinic visits kept / clinic visits kept 
+ ED visits), as it has been used to discriminate frequent emergency department users.  
  
Because qualitative research is by [CONTACT_307349], we have not defined outcomes for the qualitative 
interviews with parents of children with SCA  (Aim 3) . Qualitative interviews will aim to examine parents’ 
perceptions of factors that promote or hinder effective management of their child’s SCA.  
 
Data Collection Methods, Assessments, Interventions and Schedule  
Study 1 (Aim 1):  The implementation of a practice -based social determinants of health screening and 
referral intervention in two pediatric hematology clinics to field test key study logistics and 
understand the facilitators and barriers to implementation and accelerate its adoption  
  
Study Procedures.  At baseline and every six months throughout the study period, the [LOCATION_011] Medical 
Center -based team  will conduct  focus groups  with stakeholders (e.g., clinical and administrative staff) at 
each of the four pediatric hematology clinic sites  to better understand the barriers and facilitators to 
implementation of WE CARE.   The site PI [INVESTIGATOR_307321].  The 
BMC- based team will provide an information sheet about Aim [ADDRESS_376152] focus groups (6 -8 
individuals per group) with key stakeholders identified by [CONTACT_7880] [INVESTIGATOR_307323]. They will 
include both clinic leadership and individuals known within the clinic to be thought leaders. The 
composition of these groups may vary at each time point, but the structure, discussion topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102], and goals 
of the later focus groups will be the same as the earlier focus groups. Individuals participating in multiple 
focus groups will be re -consented at each time point.  
  
Quality improvement  methodology will be used to both gather key information and optimize the 
implementation of WE CARE. We will employ the Model for Improvement’s Plan -Do-Study -Act (PDSA) 
methodology to assess the implementation of WE CARE in an iterative fashion for one year in each 
clinic. Best practices regarding key elements of the intervention will be continually assessed throughout 
the QI phase. Drs. Garg and Kavanagh will initially meet weekly with clinic stakeholders via video 
conferencing to review the WE CARE process data and identify areas for improvement. We expect, 
based on our prior experience that we will gradually scale back to monthly meetings.  This phase of the 
study will not involve human subjects.  
  
Intervention Fidelity Data:  Study staff, as we have previously done, will collect data on the 
implementation of WE CARE from the electronic health record (EHR). Specifically, to determine whether 
WE CARE  screeners were given and whether referrals were made at clinic visits , and to assess for drift 
during the study period, we will measure the scanned surveys in the EHR for SCA visits. Of note, the WE 
CARE survey has a referral checkbox that providers mark if a referral is made. Clinical staff will be 
instructed to check off the box if she/he provides an information sheet from the Family Resource Book 
[ADDRESS_376153] 10 patients who had a visit and review 
their EHR for distribution of surveys and referrals. This study phase will not involve human subjects.  
  
Materials.  The research data will include audio -recordings of focus groups. Only study PIs Drs. Garg  and 
Kavanagh, Drainoni (co -I), and trained study  staff at each of the study sites will have access to 
participants' identifying information. The site PIs and RAs from the two control sites will not have access 
to the identifiable qualitative data. We will use excel spread sheets to document our descriptive QI and 
fidelity data ( e.g., distribution of WE CARE surveys, unmet needs, referrals); no HIPAA identifiers will be 
collected.  
  
Study 2 (Aim 2):  Obtaining population -specific empi[INVESTIGATOR_307318] a 
future large -scale cluster RCT of WE CARE for children with SCA  
   
Study Procedures.  Parents will be asked to complete a baseline and 12 -month follow -up questionnaire 
at their child’s medical visit and complete a brief telephone interview 3,  6, and [ADDRESS_376154] in handing out informational flyers If a family is 
identified as likely to meet eligibility criteria, a member of the study team will approach potentially 
eligible parents in a private location at the practice, such as an exam room . If the parent is eligible for 
the study, a study team member will review the study with him/her. Informed consent will be obtained  
via written consent. The original hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_307324] a locked file in a locked room in 
the hematology research space at that site . Each clinical site will maintain a tracker linking each patient 
to a unique subject ID number, which does not contain any combination of information that allows the 
identification of a subject; this tracker will not be shared outside th at clinical site. Participants will be 
provided with a copy of their signed informed consent form.  
 
Data will be collected from parents primarily from parent -administered surveys at enrollment and at 
follow -up which will occur one year post -index visit.   These surveys will be completed using a study 
tablet (e.g., iPad)  and backed up on to  a HIPAA -compliant [LOCATION_011] Medical Center installation of REDCap, 
which is backed up on the secure, password -protected B oston University Medical Campus server.  To 
complete these surveys, subjects will enter their unique ID number. A brief telephone interview will be 
conducted 3, 6, and [ADDRESS_376155] (EHR) on child health outcomes (i.e., 
adherence to clinic visits,  medication adherence,  ED visits, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], vaso -occlusive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841], 
acute chest syndrome, and infections). Data from the EHR will be collected three times  (baseline, 6-
months post -enrollment,  and 12-months post -enrollment).  
 
*Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap) is a research focused, electronic web- based data capture 
system. REDCap is a data collection tool and allows for storage and management of both surveys and 
databases. REDCap is a secure storage system and meets HIPAA compliance standards. REDCap software 
will be used to facilitate parent consents, questionnaires, and forms.  
  
10 
 Materials.  The research data will include questionnaires completed by [CONTACT_3654]/caregivers both in -
person and via telephone, parent hair cortisol samples, and medical chart review. Only trained project 
staff at each clinical site will have access to participants' identifying information.  
   
For the hair cortisol samples, we will be following the hair collection protocol developed by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Jerrold 
Meyer from the University of [LOCATION_005] (UMASS). Hair will be cut at the level of the scalp from 2 -3 
locations and cut to 3cm at the distal end. Hair samples will be placed directly into a plastic vial; each 
vial will be labeled by [CONTACT_307350] (see below). Hair cortisol is 
stable at room temperature indefinitely, thus vials will be stored in a locked file cabinet.  
  
For the  medical chart review , existing trained research staff members at each study site, will collect the 
data.  We decided to use existing research staff for the data collection component of the study since 
getting chart review credentialing is diffic ult at each of the study sites.  At baseline and 12 -month follow -
up, medical charts will be reviewed in order to determine the number of appointments kept versus 
cancelled or no -show, the number of days covered by [CONTACT_307351], 
and blood tests for monitoring hydroxyurea (including WBC, HB F%, and MCV). At [ADDRESS_376156] syndrome, and sepsis diagnoses.  
  
All enrolled parent -child dyad study participants will be assigned ID numbers which do not contain 
personal identifiers.   All data will be tracked using these ID numbers.   The data will be stored in 
computer files that are protected by a series of passwords known only to study staff and will be stored 
separately from participant identifiers (i.e., child’s name, medical record number).   Only the PIs and the 
research staff at each clinical site will have access to subjects’ identities. The master code for each site 
will be stored in computer files on each site’s HIPAA compliant server; they will be protected by a series 
of passwords k nown only to the research staff.  The database will be stored in computer files on the 
[LOCATION_011] University Medical C ampus  HIPAA compliant server; it will also be protected by a series of 
passwords known only to the [LOCATION_011] Medical Center- based research team (hereafter termed core 
research team) . 
  
 
Study 3 (Aim 3):  Qualitatively assess possible mechanisms linking SDoH interventions to improved 
health outcomes, such as increasing a parent’s ability to manage their child’s disease through 
medication adherence  
 
Study Procedures.   The [LOCATION_011] Medical Center -based team  will conduct individual in -depth, semi -
structured interviews (~60 minutes) with English - and Spanish -speaking parents of children aged ≤12 
years who receive medical care for SCA at the two control sites (i.e., those in which the WE CARE 
intervention is not implemented).   The interviews will be conducted in a designated private area (e.g., 
exam room) in the outpatient hematology clinic. A research assistant at the two control sites will 
coordinate recruitment efforts, which will include telling potentially -eligible families about the study and 
conducting initial eligibility screening. Specifically, eligibility will be determined by [CONTACT_464] . Eligible 
children’s medical charts will be flagged. We will also ask front desk personnel to assist us in identifying 
potential subjects, if they are willing, and, in some sites, to assist in handing out informational flyers.  
The flyer will give a brief description of the project. If a family is identified as likely to meet eligibility 
criteria, a member of the study team  will approach the parent about the study during their child’s visit 
(in a private  location at the practice, such as an  exam room) and explain to them the purpose of the 
study and the expectations for the participant. Families who are both eligible and interested in 
11 
 participating will be scheduled for an interview, which will occur in the hematology clinic on the same 
day as a  future  routine medical visit to decrease participant burden. If participants are willing to 
participate and express a desire to consent during this initial encounter, the site RA will obtain written 
informed consent from participants  at this time ; however, participants will not be required to consent 
during this initial encounter, as they will be given the opportunity to consent on the day of their 
interview. The RA will work with the site PIs to schedule study participants, and the [LOCATION_011]  Medical 
Center -based research team ([CONTACT_146200] and a RA trained in qualitative methodology) will conduct 
interviews at the control sites . A maximum of [ADDRESS_376157]. 
Long and the [LOCATION_011]  Medical Center- based RA will take responsibility for performing informed consent 
procedures and collecting qualitative data (both of which will occur at the control sites), as well as 
managing and analyzing qualitative data.  Informed consent will be obtained via written consent. The 
original hard copi[INVESTIGATOR_307324] a locked file in a locked room in the hematology 
research space at that site. Each clinical site will maintain a tracker linking each patient to a unique 
subject ID number, which does not contain any combination of information that allows the identification 
of a subject; this tracker will not be shared outside that clinical site. Participants will be provided with a 
copy of their signed informed consent form.   
 
Enrollment will continue until saturation is reached (i.e., more interviews will not generate additional 
information) in primary research questions. Qualitative interviews will examine parents’ perceptions of 
factors that promote or hinder effective management of their child’s SCA.  [CONTACT_146200]’s team will conduct 
interviews in pairs, and therefore will always have a member of the research team available for 
childcare, if necessary.  
  
Materials.  The research data will include audio -recordings and transcripts of qualitative interviews with 
parents. Only study PIs ( Drs. Garg and  Kavanagh), co-I (Long), and trained project staff who are deployed 
to each of the study sites (hereafter termed core research team) will have access to participants' 
identifying information. The site PIs and RAs from the two control sites will not have access to the  
identifiable qualitative data.  However, the PIs and RAs from the control sites will be responsible for 
storing informed consent forms securely at their site.  
 
Study Timeline  
 Pre-
Award   
Year 1   
Year 2   
Year 3   
Year 4  
Quarter   1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
Obtain IRB approval  X                 
Hire and train research staff  X X                
Finalize procedure materials  X X                
Pre-implementation data collection from key 
clinic stakeholders (Aim 1)    X X              
Assessing the implementation of WE CARE 
(Aim 1)     X X X X X X X X X X X X   
Accrue study sample to measure empi[INVESTIGATOR_307325] (Aim 2)      X X X X X X        
Data collection (Aim 2)      X X X X X X X X X X    
Qualitative work assessing possible   X X X X X X          
12 
 mechanisms (Aim 3)  
Final quantitative data analysis (Aim 3)               X X X   
Writing and publication of manuscripts        X X X X X X X X X X X 
Adverse Event Criteria and Reporting Procedures  
The study PIs, Drs. Garg and Kavanagh, will meet weekly with the core research team to review study 
data, compliance with data collection and security procedures, data storage processes, any actual 
breaches of confidentiality, along with any other issues of subject safety. We believe that there is only minimal risk involved with the participants, primarily concerning breach of confidentiality. Each week, 
the study PIs will review with the research team whether any breaches of confidentiality have occurred 
along with any instances of non -compliance with the study’s protocol. Research staff will be in monthly 
contact [CONTACT_307352] [INVESTIGATOR_307326] , and to identify any 
issues with data or emerging patterns of concern . Adverse events (AEs) will be recorded and assessed by 
[CONTACT_307353], both on an individual basis and in aggregate (to discover any trends which 
could mean additional risks to subjects). Any AE or group of AEs that together meet the definition of 
Unanticipated Problem (UP) will be reported as soon as possible and within 2 business days to the 
BUMC IRB, and 7 business days to the NHLBI. An Unanticipated Problem is defined as any event that 
meets all three of the following criteria: unexpected, possibly related to the research, and suggests that the research places subjects or others at a greater risk of harm than was previously known or recognized. OHRP Guidance on Reviewing and Reporting Unanticipated Problems Involving Risks to 
Subjects or Others and Adverse Events; OHRP, HHS; January 15, 2007). Throughout the course of the 
study, the data and adherence to the processes in place to protect the data and prevent any breach of 
confidentiality will also be monitored monthly by [CONTACT_6283]. Garg and Kavanagh  (study PIs)  in consultation 
with [CONTACT_307366] (biostatistician). The study PIs are ultimately responsible for the ethical conduct of the 
study, data integrity, and overall safety of this study.  
Data Management Methods  
Aim [ADDRESS_376158] processing text files suitable for manipulation using the 
qualitative software program, N -VIVO11. The audio -tapes will be transcribed verbatim; each transcript 
will then be reviewed by a research assistant for accuracy.  Recordings will be destroyed after seven 
years.  
 
Aim [ADDRESS_376159] -index visit.   These surveys will be completed 
in REDCap* using a study tablet (e.g., iPad). REDCap  (Research Electronic Data Capture ) is a research 
focused, electronic web -based data capture system. REDCap is a data collection tool and allows for 
storage and management of both surveys and databases. REDCap is a secure storage system and meets 
HIPAA compliance standards. REDCap software will be used to facilitate parent consent, questionnaires, 
and forms.  
 
A brief telephone interview will be conducted 3, 6, and [ADDRESS_376160] (EHR) on child health outcomes (i.e., adherence to clinic visits, ED visits, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], vaso -
occlusive epi[INVESTIGATOR_1841], acute chest syndrome, and infections). Data from the EHR will be collected three 
times  (baseline, 6-months post -enrollment, and 12-months post -enrollment).  Recordings will be 
destroyed after seven years.  
 
Aim 3 . Qualitatively assess possible mechanisms linking SDoH interventions to improved health 
outcomes.   The in -depth interviews with parents will be recorded, transcribed verbatim, and checked for 
accuracy. Spanish transcripts will be translated into English to facilitate interpretation by [CONTACT_17881]. Transcripts will be entered into NVIVO11, to facilitate coding and analysis.    
Quality Control Method  
For the  medical chart review , each research assistant will periodically (every six months) review at least 
five randomly selected visits at his or her own site.   Inter -rater reliability will be determined using the 
kappa statistic.   Any discrepancies will be reviewed with t he co -PIs present and resolved. For the 
qualitative interviews and focus groups, one quarter of transcripts will be independently doub le-coded 
and compared to ensure comprehensiveness and accuracy of coding. Inter -coder concordance will be 
calculated.129 The REDCap database used for parent questionnaires will use branching logic and 
validation rules in order to diminish  opportunities for error. T here will be no opportunity for errors 
transcribing parent questionnaires into the study database , because parents will independently enter 
questionnaire responses directly into REDCap.  
Data Analysis Plan  
Aim 1 . Implement WE CARE in the outpatient pediatric hematology setting.  To code the data, we will 
analyze each interview initially according to PARIHS’s three core components: (1) evidence: attitudes 
and beliefs about evidence of the WE CARE system; (2) context: organizational, systemic, and sociopolitical features that promote or hinder implementation of WE CARE; (3) facilitation: attributes of the facilitation that supported or impeded the implementation, and needed adaptations. In general, we will follow the general procedures of grounded theory to identify themes that are unexpected. We will first create an initial set of conceptual categories using the Constant Comparative Method developed by 
[CONTACT_307354]. According to this method, the initial conceptual categories are then applied to new 
data, and the categories are revised to reflect the addition of the new data. Upon completion of this 
process and review of all transcripts, we will have then identified a series of categories that reflect 
participants’ experiences with the implementation of WE CARE. Passages referring to the different conceptual categories of the PARIHS model and other areas will be marked and identified by [CONTACT_307355]. Marked passages will be compared to enable the identification of similarities and differences across study sites. Issues of reliability and validity will be handled in the 
following way. First, two members of the study team will jointly examine each transcript to develop a 
common set of content codes, formulate coding rules and develop the codebook. They will independently code additional transcripts using the codebook; they will then meet after each transcript has been coded to compare their findings and assess the reliability of the coding rules. Discrepancies will be resolved and coding rules modified via discussion among the team. This process will be repeated with 
all coded transcripts. The goal of this qualitative analysis is to establish a shared, coherent set of codes 
and coding rules through a process of critical review and consensus building.  
  
[ADDRESS_376161] to follow -up, refusing 
participation, and enrolled. We will examine this by [CONTACT_547] (e.g., father vs. mother). We will note 
reasons for refusals. We will determine parents’ recruitment and attrition rates and receipt of WE CARE 
using descriptive statistics. We will also determine the data collection completion rate, including hair 
cortisol, for each data time point (baseline, 3 -, 6-, 9-, and 12 -month follow -up) via descriptive statistics. 
Each outcome and process variable described above will be first transformed into its final composite value/score. We will calculate within -group mean and standard deviation of our SDoH, process, 
mediator and health utilization and health outcome variables. We will also break down the intervention 
group into two subgroups differentiated by [CONTACT_307356] -up, and 
explore any differences. An intention -to-treat approach will be used to explore differences between the 
intervention and control groups. We will also report all data disaggregated by [CONTACT_547]. Two independent 
sample t -test and chi -square tests will be used to determine bivariate differences. Mixed effects 
regression models will be used to estimate the effect size of the intervention on SCA outcomes accounting for baseline differences in sociodemographics, types of SDoH, cumulative needs, receipt of services, and  a priori  determined covariates (i.e. sociodemographic characteristics). To explore potential 
moderators for the intervention effect at the parent, child and family levels (e.g., gender, race, ethnicity, 
age, language, household income), we will use Rothman’s methodology; specifically, we will conduct 
stratified analyses for each potential moderator followed by [CONTACT_307357]. We will also explore mediation of our hypothesized potential mediators between SDoH and the 
intervention with each SCA health outcome using the approach recommended by [CONTACT_38722], Lockwood, and Williams.
128 We will account for the clustering by [CONTACT_307358].92 
  
Aim 3 . Qualitatively assess possible mechanisms linking SDoH interventions to improved health 
outcomes.   Qualitative interviews will be analyzed using applied thematic analysis methodology, 
including: 1) increasing familiarity with the data and generating preliminary codes; 2) generating initial codes and coding structures, including data reduction and complication; 3) combining codes into higher -
level themes; and 4) refining and defining themes and identifying ways in which themes fit together.  A 
priori  research questions and probes will serve as the initial draft of the coding structure.  
Statistical Power and Sample Considerations  
We will enroll up to 2 35 subjects in this study, including up to 60 practice staff and 1 75 parents of 
children with SCA.  
 
Because the goal for  Aim 1  is to examine the implementation of WE CARE in the outpatient pediatric 
hematology clinical setting our sampling will be purposeful. Based on our previous experience, we 
anticipate up to 15 practice staff per site will participate in focus group discussions.  
  
For Aim 2 , we are proposing to enroll 3 5 families from each of the four study sites (2 experimental, 2 
control) to field test study logistics, including collecting empi[INVESTIGATOR_307327] a 
larger pragmatic trial. To demonstrate the feasibility of our study design, we use ED visits (primary 
15 
 outcome) and penicillin adherence as examples. Assuming a 5% error rate, and based on our R00 WE 
CARE study, we expect a cluster coefficient no larger than 0.01. Based on recent data, we expect at least 
80% of children in our control group to have at least one ED visit within our study observation period. 
We expect that our intervention group will have a much lower proportion, with ≤40% having with one or 
more ED visits. Our proposed study sample has >90% power to detect differences of at least 25% in the 
proportion of children with ED visits. In addition, based on estimates from the literature we expect a 9 -
month medication adherence of 40% and 10% in the intervention and control groups, respectively. Our 
study will have 90% power to detect differences of at least 20% in penicillin adherence, which is 
considered clinically significant. Consistent with CONSORT guidelines for pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602], we will not use 
results from this study to determine efficacy, since effects sizes from pi[INVESTIGATOR_307328]; rather we will determine empi[INVESTIGATOR_307329] a future multi- site trial.  
  
For Aim 3 , in order to explore an array of beliefs and practices regarding family contextual factors that 
promote or prevent effective SCA management, enrollment will continue until saturation is reached  (i.e. 
more interviews will not generate additional information) in primary research questions. Based on our 
previous experience, we expect [ADDRESS_376162]. Garg’s 
intimate knowledge of WE CARE and [CONTACT_307367]’s extensive expertise in treating children with Sickle 
Cell Disease make them the perfect team for this proposal. Their partnership ensures that the leaders of 
this study have the insight and know -how in both the content and target population to achieve the aims 
set forth in this proposal. Drs. Garg and Kavanagh are well -equipped to serve as study  PIs and will utilize 
their varied but complementary and synergistic expertise in the conduct of the proposed project.  
Professional Relationship: The study PIs have been colleagues for eight years with a shared interest in 
and commitment to improving care to reduce disparities in outcomes for vulnerable children. In addition 
to their routine professional interactions within the Pediatrics department, Drs. Garg and Kavanagh have successfully collaborated on implementing [CONTACT_307368]’s approach to screening and referral for social determinants of health (SDoH) in the Pediatric Primary Care Clinic at [LOCATION_011] Medical Center (BMC) via 
quality improvement methods; have submitted an abstract on this work to the Pediatric Academic 
Societies’ (PAS) Meeting; and are currently preparing a manuscript to submit to a peer- reviewed journal.  
Expertise of the study PIs: 
Arvin Garg, MD, MPH, is an  Associate Professor of Pediatrics and Assistant Dean for Student 
Affairs at [LOCATION_011] University School of Medicine (BUSM) as well as a practicing general 
pediatrician at BMC with extensive research experience. [CONTACT_307368] has been Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_307330]. He is the creator of the WE CARE screening and referral system aimed at mitigating social determinants of health, which forms the basis for the proposed implementation of screening and referral for social d eterminants in the 
outpatient Pediatric Hematology setting. His previous K99 NICHD examined the efficacy of WE CARE in pediatric clinics treating underserved populations. His current NIMHD R01 award is 
primarily designed to test the implementation and effectiveness of WE CARE in urban general 
[ADDRESS_376163] evaluation of WE CARE has demonstrated its efficacy in the 
pediatric primary care setting ; however, his prior and current studies were conducted in healthy 
children  and were not primarily designed to assess the impact of WE CARE on health outcomes . 
The current application addresses a clinically - and policy -relevant research gap in the healthcare 
delivery for children, particularly children with medically complex conditions.  This proposal also 
aims to identify the contextual factors at the family and health system levels that may impact 
the widespread adoption of SDoH interventions for medically complex children . [CONTACT_307368]’s 
expertise in implementing WE CARE into general pediatric practices and conducting clinical trials 
will be vital to ensuring the success of the project.   
Patricia Kavanagh, MD , is an Associate Professor of Pediatrics at BMC. She has spent the past 
ten years devoted to health disparities research through the lens of Sickle Cell Anemia. She was 
the recipi[INVESTIGATOR_22874] a K23 from NHLBI and recently completed a study of a home pain plan with 
children with Sickle Cell Anemia and their parents, as little is known about the current patterns 
of pain and medication use in the home setting. In addition, she has improved the quality of care for children and young adults with Sickle Cell Anemia by [CONTACT_307359]. Given her knowledge of Sickle Cell Anemia and her previous 
work with this patient population, her expertise will be vital to optimizing the intervention for 
the target population.  
Rationale for Choice of Team Members: The study PIs have assembled an expert research team that is 
well-positioned to complete the work proposed in this application. The team includes: an implementation 
expert  ([CONTACT_307369]), a biostatistician ([CONTACT_307366]), a Clinical and Biological- Health Psychologist ([CONTACT_307370]), a Pediatric Psychologist who specializes in Sickle Cell Disease ([CONTACT_307371]), and a child health policy expert ([CONTACT_307372]), all of whom have published broadly on child health disparities. In addition, 
the team includes four pediatric hematologists with significant expertise in Hemoglobinopathies, including Sickle Cell Anemia ([CONTACT_307373], [CONTACT_307374], [CONTACT_307375], and [CONTACT_307376]) . 
Scientific Responsibilities of the study PIs: The study PIs will be jointly responsible for scientific issues and 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_307331], with input from research team members.  [CONTACT_307368] will oversee Aims [ADDRESS_376164]. Raphael (a national leader in child health policy) 
and his national reputation in incorporating SDoH screening and referral interventions into the delivery 
of medical care.  [CONTACT_307367] will be the liaison to participating sites given her longstanding 
relationship with the medical directors at each sites, leadership role in sickle cell disease treatment, and 
involvement in the New England Sickle Cell Consortium. She will also oversee Aim 3  given her expertise 
and clinical experience in the care of children with Sickle Cell Anemia.  
Administrative Responsibilities of the study PIs: The study PIs will be jointly responsible for 
administrative management. [CONTACT_307368] will serve as contact [CONTACT_976] [INVESTIGATOR_307332]. [CONTACT_307368] will also be responsible for supervising the Research Coordinator and other 
staff. [CONTACT_307367] will serve as the liaison to the participating clinical sites and will be actively involved in 
monitoring study recruitment and attrition. The study PIs will share  responsibility for fiscal and 
regulatory activities of the project.  
17 
 Communication: The study  PIs’ offices are located on the same floor of the Vose Hall Building on the 
[LOCATION_011] University Medical Campus, therefore it will be easy for the study PIs to communicate 
regularly . They will hold weekly meetings in person , and will communicate as needed in between 
scheduled meetings. Research team members will participate in these meetings as needed.  
Resolving disputes: In the unlikely event that a conflict develops, the study PIs will meet in person 
and attempt to resolve the dispute. If they fail to resolve the dispute, the disagreement will be 
referred to an arbitration committee consisting of one impartial senior executive from BMC and two 
impartial senior executives mutually agreed upon by [CONTACT_307360]. No members of the arbitration 
committee will be directly involved in the research grant or disagreement.  
Publication and Data Access: The study PIs will develop procedures for authorship of publications and 
presentations, as well as access to the de- identified data. Authorship will be based on the relative 
scientific contributions of the study PIs and other collaborators. Procedures will be subject to 
modification based on input from the research team. Given the extent to which many members of this 
project have collaborated successfully in previous research studies, the study PIs do not an ticipate 
problems in this area.  
Responsibilities of the Site PIs: Site PIs will be responsible  for overseeing the day -to-day research 
operations at their respective sites. They will be responsible for meeting regulatory obligations, such as 
obtaining informed consent, overseeing the implementation of the approved protocol, and reporting 
unanticipated problems and study progress to the single IRB ( sIRB ). Site investigators will communicate 
relevant information necessary for the sIRB to consider local context issues and state/local regulatory 
requirements during its deliberations. Participating sites will rely on the sIRB to satisfy the regulatory 
requirements relevant to the ethical review.  
 
The sIRB will be hosted at [LOCATION_011] Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], for which [CONTACT_307377] is the site PI. She is a 
pediatric hematologist dedicated to clinical care and advancing clinical research for patients with 
hemoglobinopathies, including sickle cell disease (SCD) and thalassemia. During her fellowship, she 
conducted research in the laboratory of [CONTACT_307378] in the Department of Hematology at 
Brigham and Women’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], with a focus on fetal hemoglobin induction for SCD treatment. Her lab -
based research projects were translational in scope and supported her long -standing goal of performing 
clinical research in hemoglobinopathy populations. After fellowship, she sought to transition away from the lab, and has gained experience in a variety of clinical research studies. As the co -PI [INVESTIGATOR_307333] -sponsored trial of gene therapy for patients with SCD, she is the primary protocol author, and has 
worked with a multidisciplinary clinical research team to successfully complete several pre -IND 
regulatory approvals. As the co PI [INVESTIGATOR_307334] a stem 
cell mobilizing agent in patients with sickle cell disease, she successfully applied to the FDA for an IND 
and to the BCH IRB for approval, developed the case report forms, led the subject recruitment process, and is currently complet ing subject participation. She is  currently the site PI [INVESTIGATOR_8178] a phase [ADDRESS_376165] enrollment, communication with industry sponsor and medical monitors, IRB communication, and other aspects of trial management. During her  
training and career at BCH and DFCI, she has  had the opportunity to work with many leaders in non -
malignant hematology. Along with a dedicated team of social workers and nurses, she is a regular 
participant in outreach and education projects for our SCD patients and  families. Her clinical research 
experience, leadership role in the hemoglobinopathy program at BCH, active SCD patient panel, and 
access to superb clinical research support staff will allow her to successfully serve as the [LOCATION_011] 
Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307335].  
18 
  
Overall structure of the study team, by [CONTACT_307361] 1 (Aim 1): The implementation of a practice -based social determinants of health screening and 
referral intervention in two pediatric hematology clinics to field test key study logistics and 
understand the facilitators and barriers to implementation and accelerate its adoption  
The study team will include the study PIs (Drs. Garg and Kavanagh); [CONTACT_307369] (implementation 
expert); site PI [INVESTIGATOR_307336]  ([CONTACT_307373], [CONTACT_307374], [CONTACT_307375], [CONTACT_307376]); and 
the research staff. [CONTACT_307368] will oversee the study given his experience and prior collaborations with [CONTACT_307379] on related WE CARE implementation studies.  
 
Study 2 (Aim 2): Obtaining population -specific empi[INVESTIGATOR_307318] a 
future large -scale cluster RCT of WE CARE for children with SCA  
The study team will include the study PIs (Drs. Garg and Kavanagh); [CONTACT_307366] (Biostatistician); site PI 
[INVESTIGATOR_307336] ([CONTACT_307373], [CONTACT_307374], [CONTACT_307375], [CONTACT_307376]); and the research 
staff. [CONTACT_307368] will oversee the study given his experience and expertise in conducing cluster RCTs and history of successful collaborations with [CONTACT_307366].  
 Study 3 (Aim 3): Qualitatively assess possible mechanisms linking SDoH interventions to improved 
health outcomes, such as increasing a parent’s ability to manage their child’s disease through 
medication adherence  
The study team will include the study PIs (Drs. Garg and Kavanagh); [CONTACT_146200] (clinical and biological-
health psychology expert); site PI [INVESTIGATOR_307336]  ([CONTACT_307373], [CONTACT_307374], [CONTACT_307375], 
[CONTACT_307376]); and the research staff. [CONTACT_307367] will oversee the study given her expertise, prior 
qualitative research work and clinical experience in the care of children with Sickle Cell Anemia.  
 
References  
1. Machledt D. Addressing the social determinants of health through Medicaid managed care. Issue Brief 
(Commonwealth Fund). 2017;2017:1 -9. 
2. American Academy of Pediatrics. Poverty and child health in the [LOCATION_002]. Pediatrics. 2016;137(4).  
3. National Institutes of Health. Screening and referral for social determinants of health: Innovative health 
care applications and future directions. At https://www.scgcorp.com/socialdeterminants18/. Accessed on 
February 20, 2018.  
4. Kuo DZ, Houtrow AJ. Recognition and management of medical complexity. Pediatrics. 2016;138(6).  
5. Perrin JM, Bloom SR, Gortmaker SL. The increase of childhood chronic conditions in the [LOCATION_002]. 
JAMA. 2007;297(24):2755 -2759.  
6. Lehrer HM, Dubois SK, Maslowsky J, et al. Hair cortisol concentration and glycated hemoglobin in african american adults. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2016;72:212- 218.  
7. Ramirez J, Elmofty M, Castillo E, et al. Evaluation of cortisol and telomere length measurements in ethnically diverse women with breast cancer using culturally sensitive methods. J Commun Gen. 
2017;8(2):75 -86. PMCID: PMC5386910.  
8. Schreier HM, Enlow MB, Ritz T, et al. Lifetime exposure to traumatic and other stressful life events and 
hair cortisol in a multi -racial/ethnic sample of pregnant women. Stress. 2016;19(1):45- 52. PMCID: 
PMC4766015.  
9. Wosu AC, Gelaye B, Valdimarsdottir U, et al. Hair cortisol in relation to sociodemographic and lifestyle 
characteristics in a multiethnic US sample. Ann Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541]. 2015;25(2):90 -95, 95.e91 -92. PMCID: 
PMC4306631.  
19 
 10. O’Brien KM, Meyer J, Tronick E, et al. Hair cortisol and lifetime discrimination: Moderation by [CONTACT_307362]. Health Psychol Open. 2017;4(1):doi:10.1177/2055102917695176. PMCID: 
PMC2055102915405887.  
11. Kroner EL HR, Brousseau DC. Emergency department reliance: A discriminatory measure of frequent emergency department users. Pediatrics. 2010;125(1):133- 138.  
12. Hemker BG, Brousseau DC, Yan K, et al. When children with sickle -cell disease become adults: Lack of 
outpatient care leads to increased use of the emergency department. Amer J Hematol. 2011;86(10):863 -
865.  
13. Garg A, Toy S, Tripodis Y, et al. Addressing social determinants of health at well child care visits: A cluster 
RCT. Pediatrics. 2015;135(2):e296- e304.  
14. Berkowitz SA, Hulberg A, Standish S, et al. Addressing unmet basic resource needs as part of chronic 
cardiometabolic disease management. JAMA Intern Med. 2017;177(2):244- 252.  
15. Hassell KL. Population estimates of sickle cell disease in the U.S. Am J Prev Med. 2010;38(4S):S512 –S521.  
16. King AA, Rodeghier MJ, Panepi[INVESTIGATOR_29416], et al. Silent cerebral infarction, income, and grade retention among 
students with sickle cell anemia. Am J Hematol. 2014;89(10):E188- E192. PMCID: PMC4261188.  
17. Sonik RA, Teasdale S, Parish SL, et al. Unmet legal and social advocacy needs of children with sickle cell 
disease: Implications for health care payer costs. Child Youth Serv Rev. 2018;84(C):76 -81. 
18. Gaston MH, Verter JI, Woods G, et al. Prophylaxis with oral penicillin in children with sickle cell anemia: A 
randomized trial. N Engl J Med. 1986;314:1593- 1599.  
19. Falletta JM, Woods GM, Verter JI, et al. Discontinuing penicillin prophylaxis in children with sickle cell 
anemia. J Pediatr. 1995;127(5):685 -690.  
20. King AA, Baumann AA. Sickle cell disease and implementation science: A partnership to accelerate 
advances. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2017;64(11):e26649- n/a. 
21. American Psychological Association. Multicultural guidelines: An ecological approach to context, identity, 
and intersectionality. 2017. Accessed at: http://www.apa.org/about/policy/multicultural -guidelines.pdf . 
22. National Heart Lung and Blood Institute. Charting the future together:  NHLBI strategic vision.  National 
Institutes of Health, US Department of Health and Human Services. Bethesda, MD. NIH Publication 16 -HL-
61502016.  
23. Marmot M, Wilkinson RG. Social determinants of health.  [LOCATION_001]: Oxford University Press; 2006.  
24. Shonkoff JP, Garner AS. The lifelong effects of early childhood adversity and toxic stress. Pediatrics. 
2012;129(1):e232 -246.  
25. Shonkoff J, Phillips D, eds. From neurons to neighborhoods.  Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 
2000.  
26. Frieden TR. A framework for public health action: The health impact pyramid. Am J Public Health. 2010;100(4):590- 595. PMCID: PMC2836340.  
27. McGinnis JM, Williams -Russo P, Knickman JR. The case for more active policy attention to health 
promotion. Health Aff. 2002;21(2):78- 93. 
28. Lawlor DA, Ronalds G, Macintyre S, et al. Family socioeconomic position at birth and future cardiovascular disease risk: Findings from the aberdeen children of the 1950s cohort study. Am J Public Health. 
2006;96(7):1271- 1277. PMCID: PMC1483862.  
29. Lawlor DA, Smith GD, Ebrahim S. Association between childhood socioeconomic status and coronary heart 
disease risk among postmenopausal women: Findings from the british women's heart and health study. 
Am J Public Health. 2004;94(8):1386- 1392. PMCID: PMC1448460.  
30. Kuh D, Hardy R, Langenberg C, et al. Mortality in adults aged 26- 54 years related to socioeconomic 
conditions in childhood and adulthood: Post war birth cohort study. BMJ. 2002;325(7372):1076 -1080. 
PMC ID: PMC131184.  
31. Marmot M. Social determinants of health inequalities. Lancet. 2005;365(9464):[ADDRESS_376166]. The social determinants of health: Coming of age. Annu Rev Public 
Health. 2011;32:381 -398.  
33. Semega JL, Fontenot KR, Kollar MA. Income and poverty in the [LOCATION_002]: 2016. In: U.S. Census Bureau Current Population Reports. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office,; 2017:[ADDRESS_376167]. 2013;7(2):67- 73. 
PMCID: PMC3766848.  
20 
 35. Power C, Hertzman C. Social and biological pathways linking early life and adult disease. Brit Med Bull. 
1997;53(1):210- 221.  
36. Brewer EJ, McPherson M, Magrab PR, et al. Family -centered, community -based, coordinated care for 
children with special health care needs. Pediatrics. 1989;83(6):1055 -1060.  
37. Marmot M, Allen J, Bell R, et al. WHO European review of social determinants of health and the health 
divide. Lancet. 2012;380(9846):1011- 1029.  
38. Havranek EP, Mujahid MS, Barr DA, et al. Social determinants of risk and outcomes for cardiovascular 
disease: A scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;132(9):873 -898.  
39. Dzau VJ, McClellan MB, McGinnis JM, et al. Vital directions for health and health care: Priorities from a 
National Academy of Medicine initiative. JAMA. 2017.  
40. Alley DE, Asomugha CN, Conway PH, et al. Accountable health communities —  addressing social needs 
through Medicare and Medicaid. N Engl J Med. 2016;374(1):8- 11. 
41. McGinnis J, Williams -Russo P, Knickman J. The case for more active policy attention to health promotion. 
Health Aff. 2002;21(2):78- 93. 
42. Ash AS, Mick EO, Ellis RP, et al. Social determinants of health in managed care payment formulas. JAMA 
Internal Med. 2017;177(10):1424- 1430. PMCID: PMC5710209.  
43. Gottlieb LM, Hessler D, Long D, et al. Effects of social needs screening and in -person service navigation on 
child health: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA Pediatr. 2016;170(11):e162521.  
44. Brousseau DC, A Panepi[INVESTIGATOR_1946] J, Nimmer M, et al. The number of people with sickle -cell disease in the United 
States: National and state estimates. Am J Hematol. 2010;85(1):77- 78. 
45. Yawn BP, Buchanan GR, Afenyi -Annan AN, et al. Management of sickle cell disease: Summary of the 2014 
evidence- based report by [CONTACT_249384]. JAMA. 2014;312(10):1033- 1048.  
46. Wang WC, Ware RE, Miller ST, et al. Hydroxycarbamide in very young children with sickle -cell anaemia: A 
multicentre, randomised, controlled trial (baby [CONTACT_307363]). Lancet. 2011;377(9778):1663- 1672. PMCID: 
PMC3133619.  
47. Walsh KE, Cutrona SL, Kavanagh PL, et al. Medication adherence among pediatric patients with sickle cell 
disease: A systematic review. Pediatrics. 2014;134(6):1175 -1183. PMCID: PMC4243064.  
48. Reeves SL, Tribble AC, Madden B, et al. Antibiotic prophylaxis for children with sickle cell anemia. 
Pediatrics. 2018;141(3).  
49. Candrilli SD, O'Brien SH, Ware RE, et al. Hydroxyurea adherence and associated outcomes among 
Medicaid enrollees with sickle cell disease. Am J Hematol. 2011;86(3):273 -277.  
50. Loiselle K, Lee JL, Szulczewski L, et al. Systematic and meta -analytic review: Medication adherence among 
pediatric patients with sickle cell disease. J Pediatr Psychol. 2016;41(4):406- 418.  
51. Maslow AH. A theory of human motivation. Psycholog Rev. 1943;50:370- 396.  
52. Henize AW, Beck AF, Klein MD, et al. A road map to address the social determinants of health through 
community collaboration. Pediatrics. 2015;136(4):e993- e1001.  
53. Garg A, Butz A, Dworkin P, et al. Improving the management of family psychosocial problems at low -
income children's well -child care visits: The WE CARE project. Pediatrics. 2007;120:547 -558.  
54. Institute of Medicine, Committee on Quality Health Care in America. Crossing the quality chasm: A new 
health system for the 21st century.  Washington, DC: National Academy Press; 2001.  
55. Hsu LL, Green NS, Donnell Ivy E, et al. Community health workers as support for sickle cell care. Am J Prev 
Med. 2016;51([ADDRESS_376168] 1):S87 -98. PMCID: PMC4918511.  
56. King AA, Baumann AA. Sickle cell disease and implementation science: A partnership to accelerate 
advances. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2017;64(11):e26649.  
57. The Kaiser Family Foundation State Health Facts. Data source: Estimates based on the Census Bureau's 
March Current Population Survey (CPS: Annual social and economic supplements), 2014 -2017, "Health 
insurance coverage of children 0- 18." Accessed on February 20, 2018.  
58. Harvey G, Kitson A. Parihs revisited: From heuristic to integrated framework for the successful 
implementation of knowledge into practice. Implement Sci. 2016;11:33.  
59. Kavanagh PL, Sobota AE, McClure ES, et al. Using an electronic health record -based registry to improve 
pediatric sickle cell care. J Clin Outcomes Manage. 2014;21(4):159- 168.  
60. Sobota AE, Kavanagh PL, Adams WG, et al. Improvement in influenza vaccination rates in a pediatric sickle 
cell disease clinic. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2014;62(4):[ADDRESS_376169], Sprinz PG, Wolfgang TL, et al. Improving the management of vaso- occlusive epi[INVESTIGATOR_307337]. Pediatrics. 2015;136(4):e1016- e1025.  
62. Long KA, Kao B, Plante W, et al. Cultural and child -related predictors of distress among latina caregivers of 
children with intellectual disabilities. Amer J Intellect Dev Disabil. 2015;120(2):145 -165.  
63. Long KA, Lobato D, Kao B, et al. Perceptions of emotion expression and sibling- parent emotion 
communication in Latino and non- Latino white siblings of children with intellectual disabilities. J Pediatr 
Psychol. 2013;38(5):551- 562. PMCID: PMC3666121.  
64. Marsland AL, Long KA, Howe C, et al. A pi[INVESTIGATOR_9416] a stress management intervention for primary 
caregivers of children newly diagnosed with cancer: Preliminary evidence that perceived social support 
moderates the psychosocial benefit of intervention. J Pediatr Psychol. 2013;38(4):449- 461. PMCID: 
PMC3633253.  
65. Harrison AJ, Long KA, Manji KP, et al. Development of a brief intervention to improve knowledge of autism and behavioral strategies among parents in tanzania. Intellect Dev Disabil. 2016;54(3):187- 201.  
66. Long KA, Ewing LJ, Cohen S, et al. Preliminary evidence for the feasibility of a stress management 
intervention for 7 - to 12- year -olds with asthma. J Asthma. 2011;48(2):162 -170.  
67. Sequeira S, Morgan JR, Fagan M, et al. Evaluating quality of care for sexually transmitted infections in 
different clinical settings. Sex Transmit Dis. 2015;42(12):717 -724.  
68. Meyer J, Novak M, Hamel A, et al. Extraction and analysis of cortisol from human and monkey hair. J Vis 
Exp. 2014(83):e50882. PMCID: PMC4089402  
69. Meyer JS, Novak MA. Minireview: Hair cortisol: A novel biomarker of hypothalamic -pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -
adrenocortical activity. Endocrinology. 2012;153(9):4120 -4127. PMCID: PMC3423616.  
70. Kao K, Doan SN, St. John AM, et al. Salivary cortisol reactivity in preschoolers is associated with hair 
cortisol and behavioral problems. Stress. 2018;21(1):[ADDRESS_376170] A, et al. Intra -individual stability and developmental change in hair cortisol 
among postpartum mothers and infants: Implications for understanding chronic stress. Dev Psychobiol. 
2016;58(4):509- 518.  
72. Tarullo AR, St. John AM, Meyer JS. Chronic stress in the mother -infant dyad: Maternal hair cortisol, infant 
salivary cortisol and interactional synchrony. Infant Behav Dev. 2017;47:92 -102. PMCID: PMC5493894.  
73. Ursache A, Merz EC, Melvin S, et al. Socioeconomic status, hair cortisol and internalizing symptoms in 
parents and children. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 78:142- 150. PMCID: PMC5421817.  
74. Barakat LP, Patterson CA, Weinberger BS, et al. A prospective study of the role of copi[INVESTIGATOR_307338]. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 
2007;29(11):752- 760.  
75. Barakat LP, Schwartz LA, Salamon KS, et al. A family -based randomized controlled trial of pain 
intervention for adolescents with sickle cell disease. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2010;32(7):540 -547. PMCID: 
PMC2950888.  
76. Daniel LC, Li Y, Smith K, et al. Lessons learned from a randomized controlled trial of a family -based 
intervention to promote school functioning for school -age children with sickle cell disease. J Pediatr 
Psychol. 2015;40(10):1085 -1094. PMCID: PMC4626743.  
77. Robinson MR, Daniel LC, O’Hara EA, et al. Insurance status as a sociodemographic risk factor for functional 
outcomes and health -related quality of life among youth with sickle cell disease. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 
2014;36(1):51 -56. PMCID: PMC4418500.  
78. Brownson RC, Kreuter MW, Arrington BA, et al. Translating scientific discoveries into public health action: 
How can schools of public health move us forward? Public Health Rep. 2006;121(1):97- 103. PMCID: 
PMC1497798.  
79. Wagner EH, Grothaus LC, Sandhu N, et al. Chronic care clinics for diabetes in primary care -  a system -wide 
randomized trial. Diabetes Care. 2001;24(4):695- 700.  
80. Wagner EH, Austin BT, Davis C, et al. Improving chronic illness care: Translating evidence into action. Health Aff. 2001;20(6):64- 69. 
81. Wagner E. Organizing care for patients with chronic illness. Millbank Q. 1996;74:511- 528.  
82. Glasgow RE, Orleans CT, Wagner EH. Does the chronic care model serve also as a template for improving 
prevention? Millbank Q. 2001;79(4):579- 612, iv -v. PMCID: PMC2751207.  
22 
 83. Hung DY, Rundall TG, Tallia AF, et al. Rethinking prevention in primary care: Applying the chronic care 
model to address health risk behaviors. Millbank Q. 2007;85(1):69- 91. PMCID: PMC2690311.  
84. Wood D, Halfon N, Scarlata D, et al. Impact of family relocation on children's growth, development, school 
function, and behavior. JAMA. 1993;270(11):1334 -1338.  
85. Wood DL, Valdez RB, Hayashi T, et al. Health of homeless children and housed, poor children. Pediatrics. 
1990;86(6):858- 866.  
86. Bassuk EL, Weinreb LF, Dawson R, et al. Determinants of behavior in homeless and low -income housed 
preschool children. Pediatrics. 1997;100(1):92 -100.  
87. Casey PH, Szeto KL, Robbins JM, et al. Child health -related quality of life and household food security. Arch 
Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2005;159(1):51- 56. 
88. Cook JT, Frank DA, Berkowitz C, et al. Food insecurity is associated with adverse health outcomes among 
human infants and toddlers. J Nutr. 2004;134(6):1432- 1438.  
89. Weinreb L, Wehler C, Perloff J, et al. Hunger: Its impact on children's health and mental health. Pediatrics. 2002;110(4):e41.  
90. Alaimo K, Olson CM, Frongillo EA, Jr. Food insufficiency and american school -aged children's cognitive, 
academic, and psychosocial development. Pediatrics. 2001;108(1):44 -53. 
91. Alaimo K, Olson CM, Frongillo EA, Jr., et al. Food insufficiency, family income, and health in US preschool 
and school -aged children. Am J Public Health. 2001;91(5):781- 786, PMC ID: PMC1446676.  
92. Frank DA, Casey PH, Black MM, et al. Cumulative hardship and wellness of low -income, young children: 
Multisite surveillance study. Pediatrics. 2010;125(5):e1115- e1123.  
93. Frank DA, Neault NB, Skalicky A, et al. Heat or eat: The low income home energy assistance program and 
nutritional and health risks among children less than 3 years of age. Pediatrics. 2006;118(5):e1293- 1302.  
94. Bauman LJ, Silver EJ, Stein RE. Cumulative social disadvantage and child health. Pediatrics. 
2006;117(4):1321 -1328.  
95. Larson K, Russ SA, Crall JJ, et al. Influence of multiple social risks on children's health. Pediatrics. 
2008;121(2):337- 344.  
96. Kauth MR, Sullivan G, Blevins D, et al. Employing external facilitation to implement cognitive behavioral 
therapy in va clinics: A pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. Implement Sci. 2010;5:75. PMCID: PMC2964555.  
97. Bidassie B, Williams LS, Woodward -Hagg H, et al. Key components of external facilitation in an acute 
stroke quality improvement collaborative in the Veterans Health Administration. Implement Sci. 2015;10:69. PMCID: PMC4437451.  
98. Bellg AJ, Borrelli B, Resnick B, et al. Enhancing treatment fidelity in health behavior change studies: Best 
practices and recommendations from the NIH behavior change consortium. Health Psychol. 2004;23(5):443- 451.  
99. Krueger RA CM. Focus groups: A practical guide for applied research.  Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications; 2000.  
100.  Kitson A, Harvey G, McCormack B. Enabling the implementation of evidence based practice: A conceptual framework. Quality in health care : QHC. 1998;7(3):149- 158.  
101.  Stetler CB, Damschroder LJ, Helfrich CD, et al. A guide for applying a revised version of the PARIHS 
framework for implementation. Implement Sci. 2011;6:99. PMCID: PMC3184083.  
102.  Langley G, Nolan K, Nolan T, et al. The improvement guide:  A practical approach to enhancing 
organizational performance.  San Francisco: Jossey -Bass; 1996.  
103.  Kistin C, Silverstein M. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602]: A critical but potentially misused component of interventional 
research. JAMA. 2015;314(15):1561 -1562. PMCID: PMC4917389.  
104.  Lancaster GA, Dodd S, Williamson PR. Design and analysis of pi[INVESTIGATOR_7602]: Recommendations for good 
practice. J Eval Clin Pract. 2004;10(2):307- 312.  
105.  Forni GL, Finco G. Development of interactive algorithm for clinical management of acute events related 
to sickle cell disease in emergency department. Orphanet J Rare Diseases. 2014 June 23;9:91.  
106.  Cook JT, Frank DA, Levenson SM, et al. Child food insecurity increases risks posed by [CONTACT_307364]'s health. J Nutr. 2006;136(4):1073- 1076.  
107.  Varni JW, Seid M, Kurtin PS. Pedsql 4.0: Reliability and validity of the pediatric quality of life inventory 
version 4.0 generic core scales in healthy and patient populations. Med Care. 2001;39(8):800- 812.  
23 
 108.  Varni JW, Seid M, Knight TS, et al. The PedsQL ™ 4.0 generic core scales: Sensitivity, responsiveness, and 
impact on clinical decision -making. J Behav Med. 2002;25(2):175 -193.  
109.  Panepi[INVESTIGATOR_29416], Pajewski NM, Foerster LM, et al. The performance of the PedsQL generic core scales in 
children with sickle cell disease. J Pediatr Hematol Oncol. 2008;30(9):666 -673. PMCID: PMC2667700.  
110.  Brandow AM, Brousseau DC, Pajewski NM, et al. Vaso- occlusive painful events in sickle cell disease: 
Impact on child well -being. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2010;54(1):92 -97. PMCID: PMC3114448.  
111.  Panepi[INVESTIGATOR_1946] J, Torres S, Varni J. Development of the PedsQL ™ Sickle Cell Disease Module items: Qualitative 
methods. Qual Life Res. 2011:1- 17. PMCID: PMC3277645.  
112.  Panepi[INVESTIGATOR_29416], Torres S, Bendo CB, et al. PedsQL ™ Sickle Cell Disease Module: Feasibility, reliability, and 
validity. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2013;60(8):1338- 1344.  
113.  Hemker BG, Brousseau DC, Yan K, et al. When children with sickle -cell disease become adults: Lack of 
outpatient care leads to increased use of the emergency department. Am J Hematol. 2011;86(10):[ADDRESS_376171]. 2009;114(1 –3):163 –173.  
115.  Cohen S, Kamarck T, Mermelstein R. A global measure of perceived stress. J Health Soc Behav. 
1983;24(4):385- 396.  
116.  Wester VL, van Rossum EF. Clinical applications of cortisol measurements in hair. Eur J Endocrinol. 
2015;173(4):M1- 10. 
117.  Stalder T, Steudte -Schmiedgen S, Alexander N, et al. Stress -related and basic determinants of hair cortisol 
in humans: A meta -analysis. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2017;77:261 -274.  
118.  Tobin DL, Holroyd KA, Reynolds RV, et al. The hierarchical factor structure of the copi[INVESTIGATOR_307339]. Cog Ther Res. 1989;13(4):343- 361.  
119.  Patterson JM, McCubbin HI, Warwick WJ. The impact of family functioning on health changes in children 
with cystic fibrosis. Soc Sci Med. 1990;31(2):[ADDRESS_376172] an experimental ecology of human development. Amer Psychol. 
1977;32(7):513.  
121.  Kazak A. Families of chronically ill children: A systems and social -ecological model of adaptation and 
challenge. J Consult Clin Psychol. 1989;57(1):25 -30. 
122.  Epstein NB, Bishop DS, Levin S. The McMaster model of family functioning. J Marital Fam Ther. 
1978;4(4):19 -31. 
123.  Miller IW, Ryan CE, Keitner GI, et al. The McMaster approach to families: Theory, assessment, treatment 
and research. J Fam Ther. 2000;22(2):168- 189.  
124.  QSR. NVIVO qualitative data analysis software, version 10. QSR International Pty Ltd. 2012.  
125.  Strauss AL. Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory procedures and techniques.  Newbury Park, CA: 
Sage Publications; 2013.  
126.  Glaser B. The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qualitative research.  Chicago: Aldine Publishing 
Company; 1967.  
127.  Rothman KJ, Greenland S. Modern epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], 2nd ed.  Philadelphia, PA: Lippi[INVESTIGATOR_10354], Williams and 
Wilkins; 1998.  
128.  MacKinnon DP, Lockwood CM, Williams J. Confidence limits for the indirect effect: Distribution of the 
product and resampling methods. Multivar Behav Res. 2004;39(1):99. PMCID: PMC2821115.  
129.  Morse J BM, Mayan M, et al. Verification strategies for establishing reliability and validity in qualitative 
research. Internat J Qual Meth. 2002;2008(1):13- 22. 
130.  Guest G MK, Namey EE. Applied thematic analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA. 2012;SAGE Publications, Inc.  
131.  Morse J. The significance of saturation. Qual Health Res. 1995;5:147- 149.  
132.  Paulukonis ST, Feuchtbaum LB, Coates TD, et al. Emergency department utilization by [CONTACT_307365], 2005– 2014. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2016;64(6):e26390. PMCID: PMC5403550.  
133.  Sox CM, Cooper WO, Koepsell TD, et al. Provision of pneumococcal prophylaxis for publicly insured 
children with sickle cell disease. JAMA. 2003;290(8):1057- 1061.  
134.  Kraemer H, Mintz J, Noda A, et al. Caution regarding the use of pi[INVESTIGATOR_242385]. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2006;63(5):484 -489.  
24 
  