CONFIDENTIAL  
 
This is a University of Colorado document that contains confidential 
information.  It is intended solely for the recipi[INVESTIGATOR_38257](s) 
and must not be disclosed to any other party.  This material may be used 
only for evaluating or conducting clinical investigations; any other 
proposed use requires written consent from the University of Colorado.  
 
Protocol:  Ocrelizumab University of Colorado  
P/IST template 06- 2016 1.0    5Decmber2016  PROTOCOL  
 
 
 
STUDY TITLE:  Evaluating the Tolerability and Safety Profile of Switching from Rituximab to Ocrelizumab: A Real World Evaluation of Patients with Relapsing Forms of Multiple Sclerosis  
 
 STUDY DRUG:    OCREVUS (ocrelizumab)  
 
 SUPPORT PROVIDED BY:  [CONTACT_8229], Inc.  
 
 INVESTIGATOR:  Timothy Vollmer MD, [ADDRESS_40168]. Aurora, CO, [ZIP_CODE], Mail Stop B185, Phone-  
[PHONE_617], Fax - [PHONE_618] 
[EMAIL_639]
  
  SUB INVESTIGATORS:   Kavita V. Nair, PhD.  
Enrique Alvarez, MD., PhD  
    STUDY NUMBER:    16-1354  
  PROTOCOL VERSION/DATE:  Version 07Nov2018  
 
[ADDRESS_40169] of the Study  ............................................................................. 21 
4.9.2.  Analysis of Treatment Group Comparability  .......................................................... 22 
4.9.3  Efficacy Analysis –Not Applicable  .................................................................................. [ADDRESS_40170] or Ethics Committee Approval  ................................................... 34 
6.5 Study Monitoring Requirements  ........................................................................................... 34 
6.6 Data Collection  ..................................................................................................................... 34 
6.7 Study Medication Accountability (if applicable)  .................................................................... 34 
6.8 Disclosure and publication of Data  ....................................................................................... 35 
 
3 
 6.9 Retention of Records  ............................................................................................................ 35 
REFERENCES  ............................................................................................................................... 36 
TABLES AND FIGURES  .................................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined.  
APPENDICES  .................................................................................. Error! Bookmark not defined.  
APPENDIX A: SAFETY REPORTING FAX COVER SHEET  ........................................................ [ADDRESS_40171] shown 
that B -cell depletion is of significant clinical beneﬁt as a treatment of relapsing 
forms of multiple sclerosis (MS).1 Ocrelizumab is a humanized monoclonal 
antibody that targets CD20 and selectively depletes CD20 expressing cells, while preserving the capacity for B cell reconstitution. When compared with rituximab, ocrelizumab is associated with increased antibody -dependent cell -mediated 
cytotoxic e ﬀects, and reduced complement -dependent cytotoxic eﬀ ects in vitro.
2 
By [CONTACT_38273] -dependent cell mediated cytotoxic eﬀ ects, ocrelizumab 
might modulate tissue- dependent mechanisms of pathogenic response more 
eﬀectively compared to rituximab. As a humanized molecule, ocrelizumab is 
expected to be less immunogenic with repeated infusions and might thus present a more favorable safety profile when compared to rituximab.
2  
 Despi [INVESTIGATOR_38258]’s current off label use in the treatment of MS, currently there is 
only data available from phase 2 trials  and open label trials . The HERMES group 
conducted a phase 2, double- blind, 48- week trial involving 104 patients with 
relapsing forms of MS; 69 patients received 1000 mg of intravenous rituximab 
and 35 patients received placebo on days 1 and 15.
3  A significantly higher 
number of patients in the rituximab group (78.3%) versus the placebo group (40.0%) had an infusion related reaction (IRR) events within [ADDRESS_40172] infusion. Within 24 hours after the second infusion, fewer patients in th e 
rituximab group (20.3%) than in the placebo group (40%) had similar events. A majority of the rituximab group with IRR events (92.6%) were classified as mild to moderate (grade 1 or 2) in severity.  
 
Safety data from the Investigators Brochure on the OPE RA I and II phase [ADDRESS_40173] common adverse events experienced by [CONTACT_38274] 600 mg of ocrelizumab.
4 The percentage of patients experiencing IRRs was 
higher in the ocrelizumab group (relapsing forms of MS: 34.3%;  primary progressive forms of MS 39.9%) compared with the interferon β -1a (active 
control) group who received placebo infusions (relapsing forms of MS: 9.7%; primary progressive forms of MS: 25.5%). The rate of IRRs was highest during the first infusion or Dose 1 (27.5% on Day 1; 4.71% on Day 15 of Dose 1) and decreased over time (13.7%; 9.6% and 7.8% following Dose 2, 3, and 4 respectively) for the ocrelizumab treated group. Comparatively, interferon β-1a 
users experienced 6.5% of IRRs on Day 1, 2.58% on Day 15, <  2.00% after 
doses 2, 3 and 4 respectively. The reported IRRs were primarily mild- to-moderate 
in severity (Grades 1 and 2).  Serious IRRs occurred in 0.1% and 1.0% respectively of relapsing and progressive patients and treated with ocrelizumab.  
 Clinical data describing the efficacy and tolerability profile of rituximab and ocrelizumab has utilized populations with different prior treatment characteristics. 
In the phase 2 HERMES trials, a majority (78.5%) of rituximab patients had been previously been treated  with a disease modifying therapy in the last [ADDRESS_40174], the OPERA I and II phase 3 clinical trials, a majority of ocrelizumab 
 
5 
 patients (72.9% in OPERA I and 73.8% in OPERA II) represented a treatment 
naïve population.[ADDRESS_40175] suggested that pathogenic T cells ar e sufficient for the full expression of MS. However, it is now evident that 
full autoimmune B cells and humoral immune mechanisms also play key roles. 
5 
Ocrelizumab is a humanized monoclonal antibody that targets CD20 and 
selectively depleted CD -20 expressing B cells.  CD20 is a B cell surface 
molecule that is expressed on pre B cells and mature B cells, but not expressed 
earlier in the development of B cells or on m ature plasma cells. In all three 
ocrelizumab studies (with relapsing and progressive populations), treatment with 
600 mg of ocrelizumab led to rapid and complete depletion of circulating CD19+ 
B cells within [ADDRESS_40176] treatment. 4 B cell depletion was s ustained throughout 
treatment period. The median time to repletion of B cells was 72 weeks (range 27-175 weeks). We hypothesize that in switching rituximab treated patients to 
ocrelizumab, the proportion of patients with B cell depletion ( CD19+ and CD20+ < 
1%) [ADDRESS_40177] dose of rituximab and similar to findings in OPERA I and II.  
 Immunogenicity results from the OPERA I and II t rials examined the number of 
patients who had treatment induced anti -drug antibodies (ADA) to ocrelizumab. 
[ADDRESS_40178] baseline sample during the controlled treatment period, 3 patients (0.4%) showed treatment induced ADA to ocrelizumab.  Of these, 1 patient tested positive for neutralizing antibodies (NAB) to ocrelizumab. During the open label extension phase, the prevalence of ADA continued to remain low with post baseline incidence of 1. 9% (2/103 with treatment induced ADA). Currently there 
is little evidence examining the prevalence of treatment induced ADAs to both rituximab and ocrelizumab in patients that switch from the former to the latter in comparison to continuing rituximab patients. Therefore, we will perform assays to detect ADAs to both rituximab and ocrelizumab in all patients switching from rituximab to ocrelizumab at Day 1, [ADDRESS_40179] been hypothesized to be a reaction by [CONTACT_38275]20 expressing cells as they are destroyed by [CONTACT_38276] a “cytokine storm”.  Understanding this process may lead to mechanisms that may aid in ameliorating these infusion reactions.  If they are associated with ADA, then it might be possible to predictively premedicate these patients only.  Alternatively, if they are associated with cytokine release, it may be possible to eliminate premedication in patients who are already CD20+cell depleted in subsequent infusions.  
Therefore, we will assay the profile of certain cytokines in the serum [ADDRESS_40180] require d that the FDA or EMA approved versions of anti -CD20 
monoclonal antibodies be used in the treatment of MS, namely ocrelizumab. Currently, we estimate several thousand MS patients in the US and Sweden are taking rituximab currentl y. Thus, it will be important to demonstrate that switching 
from a chimeric anti -CD20 to a more fully humanized anti -CD20 does not lead to 
unexpected infusion reactions and does not increase the probability of development of anti -drug antibodies.  
 The Rocky Mountain MS Center (RMMSC) at the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus prescribed rituximab infusions for [ADDRESS_40181] 12 months, of which 323 patients received their infusion at the University of Colorado Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s Outp atient Infusion Center between September, 2015-
March, 2016. The RMMSC is one of the few sites nationwide with large numbers of MS patients treated with rit uximab. On March 28, 2017, Ocrevus  (ocrelizumab) 
was approved by [CONTACT_38277] . With the approval of ocrelizumab, current rituximab users are 
being counselled by [CONTACT_38278] -CD20 MAB covered by [CONTACT_38279].  
 
2.  OBJECTIVES  
2.1 Primary Objectives 
Primary objective: Our primary objective is to assess the frequency and severity 
of IRRs in MS patients with sustained use rituximab ( > 2 infusions) at least six 
months apart who switch to ocrelizumab (switching group) . IRRs will be 
compared to: a) patients continuing to receive rituximab (comparator group) at 
each infusion cycle,  and b) with rates observed in the OPERA I and II 
randomized clinical trials after the first and second infusion of ocrelizumab.  
Grading criteria for IRR will be assessed using the Common Terminology Criteria 
for Adverse Events (CTCAE) developed by [CONTACT_38280] I and II trials.[ADDRESS_40182] dose of ocrelizumab. In addition, patient 
reported outcomes of their experience with IRRs will also be captured at all 
infusions of ocrelizumab. .  
 
2.2 Secondary Objectives  
Secondary Objective:  Our secondary objective is to assess the impact of 
switching from rituximab to ocrelizumab ( only in the switching group)  on the 
incidence and prevalence of anti -drug antibodies to ocrelizumab .   The presence 
of anti -drug binding antibodies will be assesse d prior to the first and third 
ocrelizumab infusion and six  to twelve  months after the last ocrelizumab infusion.  
The serum drawn before the first infusion of ocrelizumab will be the baseline comparator since these patients will only have been exposed to at least two 
rituximab  infusions over [ADDRESS_40183] 100 serum samples prior to ocrelizumab exposure and 200 after ocrelizumab exposure.  These assays will be performed by [CONTACT_38281] A 
 
7 
 Laboratories (in Richmond, VA) who will assess the anti -drug antibodies to 
ocrelizumab”, and “QPS (Netherlands) who will assess the anti -drug antibodies 
to rituximab  as a single batch once all samples have been collected and 
cryopreserved.    
 Other secondary objectives t hat will be assessed in the switching group only 
include the following:  
a. We will assess the percent  of ocrelizumab treated patients that exhibit 
early recovery of CD19+ and/or CD20+B cells (>1%)  prior to each 
ocrelizumab infusion and at month [ADDRESS_40184] will also identify CD19 
antigen expres sion to confirm depeletion since presence of anti -CD 20 
MAB in patients blood may confound the CD -20 expression assay . 
 
b. We will assess cytokines to evaluate for possible contribution of a cytokine storm to infusion reactions. Cytokines will be assessed using the MesoScale platform.  These blood samples will be collected before  the start of each ocrelizumab infusion and fol lowing infusion completion.  Blood 
samples will also be collected during a moderate or serious IRR.  
 
c. We will describe all adverse events and serious adverse events in addition to IRRs (for example infections) as described in the investigator’s brochure.
 
 
3.  STUDY DESIGN 
 3.[ADDRESS_40185] 1, 2016 (when we began collecting infusion reactions 
in a standardized way as part of standard of care at the infusion center).  
 Retrospective data will be collected only after consent is obtained.  
 In a prospective evaluation with patients at RMMSC who are currently on sustained rituximab treatment for their MS, we will examine the frequency and 
 
8 
 severity of IRRs for 100 patients who switch to ocrelizumab (switching group)  
compared to 200 patients continuing rituximab as our pri mary outcome 
(comparator group).  Our secondary outcome is to examine anti -drug antibody 
formation post switching from rituximab to ocrelizumab (switching group) . 
Comparisons for the both outcomes will also be made to findings from the 
OPERA I and II random ized clinical trials. Other exploratory outcomes including 
the measurement of B cell reconstitution, cytokine reactions and adverse event profiles will also be examined.  
 For patients who are switching to ocrelizumab, the first dose of ocrelizumab will 
be a split dose of [ADDRESS_40186] dose 
followed by 500mg (or 1000 mg if evidence of early B cell recovery) every 6 months thereafter. Study patients will be current  patients of the RMMSC who 
meet the inclusion criteria and are currently receiving rituximab infusions from the University of Colorado Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s Outpatient Infusion Center. Analysis of IRRs will be conducted by [CONTACT_38282]. Anti -drug antibody analysis will 
be conducted by [CONTACT_38283]: [COMPANY_003] Bio A Laboratories, Richmond, VA 
will conduct the anti -drug antibodies assays for ocrelizumab, QPS Netherlands, 
Netherlands will conduct the anti -drug antibodies assays for rituximab using 
cryopreserved blood samples sent by [CONTACT_38284] a single batch at the end of the study. Cytokine analysis will be conducted by [CONTACT_38285].  Study duration, including the recruitment (estimated to take 6 mont hs), data analysis and manuscript development is 
anticipated to be [ADDRESS_40187] effective disease modifying 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_38259].  Also, their safety profile to date (in terms of serious adverse events) is better than the other highly effective therapi[INVESTIGATOR_38260], fingolimod, alemtuz umab, daclizumab and dimethyl fumurate.  
Several centers including the RRMSC and the Swedish Coalition of MS Clinics have large MS populations on rituximab, some for more than [ADDRESS_40188] operating procedures 
for our study team.  
 3.3 Outcome Measures  
3.3.1.   Primary Outcome Measure  
Primary endpoint :  
 
a. Primary endpoint : The primary end point will be proportion of infusions 
with > 1 IRR between the switching and comparator groups.  
 
b. Secondary IRR assessments :   
a. We will also report the difference in the total number of IRRs after each infusion of ocrelizumab in the switching group compared to similar rituximab infusions in the comparator group.  
  
b. The difference in proportion of patients with >  1 IRR across any of 
their infusions between the switching and comparator groups  
 
c.  We will also compare the proportion of patients with an IRR 
following day 1 infusion versus the proportion of patients with an IRR at day 15 and month 6 infusions of ocrelizumab in the switching group.  
 
d. The severity of IRRs will be assessed following each infusion of   ocrelizumab in the switching and comparator group using the National Cancer Institute’s Common Terminology for Adverse 
Events Scale.
6 The frequency of each severity grade of IRR will be 
compared in a similar fashion.  
 
Nursing staff at the University of Colorado’s Outpatient Infusion Center will be responsible for classifying the severity of an IRR for each patient at the 
end of every ocrelizumab and rituximab infusion using the scale below. Nursing staff will be asked to record the highest grade of an IRR that they observed or intervened upon for each patient after completion of their infusion.  
 
Severity of IRR :  
Grade 0:  No infusion reaction  
Grade 1 : Mild reaction (transient flushing or rash drug fever < 38 
degrees C); infusion interruption not indicated; intervention not indicated  
 
10 
 Grade 2: Requires therapy or infusion interruption but responds 
promptly to sympt omatic treatment (e.g., antihistamines, NSAIDs, 
narcotics); prophylactic medications indicated for 24 hours.  
Grade 3: Prolonged (i.e., not rapi[INVESTIGATOR_13081]/or brief interruption of infusion); recurrence of 
symptoms following  initial improvement; hospi[INVESTIGATOR_12258] (e.g., renal impairment, pulmonary infiltrates)  
Grade 4 : Life threatening consequences; urgent intervention 
indicated.  
Grade 5: Death  
3.3.2 Secondary Outcome Measures  
a. Anti-drug antibodies (ADAs) :  We will measure the number of patients who 
have treatment induced ADAs against rituximab and ocrelizumab prior to every ocrelizumab infusion (T
0, T1, T2) and at the research termination visit 
(T3=between month 12 and 18)  in ONLY  the switching group. This 
analysis will be performed by [CONTACT_38281] A Laboratories (in Richmond, VA) 
who will assess the anti -drug antibodies to ocrelizumab”, and “QPS 
(Netherlands) who will assess the anti -drug antibodies to rituximab a 
single batch at end o f study for the switching group.  
  
b. Treatment efficiency:    We will be measure B cell depletion before each 
ocrelizumab infusion (T 0, T1 and T 2), by [CONTACT_38286] (T cell and 
B cell panel) at the University of Colorado Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. We will measure  the 
proportion of patients who are B cell depleted (CD -19+ and CD -20+) by 
[CONTACT_38287] [ADDRESS_40189] infusion in 
the switching group.  
 
c. Cytokine profile :  To better characterize infusion reactions and evaluate 
the contribution by [CONTACT_38288]/or by [CONTACT_38289]20 positive cells, serum levels of cytokines will be evaluated. Cytokines will be measured using the 
MesoScale platform before the start of each ocrelizumab infusion, and after the infusion is completed (T
0,T1,T2,T3). In addition,  blood samples will 
be collected for those who experience a moderate to severe IRR to further examine cytokine profiles during an IRR. Plasma samples will be analyzed 
using the V -PLEX Human Biomarker 40- Plex Kit which assays for IFN -γ, 
IL-1β, IL -2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, IL-10, IL -12p70, IL -13, TNF -α, GM -CSF, IL -5, 
IL-16, IL -7, IL-12/IL -23p40, IL- 1α, VEGF -A, IL-17A, IL- 15, TNF -β, IL-8 
(HA), MCP -1, MCP -4, Eotaxin, IP -10, MDC, Eotaxin -3, TARC, MIP -1α, 
MIP-1β, VEGF -C, VEGF -D, Tie -2, Flt -1/VEGFR -1, PlGF, FGF (basic), 
SAA, CRP, VCAM -1, ICAM -1 per manufacturer’s recommendation on a 
MesoScale SECTOR Imager 2400. This array of cytokines will provide 
information on the levels of cytokines being released during the infusion to determine if they are limited to those released by B cells. Patients will be categorized as either not having had an IRR (Grade 0), having had a mi ld 
 
11 
 reaction (Grades 1- 2), or a moderate/severe reaction (Grades 3- 5). These 
patient groups will also be evaluated for difference before and after their 
infusions for changes in each of the above cytokines.  These groups of patients will also be evaluated f or the presence of antibodies to 
ocrelizumab as described above.  
 
d. Patient reported infusion tolerance: A short patient reported outcome scale 
describing the patient’s experience to any IRR  during the ocrelizumab 
infusion  developed by [CONTACT_38282]. will be administered 
by [CONTACT_38290]. Scale items will measure patient responses to their perception and experience of IRRs.
 
 
 
3.3.3 Ancillary Safety Outcome Measures  
We will report all adverse and serious adverse events for both study groups as described in the investigators brochure guide.
4 In addition, we will run an 
immunoglobulin panel in the switching group as well.  
 3.4 Safety Plan  
Patients will be evaluated at each study visit for the duration of their participation 
in the study (see Table 1 under section 4.5 for schedule of events conducted on 
the switching group; comparator group is standard of care).  Patients will be interviewed by [CONTACT_38291]. See Section 5 (Assessment of Safety) for complete details of the safety 
evaluation for this study.  
3.5 Compliance with Laws and Regulations  
This study will be conducted in accordance with current U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) Good Clinical Practices (GCPs), and local ethical and legal requirements. An investigator held IND has been granted (IND number 132705).  
 
4.  MATERIALS AND METHODS  
 
4.1 Subjects  
We plan to enroll  100 patients  in the switching group and between 100 and 200 
patients in the comparator group (to study 200 infusions) for a total of up to 200-
300 patients which would provide adequate power (90%) for the study.  To account 
for screen failures and withdrawals, we are seeking to enroll an additional 50 patients  
for a total of 250 -350 patients. Patients are not confined to only one of the 2 groups. 
For example, data may be collected from a patient as part of the rituximab arm and 
then at a later point the patient decides to switch to ocrelizumab. This patient could then be consented into the switching group.  Enrollment  will occur over  a 3-month  
period at RMMSC..  Dropouts in the switching group that occur prior to the 6 month 
infusion will be replaced. All patients  will be included in the analyses  (Intent to Treat  
Analysis).  
 
 
[ADDRESS_40190] Selection  
All subjects will be MS patients receiving care at the RMMSC at the University of 
Colorado Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  
4.1.2 Inclusion Criteria  
 
Switching group:  
• Current active patient of RMMSC  
• 18-65 years  
• Diagnosis of relapsing forms of MS  
• Completed > two doses  of rituximab with the last dose having been 
administered : 
a) within 12 months of screening  
 and 
b)  at least [ADDRESS_40191] planned infusion of study drug  
• Are receiving their current infusions of rituximab at the University of 
Colorado Outpatient Infusion Center  
• Have discussed the possibility of switching to ocrelizumab with their MS provider  
• Screened for Hepatitis B and C and TB  within [ADDRESS_40192] dose of 
ocrelizumab  
• A negative serum pregnancy test must be available for premenopausal women and for women <[ADDRESS_40193] undergone surgical sterilization.  
• Women of childbearing potential must agree to use a “highly effective”, hormonal form of contraception or two “effective” forms of non-
hormonal contraception.  Contraception must continue for the duration of study treatment and for at least three months after the last dose of 
study tre atment  
• Are able to complete patient reported outcomes developed as English 
written scales.  
• Must be able  and willing  to give meaningful,  written  informed  consent  
prior to participation in the trial, in accordance  with local regulatory  
requirements  
Comparator group:  
• Current active patient of RMMSC  
 
13 
 • 18-65 years  
• Diagnosis of relapsing forms of MS  
• Completed > two doses  of rituximab with the last dose having been 
administered within [ADDRESS_40194] of care  
• Are receiving their current infusions of rituximab as standard of care at 
the University of Colorado Outpatient Infusion Center and will continue 
to do so 
• Are willing to be followed for subsequent rituximab infusions during the 
study period as standard of care , and/or allow retrospective data 
collection on previous rituximab infusions  
• Must be able  and willing  to give meaningful,  written  informed  consent  
prior to participation in the trial, in accordance  with local regulatory  
requirements  
 
4.1.3 Exclusion Criteria  
  
Both groups : 
• Pregnant or lactating women  
• Hypersensitivity to trial medications  
• Hepatic Dysfunction (liver enzymes are 5 times greater than normal)  
• History of Congestive Heart Failure  
• Any history of a positive blood assay for Hepatitis B or C  
• Any history of TB or a positive Quantiferon Gold Assay  
• Concurrent use of immunosuppressant medications  
• Any history of immunodeficiency or other medical condition increasing risk 
of anti -CD 20 therapy.  
•  Serious infection at the time of a scheduled study inf usion .  
• Any medical,  psychiatric  or other  condition that could  result  in the patient  
not being  able to give  fully informed consent,  or to comply  with the protocol  
requirements as determined by [CONTACT_093]  
 
4.[ADDRESS_40195], in an effort to impose some degree of similarity between the treatment 
groups, control patients will be matched, either  1:1 or 2:1 depending on the 
number of control patients,  with switching patients on gender and age (+/ - 2 
years) at recruitment.  The demographic information on switching patients will be scanned to find matches for the patients in the non- switching group.   
 Furthermore, screening of additional patients beyond the [ADDRESS_40196] 
possible matches. Second, baseline statistics will be monitored as patients enter the study, and selec tion of patients may be modified in order to maintain relative 
balance between treatment groups (if necessary using measures of disease severity other than age and gender)  if we are able to overenroll the number of 
non-switchers. Third, demographic variabl es and measures of baseline disease 
severity, including age, gender, MS disease duration, type of MS at baseline (first infusion in both study groups), along with discontinuations, will be recorded and compared between treatment groups.  
 All available observations will be used.  For continuous variables (age, MS disease duration), by [CONTACT_38292], standard deviations, medians, and ranges will be recorded, and differences among treatment groups will tested for with either with T -test/ANOVA methods or Wilcoxon/Kruskal Wallis tests.  For 
categorical variables (gender, type of MS, disability, discontinuations), frequencies and proportions will be presented, and differences among treatment 
groups will be tested for using chi -square/Fisher’s exact test. F ourth, following 
these measures, if treatment confounding is found to still be an issue, regression 
or propensity score methods, with covariates such as age, MS disease duration, and baseline EDSS score will be used post hoc to minimize confounding.   
Poten tial study patients will be identified from RMMSC electronic medical records 
(EPIC) using the study inclusion and exclusion criteria. Patients will be recruited by [CONTACT_38293]’s Outpatient Infusion Center. Potential patients are already being identified through their MS providers at RMMSC with whom discussions about the possibility of switching to ocrelizumab are currently underway.  S tudy participants who complete the 
observation phase of the study will be offer ed the ability to continue to receive 
ocrelizumab infusions provided for free by [CONTACT_38294].  Once ocrelizumab is available by [CONTACT_38295]/[COMPANY_002] Patient Assistance Program for Ocrelizumab for out of pocket expenses.  Ocrelizumab will be provided through priority placement in Genentech’s patient assistance program for those patients who are not able to receiv e insurance coverage for it.  
MS patients included in this study will have made a decision with their provider to either stay on rituximab or to switch to ocrelizumab outside of this study. The decision to switch to ocrelizumab or to stay on rituximab will be made as part of 
 
15 
 the clinical treatment process between the patient and his/her provider based on 
his/her disease severity and suitability for treatment among other factors. Therefore, patients are not randomized into either treatment arm. For the group that stays on rituximab, participation in this study is purely observational. For  
those patients in the rituximab arm who are deemed to be appropriate candidates for switching to ocrelizumab, the option to do so will be provided as standard of care under priority access and/or patient assistance programs (contingent on their individual health insurance status).  
 
It is important to note that because the incidence of IRRs for infusions prior to 
enrollment are not collected prospectively for those continuing treatment with 
rituximab and because adverse events including IRRs will not be collected using the same methods for each treatment group following enrollment, interpretation of any difference in the incidence of these events will be limited.  
 
4.3  Study Treatment  
Ocrelizumab will be provided free of charge by [CONTACT_8229]. The Sponsor 
Investigator of the study will ensure maintenance of complete and accurate records of the receipt, dispensation, and disposal or return of all study drug in accordance wit h 21 Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.), Part 312.57 and 
312.62 and Genentech requirements. Study drug will be managed with in the UCH research pharmacy.  
 
4.3.1  Dosage, Preparation, Administration and Storage  
 Ocrelizumab Formulation Packaging, and Handling 
 
Ocrelizumab will be supplied by [CONTACT_14547] a liquid formulation containing 
30-mg/mL ocrelizumab in 20 mM sodium acetate at pH 5.3, with 4% trehalose 
dihydrate and 0.02% polysorbate 20. The drug product is provided as a single-
use liquid formulation in a 15- cc, type I USP, glass vial fitted with a 20- mm, 
fluoro -resin, laminated stopper and an aluminum seal with a flip- off plastic cap 
and contains a nominal [ADDRESS_40197] into 
an infusion bag containing 0.9% sodium chloride to a final drug concentration of 
1 to 2 mg/mL.  
 
Ocrelizumab may contain fine translucent and/or reflective particles associated 
with enhanced opalescence. Do not use the solution if discolored or if the 
solution contains discrete foreign particulate matter. The infusion solution must 
be administered using an infusion set with an in- line, sterile, non- pyrogenic, low -
protein- binding filter (pore size of up to 0.2 micrometer).  
 
 
16 
 The prepared infusion solution of ocrelizumab is physically and chemically stable 
for 24 hours at 2−8°C and subsequently 8 hours at room temperature. The 
prepared infusion solution should be used immediately. If not used immediately, 
it can be stored up to 24 hours at 2−8°C. Infusion solution must be completely 
administered to the patient  within 32 hours  of preparation (not exceeding 24 
hours at 2−8°C and 8 hours at room temperature). In the event an IV infusion 
cannot be completed the same day, the remaining solution should be discarded.  
For information on the formulation and handling of ocrelizumab, see the 
Ocrelizumab Investigator 's Brochure.  
 
Dosage, Administration, and Compliance  
 
Ocrelizumab [ADDRESS_40198] dose followed by 
500mg (or 1000 mg if evidence of early B cell recovery) every [ADDRESS_40199] up to two years 
in some patients with good efficacy demonstrated after a single dose in the 
HERMES study for up to a year.3 Patients are often out of window due to 
difficulties in obtaining insurance approval within the 6 month time window. 
Therefore,  we will include those patients that receive rituximab infusions within a 
12 month window.  
 
Although ocrelizumab may be administered on an outpatient basis, patients may 
be hospi[INVESTIGATOR_25642]. Ocrelizumab 
infusions should always be administered in a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_25673] a medically qualified staff member.  
Each ocrelizumab infusion should be given as a slow IV infusion over 
approximately 150 minutes (2.5 hours) for the 300- mg dose. To reduce potential 
Infusion Related Reactions (IRRs), all patients will receive prophylactic treatment 
with 100 mg of methylprednisolone (or equivalent IV steroid), administered by 
[CONTACT_25726],  to be completed approximately 30 minutes before the start of 
each ocrelizumab infusion.  
 
It is also strongly recommended that the infusion is accompanied by [CONTACT_25727]/antipyretic such as acetaminophen/paracetamol (1 g) 
and/or an IV or oral antihistamine (such as IV diphenhydramine 50 mg or 
equivalent dose of alternative) 30 − [ADDRESS_40200] not be administered as an IV push or bolus. Well -adjusted 
infusion pumps should be used to control the infusion rate, and ocrelizumab 
should be infused through a dedicated line. It is im portant not to use evacuated 
glass containers (to prepare the infusion), which require vented administration 
sets, because this causes foaming as air bubbles pass through the solution.  
 
After completion of the infusion, the IV cannula should remain in situ  for at least 1 
hour to allow for administration of drugs intravenously, if necessary, in the event 
of a delayed reaction. If no adverse events occur during this period of time, the IV 
cannula may be removed and the patient may be discharged.  
See the Ocrel izumab Investigator’s Brochure for detailed instructions on drug 
preparation, storage, and administration.  
 
4.3.2   Dosage Modification  
Dose modification of ocrelizumab is not permitted.   
 
4.3.3   Overdosage  
There is no experience with overdosage in human  clinical trials.   
4.4 Concomitant and Excluded Therapy  
e.g., Infusion protocol concomitant therapy:  all patients will receive prophylactic 
treatment with 100 mg of methylprednisolone (or equivalent IV steroid), 
administered by [CONTACT_25726], to be completed approximately 30 minutes before the start of each ocrelizumab infusion  
Excluded medications are any significantly immunosuppressive medications or treatments (i.e., radiation therapy) as determined by [CONTACT_38296].  
 4.5 Study Assessme nts 
Full protocol review and approval will be obtained from the University of Colorado’s IRB board, known as the Colorado Multiple Institutional Review Board (COMIRB) including a scientific review from COMIRB’s Scientific Advisory and Research Committee. S igned, IRB -approved informed consent will be obtained 
from patients prior to any assessments .   
 
4.5.[ADDRESS_40201] treatment:  
Study Visits and Procedures Summary : 
 
18 
 Study  visits for the switching group include  a) screening visit,  b) first infusion of 
300 mg of ocrelizumab (day 1 or T 0), c) 300 mg of ocrelizumab infusion on day  
15 (T 1), d) 600 mg of ocrelizumab at 6 months (+/ - 2 weeks) after day 1 ( T2) and, 
e) a research termination visit between month 12  and 18  - (+/- 2 weeks) (T3).  In 
some cases, screening procedures may be performed on the first infusion day 
rather than as a separate visit. . The patient may continue on 600 mg of 
ocrelizumab or (if the patient prefers) 500 mg rituximab at T 3, or 12 to 18  months 
after Day 1 (T 0). A month  is defined  as [ADDRESS_40202] of care infusion of rituximab, up to two infusions per 
patient, approximately 6 months apart. Research data on IRRs for the 
comparator group will be collected from the medical records.  
 
A summary of all procedures for switching group is outlined under “Schedule of 
Events” in Table [ADDRESS_40203] two years. MS disease history and demographic information will also be collected. Patients will also receive an EDSS exam and take an online version of the PDDS (done as standard of care-  on an IPad).  
 The Expanded Disability Status Scale ( EDSS) is a  commonly used 
assessment that allows clinicians to objectively measure changes in the disability status of MS patients using unbiased clinical raters.
[ADDRESS_40204] levels 1.0 to 4.5 refer to 
people with a high degree of ambulatory ability and the subsequent levels 5.0 to 9.5 refer to the loss of ambulatory ability.   The range of main categories include 
(0) = normal neurologic exam ; to (5) = ambulatory without aid or rest for 200 
meters; d isability severe enough to impair full daily activities ; to (10) = death due 
to MS . In addition, it also provides seven subscale measurements called 
Functional System (FS) scores.  
 
The Patient -Determined Disease Steps (PDDS) is a PRO version of the clinic ian-
reported EDSS which hones the stages of cane use and thus is more responsive to mid -range disability changes.
8 This tool asks the patient to characterize level 
of disability into one of nine steps (0=normal, 1=mild disability, 2=moderate disability, 3= gait disability, 4=early cane, 5=late cane, 6=bilateral support, 
7=wheelchair scooter, 8=bedridden). The PDDS will be used to characterize (and to control for) disability in both study groups at all study time points.  
 
Following the screening visit, patients in the switching group will be scheduled for their first infusion of ocrelizumab at their next regularly scheduled infusion date (no more than six  months after their last rituximab infusion). Study infusion 
cycle T
[ADDRESS_40205]  an acceptable window  of +/- [ADDRESS_40206]  an acceptable window  of +/- [ADDRESS_40207] of care assessments for this population to include a 
complete  metabolic  panel  (CMP) and complete blood counts  (CBC)  with 
differential. Second, their immune profile will be evaluated through an immunoglobulin panel and  analyzing T and B cell subsets using flow cytometry 
by [CONTACT_38297] [INVESTIGATOR_307]. Samples for the 
cytokine analysis will be drawn on a similar schedule. For the cytokine analysis, blood samples will be collected prior to and after each infusion in CPT tubes Because moderate to severe infusions  reactions  can delay infusions , we will plan 
to add an additional blood draw when these reactions are detected to keep timing 
of the blood draws more consistent and to capture any possible peak in cytokine levels during these reactions should they be occurring . Plasma will be derived by  
[CONTACT_38298] 1500g for 15 min and then will be aliquoted and stored at - 80C.  
Cells will be reconstituted in freezing media (20% fetal bovine serum, 10% DMSO) and stored at - 80C for further analysis. Additionally, plasma samples will 
be analyzed by [CONTACT_38299] 2400 for evaluation of cytokine 
levels. Blood draws for the anti -drug antibody analysis will also be drawn at T
1 
and sent to [COMPANY_003] Laboratories, Richmond, VA using cryopreserved blood samples 
as a single batch at the end of the study and analyzed for cytokine analysis.  
 
Patients will receive 100 mg of methylprednisolone 30 minutes before 
administration of ocrelizumab at each infusion cycle (T 0-T2). Following the 
infusion, nursing staff will record IRR using the N ational Cancer Institute’s 
Common Terminology for Adverse Events Scale. Patient self -assessment of IRRs 
will also be captured. Adverse events will also be recorded as described in 
Section [ADDRESS_40208] 
research termination visit (T 3), only blood samples, AEs and concomitant 
medications will be collected from study patients. Concomitant medications 
include those used for the treatment  for spasticity,  depression,  or fatigue and 
other prescription and non- prescription concomitant treatments that will be 
captured from the patient directly.  
 
Patients will then receive ocrelizumab or rituximab, if they wish, as ongoing therapy. Ocrelizumab and infusion costs will be provided by [CONTACT_38300].  
 For the comparator group, they may be approached to gauge interest in the study  via telephone. If they are interested, the consent can be sent to them. 
These patients will be given the following options: 1) complete consent process orally over the phone with coordinator (and a treating physician if patient desires), sign and date the consent form and send back to coordinator via mail, fax, or email, 2) complete consent proces s with coordinator (and a treating 
physician if patient desires)  in person at their next scheduled rituximab infusion. 
In either case, data collection will not begin until written consent is obtained.    Following each rituximab infusion, nursing staff wil l record IRR using scales as 
part of standard care.  
 
 
20 
 As required by [CONTACT_38301]’s Institutional Review Board, an  
independent  Data  and Safety Monitoring  Board (DSMB) will meet  at initiation  of 
the study  and every  6 months  thereafter  until the end of the  study.  
 
Table 1. Schedule of Events (for switching group)  
Data Collection Event  Screening 
Visit ª Day 1 (T 0) 
300 mg of 
OCR ª Day 15 (T 1) 
300 mg of 
OCR)  6 months  (T 2) 
(600 mg of 
OCR)  12 -18 
months 
research 
termination 
visit (T 3) 
Informed Consent  X     
Medical Exam  X     
Physical Exam  X     
Demographics and MS Disease History  X     
Concomitant Meds  X X X X X* 
Vital Signs   X X X X 
Hepatitis B and C evaluation confirmed  X     
EDSS  X     
PDDS  X    X* 
Pre-infusion blood draw :      
     Lab:  CBC, CMP   X  X X 
     Lab: B and T cell subsets by [CONTACT_38302]   X  X X 
     Lab: immunoglobulin panel   X  X X 
     Lab: Binding antibodies   X  X X 
Pre and post -infusion blood draw and 
during moderate/severe reactions:       
     Lab: C ytokine  levels   X X X  
Administration of Ocrelizumab  X X X  
Pre-medication of [ADDRESS_40209] IRRs   X X X  
Nurses/Study Coordinator record AE   X X X X* 
Patient self-report of IRRs   X X X  
* may be completed over the phone  
 
[ADDRESS_40210] of care and IRR information will be collected from the medical records.  
 
4.6 Discontinuation of Protocol -Specified Therapy  
Protoc ol-specified therapy may be discontinued for any of the following reasons:  
• Unacceptable toxicity  
• Patient election to discontinue therapy (for any reason)  
• Physician’s judgment  
 
4.[ADDRESS_40211] will be recorded on the 
Case Report Form.  
 
4.8  Study Discontinuation 
Genentech Study Center, and the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_38261].  Reasons for terminating the study may include the 
following:  
• The incidence or severity of adverse events in this or other studies indicates a potential health hazard to subjects  
• Subject enrollmen t is unsatisfactory  
• Data recording are inaccurate or incomplete  
• Study protocol not followed 
4.[ADDRESS_40212] of a convenience sample of eligible MS patients at the 
Rocky Mountain MS Center who are currently active patients and are taking 
rituximab for the treatment of their MS.  
 
22 
 We will keep track of the number enrolled in each study group and log any 
protocol deviations, lack of compliance, no shows or drop outs.  Frequencies and proportions will be presented and compared between treatment groups.  
4.9.2.  Analysis of Treatment Group Comparability  
As described in section 4.2, demographic vari ables and measures of baseline 
disease severity, including age, gender, MS disease duration, baseline PDDS, type of MS at baseline (first infusion in both study groups), along with discontinuations, will be recorded and compared between treatment groups. A ll 
available observations will be used.  For continuous variables (age, MS disease duration), by [CONTACT_38292], standard deviations, medians, and ranges will be recorded, and differences among treatment groups will tested for with either with T -test/ANOVA methods or Wilcoxon/Kruskal Wallis tests.  For 
categorical variables (gender, type of MS, disability, discontinuations), frequencies and proportions will be presented, and differences among treatment groups will be tested for using chi -square/Fisher’s exact test.  
 
4.9.3  Efficacy Analysis – Not Applicable  
a. Primary Endpoint: NA  
b. Secondary Endpoints: NA  
  
4.9.4  Safety Analysis 
The default analysis will be available case for all eligible participants on an intent 
to treat basis.  Alpha = 0.05 for all tests. As in the OPERA I and II randomized 
clinical trials, the primary and secondary end points will be descriptively presented. F requencies and percentages for the severity of IRR grades (Grades 
0-5) will be presented for both study groups following each infusion time point 
and overall between groups. 95% confidence intervals for the proportions will be calculated.  Differences in t he distribution of IRR severity grades between 
independent samples (i.e. comparison between groups at a common time point) will be tested with the chi -square or Fisher’s exact association test, and 
additionally with ordinal or multinomial logistic regressi on.  If sample sizes are 
small among some levels of IRR severity grades, they may be collapsed or dichotomized (i.e. Grade 3 or higher, any reaction or no reaction, severe reaction or none as examples) and methods described for binary outcomes under second ary endpoints will be utilized.  Dichotomization may be used to make 
analysis and presentation of results more manageable as well.  
The primary endpoint will be the proportion of whether any IRR occurred (yes or 
no) per infusion cycle per  patient in each s tudy group. The secondary endpoints 
include the proportion per infusion per  patient of severe infusion reaction (grade 
3 or greater), the proportion of infusion reactions and severe infusion reaction per patient  across all infusions , the proportion patient s with anti -drug antibodies, and 
the proportion of patients with depleted B cells. The primary outcome, binary occurrence of IRR per infusion per patient,  could be analyzed with logistic or 
relative risk models, with GEE (generalized estimating equations) and/or GLMM 
 
23 
 (generalized linear mixed models) methods to incorporate correlation on 
repeated infusions on a patient.  The same method will apply to other longitudinal binary outcomes.  Poisson or negative binomial models with exposure terms could calculate  rates of IRR per infusion per patient as a counting process. 
Similar methods will be used to compare IRR rates between the switching group and OPERA I and II phase [ADDRESS_40213].  Adjustment for 
covariates can sometimes improve the precision of the estimated treatment difference by [CONTACT_38303].  
 
Separate descriptive statistics will be presented for relapsi ng and progressive MS 
patients. Similar descriptive analysis will be conducted for subgroups according 
to age (in tertiles) and baseline disability (mild, moderate, severe) as measured by [CONTACT_38304]. However, the study is not powered for subgroup analyses and no inferences for subgroups or interactions are planned.  As the sample is one of convenience, the study is generalizable to the extent patients at the Rocky Mountain MS center who are willing to participate are representative of MS patients.  
 
With only one primary endpoint, adjustment for multiple comparisons will not be 
much of an issue.  Secondary endpoints will be tested univariately.  The study is 
not powered for multiple tests with control of the family -wise error rate. 
Bonferroni, iterative Bonferroni, false discovery rates, and, in some cases, 
protective overall tests could also be used if adjustment for multiple tests is 
desired . 
All adverse events, lack of compliance, protocol violations, and drop outs will be 
logged, and frequencies and proportions will be presented. Safety will be 
assessed at each infusion.  
 
[ADDRESS_40214] to them. Treat ment is 
administered in clinic once every 24 weeks and is important to the patient, so patient compliance should not be much of an issue, unless they drop out of the study.  Patients who miss a treatment will be followed up. Mixed models and GLMM (generali zed linear mixed models) for longitudinal data can take into 
account missingness at random.   
 
4.9.6  Determination of Sample Size  
The sample size will be a convenience sample.   It is anticipated a minimum of 
100 patients will qualify for each cohort (200 total) resulting in studying [ADDRESS_40215] experienced a minimum  
of two infusions and either continue to stay on rituximab or switch to ocrelizumab.  
 
To estimate study power with the proposed sample size of 100 infusions  in each group, 
we conducted a chart review of 50 patients at the Rocky Mountain MS Center who are 
currently taking rituximab and examined their IRRs using the proposed IRR grading scale (see section 3.3.1) from Grade 0- 5. The number and severity of IRRs were 
captured following their third rituximab infusion. The highest grade of an IRR that occurred during the infusion was recorded. Our pi[INVESTIGATOR_38262], 14.3% of patients had an IRR of which 85.71% were Grade 0, 12.24% were grade 2 and 2.05% were Grade 3. Hauser et al., found that following the second infusion of rituximab in patients, the majority of whom (60%) were not taking a 
DMT for 6 months prior to initiating rituximab only 20.3% experienced in an IRR. 
3 
 Using IRR estimates from our pi[INVESTIGATOR_38263] a clinically meaningful difference of 20% increase in IRRs, we conducted the following power analysis for a sample of 95 patients (assuming a 5% attrition rate after recruiting 100 patients in each study group). An  IRR proportion for ocrelizumab users at 34.3% compared with 
14.3% for rit uximab (obtained from our pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299]) for a two sided (alpha = 0.05) 
two sample proportion test for the null hypothesis of no difference between rituximab and ocrelizumab in proportion of IRRs would result in 90% power for 95 patients per group.  
 In response to the FDA IND letter, “the power analysis in Section 4.9.6 of the protocol appears to compare the infusion- related reaction (IRR) rate at the third 
rituximab infusion (14.3%) to that of the first infusion of OCR (34.3%). Because 
 
[ADDRESS_40216] 
infusion and declines with subsequent infusions, we recommend that you revise 
your sample size and power calculations using the IRR incidence for a comparable number of infusions; for example, the f irst, second, or third infusion”:  
 Our response is that neither the switching and comparison groups are receiving their very first infusion of any anti -CD 20 monoclonal antibody (rituximab or 
ocrelizumab) following enrollment in the study . Both study groups have received 
a minimum of at least two infusions of rituximab prior to enrollment in the study. The first study related infusion for ocrelizumab in the switching group represents (at minimum) their third infusion for an anti -CD monoclo nal antibody which will be 
compared to their third standard of care infusion for rituximab (at minimum) following study enrollment. As a result, we believe both groups represent those patients who have experienced at least three infusions of an anti -CD mon oclonal 
antibody agent. Thereby [CONTACT_38305][INVESTIGATOR_38264] (at 14.3%) and using a clinically meaningful difference of 20% increase in IRRs for the ocrelizumab 
group ( 34.3%) to provide 90% power for 95 patients per study group (assuming a 5% 
attrition rate after recruiting 100 patients in each study group).  
 As there is only one primary outcome  to power the study on, there is no need to reduce the alpha level of the u nivariate test as part of multiple testing adjustment. 
Adjustment for interim analysis is not an issue as there are no early stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_004].  
 
4.[ADDRESS_40217] (IMP) or other 
 
26 
 protocol -imposed intervention, regardless of attribution.  For the patients on 
Ocrelizumab, all AEs occurring between the time of consent and the study 
termination visit will be  recorded.    
 
For the comparator group, IRRs are the only AEs that will be collected. In addition, clinical relapses documented during the clinical process will also be collected.  
 Serious Adverse Events An AE should be classified as an SAE if the followi ng criteria are met:  
• It results in death (i.e., the AE actually causes or leads to death).  
• It is life threatening (i.e.,  the AE, in the view of the investigator, places the 
subject  at immediate risk of death. It does not include an AE that, had it occurred 
in a more severe form, might have caused death.).  
• It requires or prolongs inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059].  
• It results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity (i.e., the AE results in 
substantial disruption of the subject’s ability to conduct normal life functions).  
• It results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect in a neonate/infant born to a 
mother exposed to the IMP.  
• It is considered a significant medical event by [CONTACT_38306] (e.g., may jeopardize the subject or may require medical/surgical intervention to prevent one of the outcomes listed above).  
 All SAEs reported or observed in either group will be recorded and reported 
as necessary.  
 
5.2 Met hods and Timing for Assessing and Recording Safety Variables  
The investigator is responsible for ensuring that all AEs and SAEs that are observed or reported during the study, are collected and reported to the FDA, appropriate IRB(s), and Genentech, Inc. i n accordance with CFR 312.32 (IND 
Safety Reports).  
 Adverse Event Reporting Period  
The study period during which all AEs and SAEs must be reported begins after informed consent is obtained and initiation of study treatment or “initiation of any study procedures” and ends at T
[ADDRESS_40218] review, or elicited by [CONTACT_38307]-directiv e questions at each study visit both before and after the infusion.  
Infusion -related AEs will be captured by [CONTACT_38308] -
reported by [CONTACT_38309].    Patients will also be 
reminded to alert the study team about any concerning health issues between study visits . Each recorded AE or SAE will be described by [CONTACT_13662] (i.e.,  start 
and end dates)  and will include , and actions taken.   
 
27 
  
For all recorded A Es, a study investigator will make an assessment of 
seriousness, and causality . To ensure consistency of AE and SAE causality 
assessments, investigators should apply the following general guideline:  
 Yes 
There is a plausible temporal relationship between t he onset of the AE and 
administration of the ocrelizumab, and the AE cannot be readily explained by [CONTACT_423]’s clinical state, intercurrent illness, or concomitant therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014]; and/or the AE follows a known pattern of response to the ocrelizumab; and/or t he AE abates 
or resolves upon discontinuation of the ocrelizumab or dose reduction and, if applicable, reappears upon re- challenge.  
 No 
Evidence exists that the AE has an etiology other than the ocrelizumab (e.g., preexisting medical condition, underlying disease, intercurrent illness, or concomitant medication); and/or the AE has no plausible temporal relationship to ocrelizumab administration (e.g., event diagnosed [ADDRESS_40219] dose of ocrelizumab).  
 Expected adverse events are those adverse events that are listed or characterized in the Package Insert or current Investigator Brochure.   Unexpected adverse events are those not listed in the Package Insert (P.I.) or current Investigator Brochure (I.B.) or not identified. This includes adverse events 
for which the specificity or severity is not consistent with the description in the P.I. or I.B. For example, under this definition, hepatic necrosis would be unexpected if the P.I. or I.B. only referred to elevated hepatic enzymes or hepatitis.  
 5.[ADDRESS_40220] evaluation time points 
should be adopted. Examples of non- direc tive questions include:  
• “How have you felt since your last clinical visit?”  
• “Have you had any new/changed health problems since you were last here?”  
 Specific Instructions for Recording Adverse Events  
Investigators should use correct medical terminology/ concepts when reporting 
AEs or SAEs. Avoid colloquialisms and abbreviations.  
a. Diagnosis vs. Signs and Symptoms  
If known at the time of reporting, a diagnosis should be reported rather than individual signs and symptoms (e.g., record only liver failure or  hepatitis rather 
than jaundice, asterixis, and elevated transaminases). However, if a constellation of signs and/or symptoms cannot be medically characterized as a single diagnosis or syndrome at the time of reporting, it is ok to report the information 
 
28 
 that is currently available. If a diagnosis is subsequently established, it should be 
reported as follow -up information.  
b. Deaths 
All deaths that occur during the protocol -specified AE reporting period (see 
Section 5.1.2), regardless of attribution, will b e reported to the appropriate 
parties. When recording a death, the event or condition that caused or 
contributed to the fatal outcome should be reported as the single medical concept. If the cause of death is unknown and cannot be ascertained at the time of reporting, report “Unexplained Death”.  
c. Preexisting Medical Conditions  
A preexisting medical condition is one that is present at the start of the study. Such conditions should be reported as medical and surgical history. A preexisting medical condition should be re- assessed throughout the trial and reported as an 
AE or SAE only if the frequency, severity, or character of  the condition worsens 
during the study. When reporting such events, it is important to convey the concept that the preexisting conditi on has changed by [CONTACT_13665] (e.g.,  “more frequent headaches”).  
d. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_38265]. If a subject is hospi[INVESTIGATOR_9615] a medical or surgical procedure as a result of an AE, the event responsible for the procedure, not the procedure itself, should be reported as the SAE. For example, 
if a s ubject is hospi[INVESTIGATOR_15428], record the heart 
condition that necessitated the by[CONTACT_13664].  
 Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_15429]:  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_38266]  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_15431]  
• Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_38267].  
e. Pregnancy  
If a female subject becomes pregnant while receiving ocrelizumab or within [ADDRESS_40221] dose of study drug, a report should be completed and expeditiously submitted to the Genentech, Inc. Follow -up to obtain the outcome 
of the pregnancy should also occur. Abortion, whether accidental, therapeutic, or spontaneous, should always be classified as serious, and expeditiously reported as an SAE. Similarly, any congenital anomaly/birth defect in a child born to a female subject expos ed to the ocrelizumab should be reported as an SAE.  
 Additional information on any ocrelizumab- exposed pregnancy and infant will be 
requested by [CONTACT_38310] (i.e. after having 
 
29 
 received the initial report, at the end of the second trimester, 2 weeks after the 
expected date of delivery, and at 3, 6, and 12 months of the infant’s life).  
 
f. Post -Study Adverse Events  
The investigator should expeditiously report any SAE occurring after a subject 
has completed or discontinued study participation if attributed to prior ocrelizumab exposure. If the investigator should become aware of the development of cancer or a congenital anomaly in a subsequently conceived offspring of a female subject who participated in the study, this should be reported as an SAE.   
g. Reconciliation  
The Sponsor agrees to conduct safety reconciliation for the safety events 
reported on ocrelizumab. Genentech and the Sponsor will agree to the reconciliation periodicity and format, but agree at minimum to exchang e quarterly 
line listings of cases received by [CONTACT_15481].   If discrepancies are identified, the Sponsor and Genentech will cooperate in resolving the discrepancies. The responsible individuals for each party shall handle the matter on a case- by-case  basis until satisfactory resolution.  The 
sponsor shall receive reconciliation guidance documents within the ‘Activation Package’.  
h.  AEs of Special Interest (AESIs)  
AEs of Special Interest are defined as a potential safety problem, identified as a result of safety monitoring of the Product. The AEs of special interest listed below will also be recorded and must be reported to Genentech as described in Section i.   
 
  
Hys and Stiamp:  
1. Cases of potential drug -induced liver injury that include an elevated ALT 
or AST in combination with either an elevated bilirubin or clinical jaundice, 
as defined by [CONTACT_25742]’s law  
2. Suspected transmission of an infectious agent by [CONTACT_5257], as 
defined below : 
Any organism, virus, or infectious particle (e.g., prion protein transmitting 
transmissible spongiform encephalopathy), pathogenic or non- pathogenic, 
is considered an infectious agent.  A transmission of an infectious agent 
may be suspected from clinical  symptoms or laboratory findings that 
indicate an infection in a patient exposed to a medicinal product.  This 
term applies only when a contamination of the study drug is suspected.  
 
 
[ADDRESS_40222] report all SAEs to Genentec h within the timelines described 
below. The completed Medwatch/case report should be faxed immediately upon 
completion to Genentech Drug Safety at:  
 
(650) 225- 4682  
OR 
(650) 225- -[ADDRESS_40223], whether related or unrelated to ocrelizumab, will be transmitted to Genentech within one (1) business day of the Awareness Date.  
 
Additional reporting requirements to Genentech include the following:  
• Any reports of pregnancy following the start of administration with 
ocrelizumab and within the follow -up period (for female patients within [ADDRESS_40224] dose of ocrelizumab will be transmitted to Genentech 
within one (1) business day of the Awareness Date. Pregnancies will be 
followed up until the outcome of the pregnancy is known, whenever possible, based upon due diligence taken to obtain the follow -up 
information.  
• All non -serious ocrelizumab AEs originating from  the study will be 
forwarded to Genentech quarterly.  
In addition to SAEs, pregnancy reports and AESIs, the following Special 
Situations Reports should be collected and transmitted to Genentech/[COMPANY_002] even in the absence of an Adverse Event within thirty (30) calendar days:  
 
• Data related to product usage during pregnancy or breastfeeding  
• Data related to overdose, abuse, misuse, inadvertent/erroneous 
administration, medication error or occupational exposure, with or without association with an AE/SAE unless ot herwise specified in the protocol  
• Data related to a suspected transmission of an infectious agent via a medicinal product (STIAMP)  
• Lack of therapeutic efficacy  
In addition, reasonable attempts should made to obtain and submit the age or 
age group of the patient, in order to be able to identify potential safety signals specific to a particular population.  
 
 
[ADDRESS_40225] a copy of the Final Study Report to [COMPANY_002] 
upon completion of the Study.  
 
Note: Investigators should also report events to their IRB as required.  
 
5.[ADDRESS_40226] 
medication information, the report should include the following information within the Event Description (section 5) of the MedWatch 3500A form:  
• Protocol description (and number, if assigned)  
• Description of event, severity, treatment, and outcome if known 
• Supportive laboratory results and diagnostics  
• Investigator’s assessment of the relationship o f the adverse event to each 
investigational product and suspect medication 
Follow -up Information 
Additional information may be added to a previously submitted report by [CONTACT_38311]:  
• Adding to the original MedWatch 3500A report and submitti ng it as follow -up 
• Adding supplemental summary information and submitting it as follow -up with 
the original MedWatch 3500A form  
• Summarizing new information and faxing it with a cover letter including patient 
identifiers (i.e. D.O.B. initial, patient number), protocol description and number, if 
assigned, brief adverse event description, and notation that additional or follow -
up information is being submitted (The patient identifiers are important so that the new information is added to the correct initial r eport)  
 Occasionally Genentech may contact [CONTACT_15483], clarification, or current status of the patient for whom an adverse event was reported. For questions regarding SAE reporting, you may contact [CONTACT_38312]. Relevant follow -up information should be submitted to Genentech Drug 
Safety as soon as it becomes available and/or upon request.  
 MedWatch 3500A (Mandatory Reporting) form is available at  
http://www.fda.gov/medwatch/getforms.html
  
 5.5 Additional Reporting Requirements for IND Holders  
For Investigator -Sponsored IND Studies, some additional reporting requirements 
for the FDA apply in accordance with the guidance set forth in 21 CFR § 600.80.  
 Events meeting the following criteria need to be submitted to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as expedited IND Safety Reports according to the following guidance and timelines:  
 
32 
 7 Calendar Day Telephone or Fax Report:  
The Investigator is required to notify the FDA of any fatal or life- threatening 
adverse event that is unexpected and assessed by [CONTACT_38313]. An unexpected adverse event is one that is not 
already described in the ocrelizumab  Investigator Brochure. Such reports are to 
be telephoned or faxed to the FDA and Genentech within [ADDRESS_40227] 
learning of the event.  
15 Calendar Day Written Report  
The Investigator is also requi red to notify the FDA and all participating 
investigators, in a written IND Safety Report, of any serious, unexpected AE that 
is considered reasonably or possibly related to the use of ocrelizumab. An unexpected adverse event is one that is not already des cribed in the ocrelizumab 
investigator brochure.  
 Written IND Safety reports should include an Analysis of Similar Events in 
accordance with regulation 21 CFR § 312.32. All safety reports previously filed 
by [CONTACT_38314], similar reports 
commented on.  
 
Written IND safety reports with Analysis of Similar Events are to be submitted to 
the FDA, Genentech, and all participating investigators within [ADDRESS_40228] learning of the event. The FDA prefers these reports on a MedWatch 3500 form, but alternative formats are acceptable (e.g., summary letter).  
 
FDA fax number for IND Safety Reports:  
Fax: 1 (800) FDA [ADDRESS_40229] also be faxed to Genentech Drug Safety:  
Fax: (650) 225- 4682 or (650) 225- 4630  
 And to the Site IRB:  
Colorado Multiple Institutional Review Board (COMIRB) office at 303 -724-1055 
or [EMAIL_640]
.  
For questions related to safety reporting, please contact [CONTACT_38315]:  
Tel: (888) 835- 2555  
Fax: (650) 225- 4682    OR    (650) 225- 4630  
 
IND Annual Reports  
 
33 
 Copi[INVESTIGATOR_15435]:  
All IND annual reports submitted to the FDA by [CONTACT_1034] -Investigator should 
be copi[INVESTIGATOR_38268]:  
 
ocrelizumab- [EMAIL_641]  and ctvist_drugsafety @gene.com   
 
Study Close -Out 
Any study report submitted to the FDA by [CONTACT_1034] -Investigator should be 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_38269]. This includes all IND annual reports and the Clinical Study Report (final study report). Additionally, any literature articles that  are a result of 
the study should be sent to Genentech. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_38270]: ocrelizumab- iis-
[EMAIL_260]  and your Genentech MSL  
 
6.  Investigator Requirements  
6.[ADDRESS_40230] be on file with 
Genentech or a Genentech representative:  
• Original U.S. FDA Form 1572 for each site (for all studies conducted under U.S. 
Investigational New Drug [IND] regulations), signed by [CONTACT_079]  
[INVESTIGATOR_38271]- investigators must appear on this form.  Investigators 
must also complete all regulatory documentation as required by [CONTACT_27952].  
• Current curriculum vitae of the Principal Investigator  
• Written documentation of IRB approval of protocol and informed consent document  
• A copy of the IRB -approved informed consent document  
• A signed Clinical Research Agreement  
 6.2 Study Completion 
The follo wing materials are requested by [CONTACT_38316] a study is considered 
complete or terminated:  
• Any study report submitted to the FDA by [CONTACT_1034] -Investigator should be 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_38269]. This includes all IND annual reports and the Clinical Study 
Report  (final study report). Additionally, any literature articles that are a result of 
the study should be sent to Genentech. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_38272]:  
• Email : ocrelizumab- [EMAIL_641]
  
 
 
[ADDRESS_40231]’s 
legally authorized representative before his or her participation in the study.  The 
case history for each subject will document that informed consent was obtained prior to participation in the study.  A copy of the informed consent document must be provided to the subject or the subject's legally authorized representative.  If applicable, it will be provided i n a certified translation of the local language.  
Signed consent forms will remain in each subject’s study file and will be available for verification by [CONTACT_9534].  
 6.[ADDRESS_40232] to their IRB any written safety report or update provided by [CONTACT_8229] (e.g.,  IND safety report, Investigator Brochure, safety amendments 
and updates, etc.).  
 6.5 Study Monitoring R equirements  
NA 
 6.6 Data Collection  
See section 4.5.1.  
 6.7 Study Medication Accountability (if applicable)  
If study drug will be provided by [CONTACT_8229], accurate records of all study drug 
dispensed from and returned to the study site should be recorded by [CONTACT_38317]’s drug inventory log.  
All expi[INVESTIGATOR_5697], partially used or empty containers should be disposed of at the study 
site according to institutional standard operating procedure.   
 
[ADDRESS_40233]’s permission, medical information may be given to his or her personal physician or other appropriate medical personnel r esponsible for his or 
her welfare.  
Data generated by [CONTACT_38318] U.S. FDA, national and local health authorities, Genentech, and the IRB for each study site, if appropriate.  
The results  of this study may be published or presented at scientific meetings.  
The Sponsor will comply with the requirements for the publication of study results.   
Additionally, Section [ADDRESS_40234] 
(FDAAA 801)  (PDF) requires Responsible Parties to register and submit 
summary results of clinical trials with ClinicalTrials.gov. The law applies to certain clinical trials of drugs (including biological products) and medical devices. (Refer to FDAAA 801 Requirements  to learn about Responsible Party, Applicable 
Clinical Trials, and deadlines for registration and results  submission)  
 6.9 Retention of Records  
U.S. FDA regulations (21 CFR §312.62[c]) require that records and documents 
pertaining to the conduct of this study and the distribution of investigational drug, including CRFs, consent forms, laboratory test results,  and medication inventory 
records, must be retained by [CONTACT_079] [INVESTIGATOR_8178] [ADDRESS_40235] 
retention policies of the relevant national and local health authorities.  
 
36 
 REFERENCES  
 
1. Palanichamy A , Jahn S , Nickles D, Rituximab efficiently depletes increased 
CD20 expressing T cells in multiple sclerosis patients. J Immunol . 2014 July 15; 
193(2): 580– 586. doi:10.4049/jimmunol.1400118  
2. Ludwig Kappos, David Li, Peter A Calabresi, Paul O’Connor, Amit Bar -Or, 
Frederik Barkhof, Ming Yin, David Leppert, Robert Glanzman, Jeroen Tinbergen, 
Stephen L Hauser; Ocrelizumab in relapsing- remitting multiple sclerosis: a phase 
2, randomised, placebo- controlled, multicentre trial: Lancet 2011; 378: 1779– 87 
3. Hauser SL, Waubant E, Arnold DL, et al, for the HERMES Trial Group. B -cell 
depletion with rituximab in relapsing -remitting multiple sclerosis. N Engl J Med 
2008; 358: 676– 88 
4. F. HOFFMANN -LA ROCHE LTD. INVESTIGATOR’S BROCHURE RO4964913 
Ocrelizumab Fourteenth Version, November 2015 Addendum No. 1 (February 
2016).  
5. Owens, GP; Bennet, JL. Gilden, DH, Burgeon, MP. The B cell response in 
multiple sclerosis. Neurol Res 2006;28;236 -44. 
6. National Cancer Institute, Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events V 
4.0 (available ahttp://www.oncology.tv/SymptomManagement/NationalCancerInstituteUpdates
CTCAEtov403.aspx)  
7. Schwartz CE, Vollmer T, Lee H, North American Research Consortium on 
Multiple Sclerosis Outcomes Study Group. Reliability and validity of two self -
report measures of impairment and disability for MS Neurology 1999; 52: 63– 71 
8. Kurtzke JF. Rating neurologic impairment in multiple sclerosis: An expanded disability status scale (EDSS). Neurology , November 1983;33(11). 1444. doi: 
10.1212/WNL.33.11.1444 
 
 
  
 
37 
 APPENDIX B: SAFETY REPORTING FAX COVER SHEET  
 
   
Genentech Supported Research  
[IP_ADDRESS].1.1.1  AE / SAE FAX No: (650) 225 -4682  
[IP_ADDRESS].1.1.2  Alternate Fax No: (650) 225- 5288  
  
Genentech Study Number   
[IP_ADDRESS].1.1.3  Principal 
Investigator   
[IP_ADDRESS].1.1.4  Site Name   
[IP_ADDRESS].1.1.5  Reporter name   
[IP_ADDRESS].1.1.6  Reporter 
Telephone #   
[IP_ADDRESS].1.1.7  Reporter Fax #   
   
[IP_ADDRESS].1.1.8  Initial Report Date  [IP_ADDRESS].1.1.9  [DD] / [MON] / [YY] 
[IP_ADDRESS].1.1.10  Follow -up 
Report Date  [IP_ADDRESS].1.1.11  [DD] / [MON] / [YY] 
[IP_ADDRESS].1.1.12   
[IP_ADDRESS].1.1.[ADDRESS_40236] 
Initials  
[IP_ADDRESS].1.1.14  (Enter a 
dash if patient has no middle name)  [IP_ADDRESS].1.1.15  [ ] - [ ] - [ ] 
 SAE or Safety Reporting questions, contact [CONTACT_38319]: (888) 835- 2555  
  
