Official Title of the study: Project Impact: An Innovative Approach to Weight Loss Maintenance   
NCT number: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Date of the document: August 1, [ADDRESS_46367]  and preregistered at 
clinicaltrials.gov (Clinical Trials Identifier: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]). Participants provided informed 
consent during enrollment , which was conducted by [CONTACT_44212] . The statistician  conducted randomization  using  a random numbers table. Participants, 
counselors , and other study staff were blind to allocation , with no access to allocation data  
during Phase I . During Phase II , three different forms of behavioral treatment were tested and 
only outcomes assessors rema ined blinded to condition.  An independent officer completed data 
and safety monitoring.  
Participants  
Participants were recruited from the community for this study from 2014 to 2016. 
Inclusion criteria were : BMI 27 – 45 kg/m2 (measured in clinic), age 18 -70 years, and 
completion of all steps in the enrollment process . Exclusion criteria were : medical or psychiatric 
conditions that could pose a risk during lifestyle modification or significantly limit the ability to 
begin a program of PA; history of bariatric surgery; current  use of weight -affecting medication; 
weight loss of 5% or more in the past 6 months; current pregnancy, lactation, or plans to become 
pregnant during the study period; participation in or plan to participate in anothe r weight loss 
program during the study period; having an immediate family member or household member 
participating in the study.  Participants received compensation  for assessment visits as follows: 
$25 for baseline, $25 for month 6, $25 for month 12, and $ [ADDRESS_46368] launch, a final sample of 320 participants was selected, with 
 2 
the assumption of up to 30% attrition, to provide 81% power to detect a medium effect size of 
weight loss or MVPA . Power analyses  accounted for a three -level hierarchical structure, with 
repeated measures for each participant in a group within one of the three intervention arms, 
assuming a within -subject corr elation of 0.5 and a within -group correlation of 0.05 (estimated 
from pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299] ). A medium effect size was chosen because 1) an effect of that size may be 
needed to justify a departure from standard behavioral treatment ( McGough & Faraone, 2009) , 
2) previous research comparing ABT to BT has observed a medium effect size for a primary 
outcome (Forman et al., 2016), and 3) medium or larger effect sizes have been observed for the 
comparison of weight loss in those engaging in high versus low MVPA ( Tate, Jeffery, 
Sherwood, & Wing, 2007) . 
Shared  Intervention Components  
Phase I  (Months 1 to 6) consist ed of 16 closed -group sessions, held on a weekly  (8 
sessions)  and then bi -weekly (8 sessions) basis, with approximately 12 participants in each 
group. During Phase I, all participants received BWL  treatment designed to induce 10% weight 
loss, with materials adapted from Look AHEAD  (2006)  and the Diabetes Prevention Program  
(2002) . Participants were instructed to keep daily records of dietary intake. Cal orie intake was  
emphasized as the key determinant of weight loss. Stimulus control, problem solving, goal 
setting, and social support skills were taught. Participants were instructed to gradually self-
monitor and increase free-living MVPA, with a goal of m aintaining [ADDRESS_46369] MVPA  in bouts of 10 
minutes or more.  Participants self -reported weekly MVPA minutes and average calorie intake 
during each session’s group check -in, and  counselors also provided brief written feedback on 
self-monitoring records on which exercise and dietary intake were reported. Counselors had 
 3 
doctoral -level psychology training.  In Phase I and II, all group sessions began with private 
measurement of weigh t. 
Phase II  Interventions (Months 7 -18) 
 Group sessions (14 total) continued in Phase II, beginning with 7 weekly sessions 
followed by 4 bi -weekly sessions. The final three sessions were held in Months 12, 15, and 18. 
Each participant also had a 15 -minute phone call with a counselor between the q uarterly sessions 
(three calls total)  to promote continued engagement . Supplementary Table A details the 
intervention content in each arm.  
Behavioral Therapy (BT)   
The BT condition in Phase II  continued to be based on Look AHEAD  (2006)  and 
Diabetes Prevention Program  (2002)  materials. Sessions were designed to apply traditional 
behavioral skills such as problem solving and goal setting to the challenges of long -term lifestyle 
modification. A pproximately two -thirds of intervention content and session time was designed to 
be applied to eating behavior, with a secondary emphasis on PA.  
Behavioral Therapy with Physical Activity Emphasis (BT+PA)  
In the BT+PA condition, approximately two -thirds of session time and content was 
designed to focus on PA, with one -third of session time focused on eating behavior. The 
intervention was created by [CONTACT_44213]  (2006)  and Diabetes 
Prevention Program  (2002)  protocols to be PA-focused, and by [CONTACT_44214]’s behavior change taxonomy  (Michie et al., 2011) . For example, when a session on 
“maintaining motivation” was conducted, exercises and discussion in session were  focused  
primarily on enhancing motivation for PA. As a nother example, the application of goal setting 
skills was primarily focused on PA goals. Progress towards PA goals, particularly the barriers or 
 4 
facilitators of such progress, was reviewed in each session in greater detail than occurred in the 
BT conditio n. PA, rather than eating behavior, was the primary target for problem solving skills. 
Group leaders frequently encouraged development of implementation intentions for PA.  
Acceptance -Based Behavioral Therapy with Physical Activity Emphasis (ABT+PA)  
The amount of emphasis on promoting PA was designed to be similar in BT+PA and 
ABT+PA. However, in ABT+PA, acceptance -based behavioral skills were taught , rather than 
traditional behavioral skills. This approach was adapted primarily from an accep tance -based 
weight loss protocol  (Forman  & Butryn,  2016) . A key goal was to  increase awareness of internal 
experiences that shape PA behaviors. The approach validated the sense that many aspects of PA 
are “uncomfortable,” meaning that it can be difficult to tolerate the thoughts  (e.g., “I would 
rather be doing something else”) , emotions  (e.g., boredom) , urges  (e.g., to avoid or end  exercise) , 
or physical sensations  (e.g., sweating)  that occur while one attempts to engage in PA or while 
making PA -related decisions . Participants le arned how to respond to internal experiences with a 
stance of non -judgmental acceptance, which enables flexibility (i.e.,  the ability to engage in a 
wide range of behaviors, regardless of the accompanying internal experiences). Ultimately, 
acceptance was i ntended to promote long -term persistence in PA. Values clarity, which is 
integral to the use of acceptance skills, included the ability to consider the ways in which being 
physically active enables  pursu it of what is most important in one’s life  (e.g., bei ng physical fit 
can make travel or community service more feasible) . Participants were encouraged to use their 
“long -term mind” to have a heightened awareness of their values at moments of PA -related  
decision making, rather than being driven by [CONTACT_44215] i nternal experiences.  
Measures  
Assessments were conducted at Months 0, 6, 12, and 18.   
 5 
Demographics . Race, ethnicity, sex, age, and education were  self-reported at baseline.  
Moderate -to-Vigorous Physical Activity . Participants were instructed to wear ActiGraph 
(Pensacola, FL) GT3X tri -axial, solid state accelerometers for all waking hours for 7 consecutive 
days at each assessment point. ActiLife software was used with cutpoints defined by [CONTACT_44216]. (2008)  to identify bouts of [ADDRESS_46370] 10 hours each day for 4 or more days.  
Weight and Height.  Participants’ weights were measured by  [CONTACT_9872] a 
Tanita® model WB -[ADDRESS_46371] the speed of the 
treadmill and were instructed to walk as briskly  as they could , adjusting the speed as they wished 
throughout the task. Participants were told that the task was a measure of physical fitness.  
Shorter times indicat ed a greater level of cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_17863]  (Mayorga -Vega , Bocanegra -
Parrilla, Ornelas, & Viciana,  2016) .  
Waist Circumference . Waist circumference was measured horizontally at the umbilicus. 
Measurements were taken two times and averaged if the measurements were discrepant by [CONTACT_4736] 2.0 cm (measurement s were re -taken if the discrepancy was greater).   
Treatment Fidelity . All treatment sessions were audio -recorded, and 10% of recordings  
were rated for counselor  fidelity to the treatment manual.  The treatment manual was organized 
so that each session included a check -in, two or three topi[INVESTIGATOR_44211] a particular behavior skill, and assignment of skill builders. Each of these section s of the 
 6 
session  was rated o n a 1 -10 scale for adherence, with adherence defined as the extent to which 
the material was delivered as specified in the manual, including pacing  of each topic . BT 
sessions also were given a rating for the extent to which the counselor  avoiding PA 
contam ination (i.e., limit ed the focus on PA to that specified in the manual) and BT and BT+PA 
conditio ns were rated for  avoiding ABT contamination .  
Data Analysis Plan : Results Through 18 Months  
Data were analyzed in R  (Team, 2013)  and SPSS Version 25  (IBM Corp., 2017 ). Data 
distributions and assumptions were examined before conducting any formal statistical test.  
Analyses were conducted on an intent -to-treat basis with multiple imputation via the mice 
package in R (van Buuren, 2011) , such that all par ticipants enrolled in the trial were included in 
analyses (BT: n = 110, BT -PA: n = 105, ABT -PA: n = 105) , with two exception s noted for 
exploratory analys es. We performed the analyses for each of the imputed datasets separately , and 
combined the test statistics across datasets based on Rubin’s rule as implemented in the miceadds 
package in R (Robitzsch, 2017) . To account for the zero -inflated distribution of MVPA, 
compound Poisson  linear regression models (cplm; Zhang, 2013)  were used to test the treatment 
effect on MVPA at [ADDRESS_46372] of treatment 
condition on MVPA or percent weight loss depended  on sex, baseline BMI, baseline MVPA, 
weight loss in Phase I or change in MVPA during Phase I. Additional exploratory analyses using 
general linear models were performed to further understand the relationship between specific 
 7 
levels of MVPA (regardless of condition) and weight loss outcomes  among participants (n = 
271) who provided data at 6 months; this subsample was chosen to reduce missing data to allow 
for greater precision in estimating dose -response for this analys is.  