 
 
Official Title: Calibration and Usability 
Validation of Patient Monitoring Device for 
Pressure Injury Prevention and Fall Detection 
 
Date of Protocol: 17 December 2018 
 
Study ID: [REMOVED]  

 CLINICAL INVESTIGATION PLAN 
RAMS0006  
Usability Validation of Patient Monitoring Device for Pressure Injury Prevention and 
Fall Detection  Version 2.0  
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2020 Masimo Corporation (Unpublished) 
All Rights Reserved Page 1 of 13 
 
  
 
Calibration and Usability Validation of Patient Monitoring Devi ce for Pressure 
Injury Prevention and Fall Detection  
 
 
 
Sponsor: Masimo 
52 Discovery 
Irvine, [LOCATION_004] [ZIP_CODE] 
  
Principal Investigator: 
 
[INVESTIGATOR_60055]-Investigator: Michael A.E. Ramsay, MD, FRCA  
 
Susan H. Smith, DNP, APRN, ACNS-BC   
  
Study Device: Masimo Centroid Sensor Monitoring Device 
Masimo Radical-7 Pulse CO-Oximeter 
Masimo LNCS® Pulse Oximeter Sensors  
Masimo Root Patient Monitoring System 
Masimo SedLine Brain Function Module and Sensors  
 
  
Sponsor Protocol Number: RAMS0006  
  
IRB: Baylor Research Institute  Institutional Review Board  
3310 Live Oak, Suite 501 
Dallas, TX [ZIP_CODE] 
 
 
 
 
Principal Investigator 
 
[INVESTIGATOR_68020] A.E. Ramsay, 
MD, FRCA Title 
 
Chairman, Department of 
Anesthesiology & Pain Management Signature [CONTACT_642464]0006: Calibration and Usability Validation of Patient Monit oring Device for Pressure Injury 
Prevention and Fall Detection  Version 2.0
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2020 Masimo Corporation (Unpublished) 
All Rights Reserved                                                                             Page [ADDRESS_859795]’s posi tion, movement and physiological data using Masimo’s 
Centroid system. The Centroid monitoring system consists of a n oninvasive, coin-battery operated, wearable sensor that can 
be attached to a subject’s chest or back and is intended to sen d the subject’s position, movement and activity data to the Roo t 
monitoring station via a Bluetooth link. Device and usability d ata from the Centroid system as well as staff notes about the 
subject’s demographics, vital signs, health condition, and acti vity will be collected. Additionally, this protocol allows for the 
placement of Masimo’s pulse oximeter system and SedLine brain f unction monitoring system. The SedLine system will 
collect EEG data in this patient population. The pulse oximeter  system will collect plethysmogram data. 
1.1 Background and Rationale 
Masimo Corporation is the developer of noninvasive technologies  for the measurement and monitoring of physiological 
variables, such as arterial oxygen saturation (SpO 2), total hemoglobin concentration (SpHb), carboxyhemoglobin 
concentration (SpCO), methemoglobin concentration (SpMet), acou stic respi[INVESTIGATOR_642451] (RAM), and cerebral and 
regional oximetry (rSO2, O3TM). These technologies are noninvasive and have a good patient s afety record.  
Masimo has developed a new noninvasive sensor named Centroid as  a device to aid in preventing hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]-acquired pressure 
injury or worsening of existing pressure injury by [CONTACT_10056] p atient movement, position, and orientation. The sensor is also 
able to detect falls through the same monitoring features. This  type of monitoring may be effective in reducing the 
debilitating conditions for patients and their extended stays i n hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], especially in the patient population who are 
vulnerable to acquire pressure injuries and/or are prone to fal l-related injuries.  
Each year over 2.5 million individuals in the U.S. develop a pr essure injury.1 Pressure injuries are painful, debilitating and 
are usually avoidable. Routine repositioning relieves and redis tributes pressure over bony prominences. It is a recommended 
procedure to help mitigate the risks for developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a pressure injury.2 The Centroid device, through detection of patient 
position, is a modality to ensure repositioning occurs routinel y.  
As many as 1 million Americans fall in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_642452].  Falls result in fractures, lacerations, bleeding and even deat h. 
Current practices to prevent falls include assessment of patien t risk, scheduled rounding practices and patient specific 
interventions to prevent falls.3 The Centroid device is proposed to be an additional technology  to assess risk for fall based on 
patient position and unique modality additive to these current practices. 
The Centroid system consists of a wearable, battery-operated, a dhesive sensor and a back-end user interface and Root 
monitor display at the patient bedside as well as a central loc ation (e.g., nursing station). The sensor contains sensing 
elements (accelerometer s, gyroscopes), proces sor, and a  blue-to oth communication chip (BTLE 2.4 GHz). An algorithm 
processes three-dimensional acceleration and rotation informati on and calculates the patient’s relative position and fall as 
parameters. These parameters are then combined over a given tim e period and computes past trend and future risk assessment 
for pressure injury. The system can generate alarms configured for adverse events related to patient posture, pressure injury 
risk and fall. 
In this study, subject position data and feedback about device usability will be collected. Data collection will also be 
conducted for Masimo’s SedLine brain function monitoring system . Secondary aims are to collect data for the pulse oximeter 
sensor and SedLine sensor for the purpose of correlating agains t Centroid sensor’s data and further investigation. 
1.2 Investigational Devices  
RAMS0006: Calibration and Usability Validation of Patient Monit oring Device for Pressure Injury 
Prevention and Fall Detection  Version 2.0
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2020 Masimo Corporation (Unpublished) 
All Rights Reserved                                                                             Page [ADDRESS_859796]’s skin and continuously storing 
and transmitting positional data wirelessly, to a host instrume nts/devices to analyze the subject’s activities. The sensor’s s kin-
contact[CONTACT_642459]-co nductive. The device is intended to be used in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]-type facilities, healthcare facilities, and home envir onments.  
Investigational SedLine sensors and patient cables may be used in this study. The SedLine brain function module is non-
invasive and uses sensors that adhere to the subject’s forehead . The SedLine brain function module uses a sophisticated 
multivariate algorithm to assess the patient’s electroencephalo gram (EEG) data from all 4 channels of the SedLine EEG 
sensor. The SedLine V2 sensor is intended to monitor the state of the brain by [CONTACT_5203]-time data acquisition and processing of 
EEG signals. The SedLine system includes patient cable that con nects the sensor and module to the Root multi-function 
monitoring system, which monitors multiple physiological parame ters in healthcare environments. 
2 STUDY DEVICES 
2.1 Description 
Investigational Devices: 
Centroid monitoring device SedLine V2 sensor and V2 patient cable 
FDA-cleared Devices: 
SedLine brain function module  
Root monitor*  Radical-7 Pulse CO-Oximeter LNCS
 SpO 2 sensors 
*NOTE: during the validation stage of the study, the FDA-cleare d Root monitor will be updated with Centroid software. The 
Root monitor at this time will be considered an investigational  device, alth ough no new pa tient risks will be introduced by [CONTACT_3433] e 
addition of the Centroid software.  
2.[ADDRESS_859797] be performed and the Equipment Shipment Check Fo rm (FRM-2713) and the device accountability log will 
be completed for each device and signed by [CONTACT_108568]. It is important that the designated study staff counts and verifies t hat 
the shipment contains all the items noted in the shipment inven tory. Any damaged or unusable study devices in a given 
shipment will be documented in the study files. The investigato r must notify the study sponsor of any damaged or unusable 
study devices that were supplied to the investigator’s site. 
2.2.2 Use of Study Device 
Use of devices and sensors will be documented on case report fo rms (CRF) for each subject. Any unused devices must be 
returned to the Sponsor at the end of the study or before produ ct expi[INVESTIGATOR_320]. 
2.2.3 Return or Destruction of Study Device 
At the completion of the study, there will be a final reconcili ation of study devices. This reconciliation will be logged on t he 
device accountability log. Any discrepancies noted will be inve stigated, resolved, and documented prior to return or 
RAMS0006: Calibration and Usability Validation of Patient Monit oring Device for Pressure Injury 
Prevention and Fall Detection  Version 2.0
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2020 Masimo Corporation (Unpublished) 
All Rights Reserved                                                                             Page [ADDRESS_859798] all device deficienc ies on the case report form and report to the Sponsor. 
2.3 Risk/Benefits 
Benefits:  There will be no direct benefits to the enrolled subjects.  Fu ture benefits to subjects include effective pressure 
injury prevention (i.e., reduction in their occurrence and/or s everity) and detection of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_642453].  
Centroid device risks:  As with all wearable sensors, the Centroid sensor has a risk o f thermal burn as there is a coin battery 
in the sensor. The coin battery used in the Centroid device is widely used in other commercially available medical devices for  
wearable monitoring applications. Masimo’s design includes safe guards against thermal burn, and this risk is believed to be 
low. Sensors will be attached with a medical-grade, biocompatib le adhesive. Marks may appear on the skin beneath the 
sensor due to adhesion for a long period (from several hours to  days). The risk is believed to be low. The sensor transmits 
that data, after on-sensor processing, via a radio link to the host device. 
SEDLine V2 sensor and V2 patient cable risks: All patient-contact [CONTACT_129625], including the adhesive used in t he design of 
the Masimo sensors, have been subjected to biocompatibility tes ts per ISO [ZIP_CODE]-[ADDRESS_859799]. 
Pulse oximeter risks:  The Radical-7 pulse CO-oximeter device and LNCS® pulse oximeter sensors used in this study are 
FDA-cleared.  
Root patient monitoring system risks:  The Masimo Root Monitoring System and SedLine brain function m odule used 
during this study are FDA-cleared devices. 
[ADDRESS_859800] data for calibration  and usability validation  of the new Centroid monitoring 
system which Masimo has developed for monitoring a patient’s po sition and movement to prevent pressure injury and 
detecting falls in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. This protocol describes data c ollection from patient volunteers during their routine hospi[INVESTIGATOR_642454]. During the calibration p hase, positional data will be collected for the purpose of 
evaluating the Centroid design and technology. Usability valida tion data will be collected and analyzed from a questionnaire 
regarding the Centroid system, with regards to ease of use, sen sor application and adhesive quality, subject comfort, device 
display and user selection, and feedback from the study staff a bout clarity of parameters display, etc. 
Secondary aims are to collect data for the pulse oximeter senso r and SedLine sensor for the purpose of correlating against 
Centroid sensor’s data and further investigation. 
4 STUDY DESIGN 
4.1 General Design 
This is a prospective clinical study of Masimo’s Centroid senso r in patients to collect movement, position, and other 
physiological data from a sensor placed on the subject’s chest or back. LNCS pulse oximeter sensors will be placed on 
subjects according to their tolerance of the sensors. SedLine s ensors may be placed on subjects while they are asleep. 
4.2 Study Endpoint 
RAMS0006: Calibration and Usability Validation of Patient Monit oring Device for Pressure Injury 
Prevention and Fall Detection  Version 2.0
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2020 Masimo Corporation (Unpublished) 
All Rights Reserved                                                                             Page [ADDRESS_859801] to Centroid comfort and durability, Centroid 
pairing/connection with Root monitor, and Root display.   
[ADDRESS_859802] in 
participating in the study, they will be asked to read the writ ten Informed Consent Form in English or Spanish depending on 
the patient’s language preference.  
All items of the Informed Consent will be explained in a way th at is easily understandable, for either English or Spanish 
speaking subjects. The patient will be given adequate time to r ead through the Informed Consent, and they will be given 
adequate time and privacy to consider the decision of whether o r not to sign the Informed Consent Form. Once all of the 
patient’s questions have been answered and the Informed Consent  Form signed, the patient is now adequately consented. 
RAMS0006: Calibration and Usability Validation of Patient Monit oring Device for Pressure Injury 
Prevention and Fall Detection  Version 2.0
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2020 Masimo Corporation (Unpublished) 
All Rights Reserved                                                                             Page [ADDRESS_859803]’s demographic (including, but  not limited to age, weight, race, ethnicity, etc.), preexistin g 
allergies, skin abnormalities, and other preexisting diseases/c onditions that may be relevant to the study will be recorded 
within a paper-based Case Report Form (CRF).  
HIPAA 
The pre-screening of patients will require the investigators to  access personal health information to identify prospective 
subjects without HIPAA authorization prior to obtaining written  informed consent for the study. Informed consent and 
HIPAA authorization will be obtained during recruitment and scr eening procedures as described in previous sections of this 
clinical investigation plan; however, pre-screening process wou ld require a waiver of HIPAA authorization, as the research 
study could not be practicably carried out without this implied  waiver of consent. The participants’ rights and welfare will n ot 
be adversely affected by [CONTACT_108567]. Patients’ protected h ealth information (PHI) will not be inappropriately reused or 
disclosed to any other person or entity. To further safeguard a ll protected health information, the data collected during the 
study will not be labeled with any personal identifying informa tion, or with a code that this research team can link to person al 
identifying information. The data will not be stored with any p rotected health information identifiers.   
6.[ADDRESS_859804]’s withdrawal should be documented in the case report fo rm and should include clear documentation of the reason for 
withdrawal to the Sponsor. 
6.6.[ADDRESS_859805]’s demographic information, vital signs, Braden Scale sc ore, risk for fall using the Johns Hopkins Fall Risk 
Assessment tool, Richmond Agitation and Sedation Scale (RASS) a nd all specified parameters will be noted in the 
subject’s Case Report Form.  
7.[ADDRESS_859806]’s che st and/or back. The sensors will then be turned on. Study staff  
will note down time, subject’s current position and head-of-bed  angle information, heart rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_1487], and parameter s 
on the Root display on the case report forms approximately ever y [ADDRESS_859807]. If the 
RAMS0006: Calibration and Usability Validation of Patient Monit oring Device for Pressure Injury 
Prevention and Fall Detection  Version 2.0
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2020 Masimo Corporation (Unpublished) 
All Rights Reserved                                                                             Page [ADDRESS_859808]’s comfort or at the PI’s discretion.  
During the calibration phase, data will be stored within the Ce ntroid device. During the validation stage, the Centroid sensor  
will pair with the Root monitor and Centroid data will be store d and displayed on the Root. Study staff will also record the 
Root’s displayed patient position. 
7.[ADDRESS_859809]’s f inger. The data collection will be initiated on the Root 
monitor. The sensor may be removed at any time, depending on th e subject’s tolerance of the sensor. 
7.[ADDRESS_859810]’s forehead and data collection will be initiated on the  Root monitor. The sensor may be removed at any time, 
depending on the subject’s tolerance of the sensor. 
7.[ADDRESS_859811] been obtained with quality data (e.g. no data drop -
outs).  Initial data sets may be considered training sets and m ay not be used for device calibration. Documentation will be 
included in the study records of when the calibration stage has  concluded and when the validation stage commenced. 
8.[ADDRESS_859812] ar e provided below (ISO 141 55:2011, 21 CFR 812.3(s)). 
x Adverse Event (AE): an adverse event is any untoward medical oc currence in a subject which need not be related to the 
device under investigation. 
x Adverse Device Effect (ADE): an adverse device effect is any un toward or unintended response to a medical device 
which may result from insufficiencies in the instructions for u se or deployment of the device, or from use error.  
x Serious Adverse Event (SAE): a serious adverse event is an adve rse event that results in death, inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], 
severe or permanent disability, a life threatening illness or i njury, fetal distress, fetal death, a congenital abnormality, a  
birth defect, or medical or surgical intervention to prevent pe rmanent impairment to body or structure. 
x Serious Adverse Device Effect (SADE): a serious adverse device effect is an adverse device effect that results in death, 
inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], severe or permanent disability or is  life threatening. 
x Unanticipated Adverse Device Effect (UADE): any serious adverse  effect on health or safety or any life threatening 
problem or death cause by [CONTACT_1282], a device, if the effect, problem, or death was not previously identified in 
RAMS0006: Calibration and Usability Validation of Patient Monit oring Device for Pressure Injury 
Prevention and Fall Detection  Version 2.0
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2020 Masimo Corporation (Unpublished) 
All Rights Reserved                                                                             Page 8 of 13 
 
 
 nature, severity or degree of incidence in the investigational plan, or application (including a supplementary plan or 
application) or any other unanticipated serious problem associa ted with a device that related to the rights, safety or 
welfare of subjects. Refer to the Device Risk Analysis and Risk  Assessment section for details on anticipated adverse 
device effects. 
9.2 Anticipated Adverse Events: 
Sensor may cause slight, temporary redness, which should fade a way shortly after sensor removal. 
Sensor may cause thermal burn; however, the design includes saf eguards and this risk is believed to be minimal. There may 
be mild allergic reaction to sensor material and adhesives. 
9.3 Adverse Event Reporting: 
x All Adverse Events, both Anticipated and Unanticipated, must be  recorded in the within the CRF and in the Adverse 
Event Report Form. 
x All Adverse Events must be promptly reported to the Sponsor.  
x All Unanticipated Adverse Device Effects will be also reported to both the Sponsor and the IRB.   
x Both Serious Adverse Events and Unanticipated Adverse Device Ef fects must be reported to the Sponsor within 48 
hours. All other Adverse Events should be reported to the Spons or within 5 business days.  
x All Serious Adverse Events will be also reported to the IRB per  IRB reporting requirements. These reports may include, 
but will not be limited to: date of onset; brief description of  the events; their treatment; whether they resulted in death, 
inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], severe or permanent disability or we re life threatening; their relationship to the study device; 
and resolution. 
9.[ADDRESS_859813] receive both Sponsor and the investigator’s IRB approval before they are initiated with the 
exception that under emergency circumstances, deviations from t he CIP to protect the rights, safety and well-being of human 
subjects may proceed without prior approval of the sponsor or t he EC. Any protocol deviations initiated without Sponsor and 
the investigator’s IRB approval that may affect the scientific soundness of the study, or affect the rights, safety, or welfar e of 
study subjects, must be documented and reported to the Sponsor and to the investigator’s IRB as soon as a possible, but no 
later than 5 working days of the protocol deviation. If protoco l deviations continue to occur frequently at a study site, a 
corrective and preventive action (CAPA) may be opened by [CONTACT_10577].   
9.5 Withdrawal of IRB approval 
An investigator shall r eport to the sponsor  a withdrawal of app roval by [CONTACT_093]’s reviewing IRB as soon as a 
possible, but no later than [ADDRESS_859814] care, special 
considerations and protections in research. This study will rec ruit subjects from the following: economically 
disadvantaged or unemployed, educationally disadvantaged, and l imited English skills and/or Non-US citizens.  
10.2 Protection of vulnerable subjects  
x There is no compensation provided for economically disadvantage d subje cts to elimina te pos sibility of undue 
influence due to financial incentive. 
x Educationally disadvantaged subjects will be provided ample tim e to ask questions and comprehend information.  
RAMS0006: Calibration and Usability Validation of Patient Monit oring Device for Pressure Injury 
Prevention and Fall Detection  Version 2.0
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2020 Masimo Corporation (Unpublished) 
All Rights Reserved                                                                             Page 9 of 13 
 
 
 x Subjects with limited English skills and/or Non-US Citizens wil l be provided translated documents in native 
language, staff/independent interpreter, and have ample time to  ask questions and understand information.  
x Medical care will be provided to these subjects after the clini cal investigation has been completed if they are injured 
as a direct result of participating in this research study. The  cost of treatment for any research related injury will be 
covered by [CONTACT_108573].  
10.[ADDRESS_859815] protected database on a secure  
server, accessible only to the Investigators.  Study data that will be released to Masimo and other regulatory authorities wil l 
be de-identified and will only pertain to study data collection , demographics, finger location of the sensor, and the recordin gs 
from the pulse oximeter.  
11.2 Source Documents 
Source data is all information, original records of clinical fi ndings, observations, or other activities in a clinical trial 
necessary for the reconstruction and evaluation of the trial.  Source data are contained in source documents.  Examples of 
these original documents and data records include: hospi[INVESTIGATOR_269497], clinical and office charts, laboratory notes, memoranda, 
recorded data from automated instruments, and copi[INVESTIGATOR_550751]. For this study, the case report forms may also be use d as source worksheets.  
11.[ADDRESS_859816] be noted on the CRF. Case report for ms are to be completed on an ongoing basis. CRF entries and 
corrections will only be performed by [CONTACT_108575], authori zed by [CONTACT_093]. Entries and corrections to the CRF wil l 
be made following Good Documentation Practices.  
The CRF will include the following information, including but n ot limited to: inclusion/exclusion criteria, whether patient 
consent obtained before start of study, demographic information , device readings, and if occurrence of any adverse event, 
protocol deviation, and device deficiencies, etc. The CRFs will  be signed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_642455] a copy to Masimo.  
CRF entries will be verified by [CONTACT_642460]. Any changes will be made directly on the paper CRFs and re-verified. Query resolution will be assessed and confirmed 
by [CONTACT_108577]. The monitor or study manage r will collect original completed and signed CRFs at the end 
of the study. A copy of the completed and signed CRFs will rema in on site 
11.4 Data Transfer and Storage 
Training on CRF completion will be provided to study personnel prior to data collection. Original CRFs will be stored in a 
secure location at site. Original CRFs will be scanned and sent  to sponsor. During Calibration stage, centroid device will be 
RAMS0006: Calibration and Usability Validation of Patient Monit oring Device for Pressure Injury 
Prevention and Fall Detection  Version 2.0
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2020 Masimo Corporation (Unpublished) 
All Rights Reserved                                                                             Page [ADDRESS_859817] device, the Root® monitoring 
system. For the pulse oximeter and SedLine systems, device data  will be downloaded from the devices and transferred to 
Masimo using secure file transfer protocols. 
CRFs will be checked for accuracy and completeness of data. If there are inconsistent or missing data points, a data query lis t 
will be generated and submitted to the PI [INVESTIGATOR_1461], who shal l both follow GDP practices for data correction by [CONTACT_642461], adding in new entry with initial and dat e, and resend to Masimo the corrected CRF. Once all queries 
have been resolved, Masimo engineers are notified that data is ready for analysis. To ensure data integrity, Masimo engineers 
will only have read access to study data, therefore are unable to unintentionally tamper with the original data files.  
11.[ADDRESS_859818] records, and copi[INVESTIGATOR_642456].   
Study records shall be retained during the study and for a mini mum of two years after date of study closure or date when 
records are not required to support 510(k) clearance. The Insti tution’s own retention policies and regulations may apply in 
addition to the minimal requirement.  
The Sponsor is responsible for verifying study data, retaining records, analyzing data, and authoring study reports. 
12 MONITORING PLAN 
12.1 As the Sponsor of this clinical investigation, Masimo Corporati on is required by 21 CFR, Part 812, of the Food and 
Drug Administration regulations to monitor and oversee the prog ress of the investigation.  The monitor(s) assigned 
by [CONTACT_108579] a direct employee fr om the Clinical Research department trained on 
departmental SOPs on conduct and monitoring of Sponsored studie s. 
12.[ADDRESS_859819] three scheduled monitoring visits to 
ensure overall regulatory compliance of the study: 
x An initiation visit, prior to any subject enrollment to confirm  site readiness, and to document training on the study 
protocol and procedures, and use of equipment. 
x At least one monitoring visit during enrollment, preferably whe n enrollment has reached 10-20% of subjects, and 
then at least once every year thereafter. 
x A final close out visit after the last patient had finished the  study.  
12.3 The Investigator shall allow access to all source documents nee ded to verify the entries in the CRFs and other GCP-
related documents (IRB approvals, IRB correspondences, and ICFs ) provided that subject confidentiality is 
maintained in agreement with HIPAA regulations.  
12.4 It will be the monitor's responsibility to inspect the CRFs at regular intervals throughout the study, to verify the 
adherence to the CIP and the completeness, consistency and accu racy of the data being entered on them.  
12.5 During each visit, the monitor will also verify presence of inf ormed consent, adherence to the inclusion/exclusion 
criteria, and documentation of SAEs/SADEs and protocol deviatio ns/violations, and check CRF against medical 
records as necessary. 
12.6 After each visit, the monitor will provide a monitoring follow- up letter to the investigator within 4 weeks of visit 
completion. The follow-up will detail findings and open action items observed during the visit. It is the 
responsibility of the Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_642457](s) to respond to the findings of the monitoring 
report, and complete any open action items as soon as possible but no later than 30 days of receiving the monitoring 
report. Any open action items not completed within the time all owed may be sufficient grounds for study site 
RAMS0006: Calibration and Usability Validation of Patient Monit oring Device for Pressure Injury 
Prevention and Fall Detection  Version 2.0
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2020 Masimo Corporation (Unpublished) 
All Rights Reserved                                                                             Page 11 of 13 
 
 
 suspension or termination; it will be up to the sponsor to dete rmine whether any incomplete action items are 
sufficient grounds for suspension or termination. See Section 1 3 for details on suspension and termination.  
12.7 Depending on the quality of the data and/or changes to factors affecting patient safety, additional monitoring visits 
may be necessary according at the sponsor’s discretion. 
[ADDRESS_859820]’s record and provide a copy to the  subject as well. The Investigator shall not allow a subject to  
participate in a study or sign consent prior to IRB approval.  
Prior to the start of data collection or subject enrollment, th e Investigator must provide documentation of IRB approval of th e 
study protocol and a copy of the approved informed consent form  (21 CFR 50).  
All subjects will be monitored closely throughout the study. Th e following measures will be taken to ensure the privacy of 
subjects: 
x A code (unique identification) number for each subject will be kept on file. 
x Only their correspondence identification number will identify s ubjects. 
x Access to the documents and data will only be made to the Inves tigators and study staff in the study.  
x The confidentiality of these documents will be protected to the  extent provided by [CONTACT_67204].  
13.2 Institutional Review Boards 
The Sponsor and/or Investigator must submit the protocol to the  appropriate IRB and obtain a copy of the written and dated 
approval letter.  
The approval letter should state the name [CONTACT_642465], date of review, date of approval, and reference the 
study name (protocol title , study number, a nd versi on). 
The informed consent used by [CONTACT_108580]. The Investigator cannot enroll subjects until a copy of th e approved informed consent is obtained from the IRB.  
Any amendments to the protocol or informed consent should be su bmitted to the IRB for review and approval per [ADDRESS_859821] of the study or pose safety risks to the subjects. 
13.3 Confidentiality 
All data collected will be kept confidential and de-identified.  It can only be accessed by [CONTACT_108581].  
13.4 Protocol Amendments 
Any changes made to the clinical investigational plan/study pro tocol will be documented by [CONTACT_108582]. Before 
submitting protocol amendment to the IRB for approval, the prot ocol amendment must be agreed upon and signed by [CONTACT_108583]. The Investigator shall not ma ke any changes to the protocol without Sponsor approval and 
documented approval from the IRB. Both PI [INVESTIGATOR_642458].  
13.5 Suspension or Termination of Study Site 
The Sponsor can suspend or prematurely terminate the PI’s and s tudy site’s participation in the study, particularly if Sponsor  
finds serious non-compliance by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_108559], and if such non -compliance was not resolved in a timely manner. The Sponsor 
RAMS0006: Calibration and Usability Validation of Patient Monit oring Device for Pressure Injury 
Prevention and Fall Detection  Version 2.0
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2020 Masimo Corporation (Unpublished) 
All Rights Reserved                                                                             Page 12 of 13 
 
 
 will document the decision to suspend or terminate the investig ation in writing. A suspended study site cannot enroll new 
subjects.  
If the Sponsor determine that the study site’s compliance to GC P and federal regulations to be inadequate at any point during 
the study, and Sponsor move to suspend or terminate the study s ite, the Sponsor will provide notification in writing to the 
principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_108560]. The study site is eligible for reinstatement upon correction of any findings and 
any open action items prior to the suspension, and provides a w ritten guarantee that the same non-compliance will not 
reoccur in the future. Site can only resume patient enrollment upon receiving written notification of reinstatement from the 
Sponsor and/or IRB.  
13.6 Termination of Clinical Investigation/Study due to UADE 
The clinical investigation may be terminated if Sponsor determi nes that an unanticipated adverse device effect presents an 
unreasonable risk to the subjects. Termination shall occur not later than [ADDRESS_859822].  
The Sponsor may resume the terminated clinical investigation wi th prior IRB approval if the device is non-significant risk.  
14 AGREEMENT BETWEEN INVESTIGATOR AND SPONSOR REGARDING RESPONSIBI LITIES FOR 
GOOD CLINICAL PRACTICE 
International Conference of Harmonization (ICH) E6 Good Clinica l Practice guidance is an international ethical and 
scientific quality standard for designing, conducting, recordin g, and reporting trials that involve the participation of human  
subjects. 
It specifies general requirements intended to: 
x Protect the rights, safety and well-being of human subjects, 
x Ensure the scientific conduct of the clinical investigation and  the credibility of the clinical investigation results, 
x Assist Sponsors, monitors, Investigators, ethics committees, re gulatory authorities and other bodies involved in the 
conformity assessment of medical devices. 
The Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_329808]:  
x Obtain and maintain IRB approval of the study. 
x Ensure all subjects are consented prior to enrollment, per FDA Code of Federal Regulations titled [ADDRESS_859823] the clinical investigation in accordance with the proto col, all applicable laws and federal regulations, and 
conditions or restrictions implemented by [CONTACT_114021]. 
x Ensure only appropriately trained personnel will be involved in  clinical investigation. 
x Maintain study records mentioned in the CIP. 
x Maintain logs for study team delegation, site visit/monitoring,  equipment disposition, study team training, subject 
recruitment and enrollment. 
x Evaluate all adverse events and adverse device effects and dete rmining whether the study is safe to continue. 
x Allow the Sponsor to conduct periodic monitoring of study activ ities to ensure GCP compliance. 
x Not promote device prior to clearance by [CONTACT_642462], except for academic purposes and 
scientific presentations. 
The Sponsor shall ensure existence and record of all necessary compliance documents, and will conduct monitoring visits to 
ensure appropriate conduct of the study. 
RAMS0006: Calibration and Usability Validation of Patient Monit oring Device for Pressure Injury 
Prevention and Fall Detection  Version 2.0
 
 
CONFIDENTIAL AND PROPRIETARY   
© 2020 Masimo Corporation (Unpublished) 
All Rights Reserved                                                                             Page 13 of 13 
 
 
 15 REVISION HISTORY: 
Version Number Version Date Summary of Revisions Made: 
1.0 05-Jan-2017 Original version  
2.0 18-Jan-2018 Study Title: Amended title to specify usability validation.  
Section 1: Changed from Centroid device to Centroid system. 
Section 1.1: Added clarification to background rationale that 
positional data and user feedback about device usability will b e 
collected. 
Section 3: Added clarification around study objectives. During 
calibration, positional data will be collected. During validati on, 
usability data will be collected from a questionnaire.  
Section 4.2: Added that user feedback will be analyzed based on  
variability of scores collected from a questionnaire for the us ability 
validation phase o f the study. Removed s tudy endpoints for 
validation phase as fall detection rate, error rate, and positi onal 
accuracy of the sensor against staff notes will no longer be an alyzed.  
Section 6.3: Removed “base d on Braden  Scale Score” from 
exclusion #3 and added “pressure injury stage 2, 3, or ungroupa ble.” 
Section 7.2: Added clarification around Centroid placement 
procedures and the data points (time, subject’s current positio n, 
head-of-bed angle, heart rate, respi[INVESTIGATOR_1487], and parameters  on 
Root display) to be collected. Added clarification that Centroi d 
sensor can be placed back on subject after procedure, x-ray, or  other 
reasons in the procedural section.  
Section 8.2: Removed sample size justification for position det ection 
rates. Added statement that no sample size justification is req uired 
for usability validation.  
Section 8.3: Removed sample size justification for fall detecti on 
rates.  
 
 
16 REFERENCES 
1. Berlowitz, et al. (2014). Preventing pressure ulcers in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_99622]: A toolkit for improving quality of care. 
Retrieved http://www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/publications/files/puto olkit.pdf  
2. National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel, European Pressure Ulcer  Advisory Panel and Pan Pacific Pressure 
Ulcer Injury Alliance. Prevention and treatment of pressure ulc ers: Quick reference guide. Emily Haesler (Ed.). 
Cambridge Media: Perth, Australia; 2014 
3. Ganz, DA, Huang, C, Saliba D, et al. Preventing falls in hospit als: A toolkit for improving quality of care. 
(Prepared by [CONTACT_642463], [LOCATION_011] University School of Publ ic Health, and ECRI Institute under Contract 
No. HHSA2902010000171 TO#1). Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthca re Research and Quality; January 2013. 
AHRQ Publication No. 13-0015-EF. 
 