Page  1 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.2015    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internet -based  Conversational  Engagement  Clinical  Trial 
NCT0287192  
July 14 2020  
Page  2 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.2015   IRB#  [ZIP_CODE]  
 
OREGON  HEALTH  & SCIENCE  UNIVERSITY  
Minimal  Risk Research  Protocol  
 
I. Protocol  Title:  Internet -based  conversational  engagement  clinical  trial (I-CONECT) 
in socially isolated adults 75+ years old: A multi -center, assessor -blinded, 
randomized, 12 -month, parallel group, efficacy study  
 
Remote  Protocol  for subjects enrolled  after  March  2020,  or whose  study 
participation timeline was significantly im pacted by [CONTACT_4113] -19. 
Aims for additional analyses proposed in the NIA -funded secondary data analysis 
(RF1AG072449;  Funding  period:  04/15/21 -03/31/24.  Title:  Identification  of Mild  Cognitive 
Impairment using Machine Learning from Language and Behavior Markers).  
 
Short  Title:  I-CONECT  
 
II. Objectives  
We hypothesize  that increasing  social  interaction  in older  adults  with normal  cognition  or mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) could improve or sustain cognitive function. Increasing daily social contact [CONTACT_469145] a cost -effective home -based prevention program that could 
slow cognitive decline and delay the onset of dementia.  
 
Aim 1: To examine  the efficacy  of our intervention  using  cognitive  test scores.  
 
We wi ll examine changes in subject  performance from baseline  to six months to test the efficacy of a 
high engagement  dose of the intervention  on the following  primary  and secondary  outcome  measures.  
 
Primary  outcome  measure  from  the National  Alzheimer’s  Coordinating  Center  (NACC)  Uniform  Data 
Set (UDS) Version 3 In-Person and Telephone  Administered Cognitive Battery:  
 
1. In-person  Montreal  Cognitive  Assessment  (MoCA)  score using only pre -pandemic cohort, with a 
sensitivity analysis  using all t he randomized subjects by [CONTACT_469146]  (pre and post -pandemic cohorts combined) .  
 
Secondary  outcome  measures : 
1. Language -based  executive  function  score:  Category  Fluency  Animals  from  the UDS  V3  
2. Learning and e pi[INVESTIGATOR_58589]:  Craft  Story  Immediate  and Delayed  Recall  (verbal  epi[INVESTIGATOR_469127]) from the UDS V3   
For the above secondary outcomes, test scores based on in-person and telephone version s are 
combined (pre and post -pandemic cohorts are combined ) due to the proximity of assessment 
protocol via two modalities .  
 
We hypothesize  the intervention  group  will show either  improvement  or less decline  in these  
global and domain -specific  cognitive  functions  compared  to the control  group.  
 
Page  3 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.2015   Aim 2: Exploratory  analysis:  To examine  the efficacy  of our intervention  on emotional well -being, 
resting -state fMRI (5 large networks), and functional measures . 
 
Changes from baseline to Month 6 in  the p sychological well -being assessed by [CONTACT_469147] (emotion items total score) , resting -state functional MRI (5 large networks) and 
IADL using OTDL -R (the Revised Observed Tasks of Daily Living ) will be examined .  
 
Aim 3: Exploratory  analy sis: To examine  whether  the intervention  could  lead to changes  in speech 
and language characteristics over time.  
 
There is a need to develop ecologically valid outcome measures sensitive to trial effects. Previous 
studies  from  our group  showed  that speech  and language  characteristics  (e.g.,  word  counts,  sentence 
complexity) differentiated participants with MCI from those  with intact  cognition cross -sectionally.  
 
We will record and analyze subjects’ conversational sessions during the trial to examine whether  
algorithms used for the cross -sectional analyses can detect changes in speech and language 
characteristics induced by [CONTACT_452594]. We hypothesize that speech and language 
characteristics  among  participants  with MCI  will increasingly  resemble  those  observed  among  the 
subjects with intact cognition over time.  
 
Aim 4: Exploratory  Analysis:  Early  identification  of MCI  using  I-CONECT  and CART  data 
(IRB# [ZIP_CODE]) (secondary data analyses).  
 
We hypothesize  that the integration  of language  markers  from  all available  video  chat audio  recordings 
can improve MCI screening accuracy. Specifically, we will:  
 
1. Identify  MCI  by [CONTACT_469148] I-CONECT  language  markers. We  will 
develop predictive models characterizing MCI using natural language processing (NLP) and 
machine  learning  (ML)  algorithms  to extract  linguistic  variables  from  the transcribed  dialogues 
and acoustic variables. We will then link the variables with the cognitive status (MCI/normal 
cognition) and use the language markers to develop ML algorithms that fuse the information 
from the two modalities (linguistic and audio) to carry out early identification of MCI.  
2. Identify MCI by [CONTACT_469149] (IRB [ZIP_CODE]).  The 
similar machine learning methods will be applied to this data set which includes highly 
frequently  in-home  monitored  data  such  as computer  usage,  walking  speed  and variability, 
time out of the house. .  
3. Fuse  CART  digital  biomarker  data and I -CONECT  language  markers  to further  boost  the model 
screening performance.  
 
 
 
III. Background  
In recognition  of the COVID -19 public  health  threat,  Oregon  Health  & Science  University  suspended  all 
in-person, n onessential research  on human subjects on March 15th, 2020. T he governor of Oregon went 
on to issue  a stay-at-home  order  shortly  thereafter.  These  restrictions  lifted  enough  to permit  remote  trial 
Page  4 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.[ADDRESS_601507]  population  (adults  age 75 and older),  it became  necessary  to adapt  the protocol  for remote 
conduct.  
IV. Study  Design  
 
This study  is a two-arm randomized  controlled  trial. 
Participants  will be randomized  in a 1:1 ratio to the experimental  or control  conditions  balancing  the 
following factors:  
• Cognitive  status  (healthy  normal  vs. MCI)  
• Age (age 75-79 vs. age 80-84 vs. over 85+) 
• Education  (high  school  completion  vs. below  high school  education)  
• Sex (male  vs. female)  
• Mean  Montreal  Cognitive  Assessment  (MoCA)  
Subjects will complete in -home assessments at the [ADDRESS_601508] approximately seven  months including the screening and  follow -up 
period.  In total,  there  are approximately  four scheduled  assessment  calls (if assessment  time points  are 
split into multiple calls), plus additional technology troubleshooting calls, depending on group 
allocation.  
 
A. Intervention  Group  
 
Half of participants will be randomized to the experimental group, the study intervention group. These  
subjects will engage in video chat conversations with study staff using an online video communication 
platform.  Each  video  chat session  will be [ADDRESS_601509]  24 weeks.  Subjects  in the  intervention  group  will receive four  chats  per 
week  (a high dose of the video  chat intervention)  for [ADDRESS_601510] group assignment, conversation frequency should not be assessed at the Month 6 time  
Page  5 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.[ADDRESS_601511]  cognitive  status  (normal  vs. 
MCI).  
 
3. Investigator  Blinding  
 
Investigators will not be blinded to subject allocation, however when making ongoing eligibility or 
subject  termination  decisions,  investigators  should  attempt  to discuss  the situation  and make  ongoing 
participation determinations without awareness of subject group assignment to the degree possible 
(i.e. by [CONTACT_469150]’s ID number or identity while assessing the situation with staff).  
 
V. Study  Population  
A. Number  of Subjects  
 
The targeted  study  population  remains  as described  in the main  I-CONECT study  protocol.  We 
anticipate enrolling approximately 40 subjects across study sites under this Remote Protoc ol. 
 
B. Inclusion  and Exclusion  Criteria 
Inclusion Criteria:  
1) Age 75 or older  
2) Consent  to participate  in the study  
3) Socially  isolated,  defined  by [CONTACT_469151]:  
i. Score  ≤12 on the 6-item Lubben  Social  Network  Scale  (LSNS -6) 
ii. Engages  in conversations  lasting  [ADDRESS_601512] self -report  
iii. Answers  “Often”  to at least  one question  on the Hughes  et al. Three -Item Loneliness  Scale  
4) Adequate  vision  to use study  technology  and complete  all neuropsychological  tests throughout 
the study, defined by [CONTACT_716]:  
i. Able  to see well enough  to read a newspaper,  wearing  glasses  if needed  but not using  a 
magnifying glass  
5) Adequate  hearing  to use study  technology  and complete  all neuropsychological  tests throughout 
the study, defined as:  
i. Able  to hear well enough  to complete  the telephone  screening  
6) Sufficient  ability  to understand  English  in order  to complete  protocol -required  testing  
7) Normal  cognition  or mild cognitive  impairment  (MCI),  as assessed  by [CONTACT_469152]  
8) Sufficiently  able to comply  with protocol  assessments  and procedures,  in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_469128]:  
Page  6 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.2015   1) Identified  as having  dementia  based  on either  of the following  criteria:  
i. Self-reported  diseases  associated  with dementia,  such as Alzheimer’s  disease,  vascular 
dementia, Lewy body dementia, frontotemporal dementia, normal pressure 
hydrocephalus, or Parkinson’s disease  
ii. Diagnosis  of dementia  by [CONTACT_469153]  
2) Anticipating  major  change  in living  arrangement  within  the upcoming  year 
3) Severely  depress ed, operationally  defined  as a 15-item GDS  score  > 7 
4) Significant  disease  of the central  nervous  system,  such as brain  tumor,  seizure  disorder,  subdural 
hematoma, or significant stroke, per subject report  
5) Current  (within  2 years  of screening)  alcohol  or substance  abuse  
6) Unstable  or significantly  symptomatic  psychiatric  disorder,  such as major  depression, 
schizophrenia, posttraumatic stress disorder, or bipolar disorder  
7) Unstable  or significantly  symptomatic  cardiovascular  disease,  such as coronary  artery  disease 
with frequent angina, or congestive heart failure with shortness of breath at rest  
8) Unstable  insulin -dependent  diabetes  mellitus,  defined  as meeting  any of the following  criteria:  
i. Received  a diagnosis  of Type  1 Diabetes  
ii. Started  taking  insulin  within  3 months  of the screening  visit 
iii. Been  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_469129]  
9) Active systemic cancer within 5 years of the screening visit (Gleason Grade < 3 prostate cancer 
and non -metastatic skin cancers are acceptable)  
10) Surgery  that required  full sedation  with intubation  within  6 months  of screening  (sedation  for 
minor procedures is acceptable)  
11) More  than one overnight  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_469130]  3 months  of the screening  visit 
12) Any other  condition  that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_1072],  is severe  enough  to cause  study 
participation to have a negative impact on participant or study team rights or wellbeing.  
 
Due to COIVD -19 risk, research personnel (including internet vendors) may be prohibited from entering the 
home to install new internet connections. In addition to the above criteria, subjects may be required to have a 
pre-existing  internet  connection  and be willing  to allow  the use of this connection  for study  purposes  (e.g. video 
chat).  
 
C. Vulnerable  Populations  
 
Decisionally impaired adults will not be included in this study. Eligibility criteria require that 
participants  have  normal  cognition  or MCI,  based  on neuropsychologist  diagnosis.  Subjects  with MCI 
have no more than minimal cognitive impairmen t and are still able to provide informed consent.  
 
Study  staff conducting  the informed  consent  process  will thoroughly  review  the consent  form  at 
screening and will assess comprehension in the following areas:  
 
• The nature  of the research  
• Consequences  of participation  for the subject’s  own situation  and health  condition  
• The difference  between  research  and clinical  care 
• Alternatives  to participation  
• Potential  risks  involved  in the study  
Page  7 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.2015   • Procedures  to follow  if the subject  experiences  discomfort  or wishes  to withdraw  
• The voluntary  nature  of participation  
If potential  participants  cannot  sufficiently  answer  related  questions  (indicating  risk of decisional 
impairment), they will not be consented or enrolled into the trial. 
Cognitive status will be reassessed by [CONTACT_469154] 6 -month time point. If it is 
determined  that the participant  has developed  dementia,  study  activities  and assessments  will cease  and 
study equipment will be returned.  
 
Other  vulnerable  populations,  such as prisoners,  will not be included  in this trial. 
 
D. Setting  
 
This is a multi -center trial involving Oregon Health & Science University (OHSU), University of 
Michigan  (UM),  and Emory  University.  OHSU  will function  as both a resea rch site and the coordinating 
center  for the trial;  sites may conduct  the study  under  OHSU  Institutional  Review  Board  (IRB)  oversight 
or local IRB oversight. [LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_469131] r. 
Subject recruitment will occur for the Oregon site primarily in the Portland area and nearby 
[CONTACT_181662], for the Michigan site primarily in Detroit and nearby [CONTACT_181662], and for the Georgia site 
in the Atlanta metro area and nearby [CONTACT_181662]. Study staff will conduct research activities (i.e. 
telephone pre -screenings, data management, data analysis) at the OHSU Layton Aging & 
Alzheimer’s Disease Center, the UM Michigan Alzheimer’s Disease Center and School of 
Nursing, and Emory’s Goizueta Alzheimer’s Disease Re search Center, or working remotely in 
accordance with those institutions’ policies. Video Chats will be conducted by [CONTACT_469155].  Screening  calls,  assessment calls,  and technology - 
related calls for installation  and repairs will be completed remotely via phone or video chat.  
E. Recruitment  Methods  
 
Recruitment  methods  will remain  as described  in the main  I-CONECT  study  protocol.  
 
This study  will not recruit  in any way that requires  in-person  contact  [CONTACT_469156] -19-related physical distancing mandates remain in effect.  
 
F. Compensation  
 
All participants who consent to participate will receive $[ADDRESS_601513] 
formally consented will still receive this compensation. Participants will receive $[ADDRESS_601514]  discontinues 
the study early for any reason.  
 
If it is necessary for the study to use a participant’s existing personal internet connection for the study 
video chat device, the study may reimburse the participant for the cost of their internet up to $[ADDRESS_601515]  receives  this reimbursement  and completes  the study,  their total study compensation 
will be $520.  
G. Consent  Process  
Prior  to obtaining  full informed  consent,  subjects  will undergo  a telephone  pre-screening  during  which  
Page  8 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.2015   basic  eligibility  will be assessed.  Data  may also be collected  and used prior  to consent  as described  in 
the Recruitment section of this protocol. Collection of protected health information (PHI) prior to 
consent for this study will be covered by [CONTACT_2717] -approved waiver as required by [CONTACT_3488].  
 
Subjects will be consented at Sc reening. Study staff will explain the consent process and study 
procedures in lay terms, and will administer a series of questions to confirm comprehension. Subjects 
will be given  ample  time to review  the consent  form  and have  any questions  answered  prior  to providing 
consent. Consent will be obtained prior to any other study procedures at Screening.  
 
Consent will be collected remotely over the phone due to COVID -[ADDRESS_601516]  their risks  or trial participation, 
and will be formally re -consented as required by [CONTACT_1201].  
 
Study  staff conducting  the video  chat interventions  will be asked  to provide  characterizing  information 
and complete a personality questionnaire. Staff will be provided with a Consent Information Sheet; 
documentation of study staff consent will not be obtained.  
VI. Procedures  
A. Subject  Characterization  
 
1. Demographics  (NACC  Form  A1) Screening  
Subject  demographic  information  will be collected.  
 
2. Social  Isolation  Assessment  Screening,  Month  6, Follow -Up 
To assess  level  of social  isolation,  subjects  will be asked  about  their conversation  frequency,  and 
the Lubben Social Network Scale (LSNS -6) and Hughes  et al. Three -Item Loneliness Scale will 
be administered. The LSNS -[ADDRESS_601517] group assignment.  
 
3. The Neuroticism -Extraversion -Openness  Five-Factor  Inventory  (NEO -FFI)  Baseline, 
Month 6  
 
1 Hughes,  M. E., Waite,  L. J., Hawkley,  L. C., & Cacioppo,  J. T. (2004).  A Short Scale for  Measuring  Loneliness  in Large  Surveys:  Results  From  Two Population - 
Based Studies. Research on aging , 26(6), 655–672. doi:10.1177/0164027504268574  
Page  9 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.[ADDRESS_601518]  does 
not successful ly complete the questionnaire on his or her own, the questionnaire will be 
completed with staff assistance.  
 
4. Genotypi[INVESTIGATOR_469132]  
A single saliva sample will be self -collected to measure APOE4, a genetic risk factor for 
Alzheimer’s disease. Participants will be permitted to opt out of sample collection and genetic 
testing.  Participants  will not be given  the results  of their genetic  test. If  it is not possible  to obtain 
a saliva sample at the designated time point, collection may be re -attempt ed at a future time 
point. If a saliva sample is determined inadequate, an additional sample may be requested at a 
future time point.  
 
B. Administrative  Procedures  
 
1. Pre-Visit  Stability  Screening  Screening,  Month  6 
At the beginning  of every  assessment  call, study  staff will compete  the Pre-Visit  Stability 
Screening. Subjects will be asked about their health, routines, and substance use.  
 
Based  on the participant’s  responses,  study  staff will assess  whether  reasonably  reliable  data can 
be collected, and determ ine if the call be rescheduled and/or if data collected should be flagged 
during  analysis  for any reason.  This screening  facilitates  consistency  of testing  conditions  across 
all assessment calls.  
 
If time point  assessments  are split into multiple  visits  (e.g. multiple  visits  for screening,  or 
multiple visits for Month 6), this screening should be administered at each visit.  
 
2. Subject  Contacts  Screening  
Subjects  may choose  to provide  contact  [CONTACT_287608] a contact  [CONTACT_469157]. Subjects may choose to 
provide  contact  [CONTACT_469158],  if they would  like their physician  to 
be notified in the event that clinically relevant information is note d in the course of the study 
(e.g. the subject is assessed as developi[INVESTIGATOR_6124]).  
 
3. Resource  Provision  Month  6, Failed  Screening,  Early  Termination/Withdrawal  
At the Month [ADDRESS_601519] -study resources for 
social engagement, and will encourage participants to utilize the resources. Subjects will also 
receive this information if they fail screening, or  if their  participation is terminated early or they 
withdraw from the study. If participants become depressed, as evidenced by [CONTACT_469159] (GDS), staff will provide information about mental health resources 
and may refer  the subject  to the subject’s  primary  care physician.  Subjects should  be encouraged 
to utilize the provided resources again at the final follow -up call.  
 
C. Cognitive  & Functional  Assessments  
 
1. Neuropsychological  Battery  Screening,  Month  6 
Subjects  will receive  the Uniform  Data  Set (UDS)  Version  3 Telephone  Administered  Cognitive 
Battery, or T -Cog, after the COVID -19 pandemic started . This battery is the telephone version 
of the National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center (NACC) UDS Version 3, used by [CONTACT_469160]’s Di sease Centers (ADC) program of the National Institute on Aging (NIA).  
Page  10 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.2015   The battery consists of brief measures of attention, processing speed, executive function, 
epi[INVESTIGATOR_10682], and language. Tests include: Craft Story Immediate Recall, Bl ind/Telephone 
MoCA,  Number  Span  Forward,  Number  Span  Backward,  Category  Fluency  (Animals),  Category 
Fluency  (Vegetables),  Oral Trail  Making  Test Part A,  Oral Trail  Making  Test Part B, Craft  Story 
Delayed Recall, Verbal Fluency (F), and Verbal Fluency (L).  
 
Administration  of the battery  will be audio  recorded.  Due to the need  to ensure  appropriate  delay 
timing for memory assessments, the neuropsychological battery assessments must be completed 
in the order presented above.  
 
The battery  data measured  at the Screening  time point  will be used as the subject’s  baseline  for 
data analysis.  
 
2. Clinical  Dementia  Rating  (CDR)  (NACC  Form  B4, Adapted) Screening,  Month  [ADDRESS_601520]. No informant will be used. It will be used in 
conjunction with the neuropsychological battery to identify participants as h aving normal 
cognition, MCI, or dementia, and to determine participant eligibility.  
 
3. The NIH  Toolbox  Emotional  Domain  Baseline,  Month  6 
The NIH Toolbox is a proctored (i.e., requires active administrator participation) assessment 
program  administered  via electronic  tablet.  To adapt  this assessment  to be conducted  remotely, 
subjects will complete only the emotional domain of the Toolbox as questionnaires.  
 
The toolbox  measure  of emotion  includes  four general  domains:  negative  affect  (anger,  fear, and 
sadness), psychological well -being (positive affect, general life satisfaction, and meaning & 
purpose), stress & self -efficacy (perceived stress and self -efficacy), and social relationships 
(social support, companionship, and social distress).  
 
D. Subject  Health  Assessments  
1. Subject  Health  History  (NACC  Form  A5, Adapted)  Screening  
Subject  medical  history  will be collected,  including  substance  use history.  
 
2. Medication  Assessment  Screening,  Month  [ADDRESS_601521]’s  current  medications  and general  information  about  medication  habits  will 
be collected.  
 
3. Geriatric  Depression  Scale  (GDS)  (NACC  Form  B6) Screening,  Month  6, Follow -Up 
The GDS is a self -report assessment of depression. If the subject scores  [ADDRESS_601522]  will be assessed  for possible  suicidal  ideation  using  a 
depression  safety  tool, and staff will take appropriate  follow -up actions  per the tool’s  guidance.  
The GDS will be  used to assess subject eligibility at screening. If  subjects are  excluded  due to 
high GDS  score,  depression  resources  will be provided  and the subject  may be referred  to their 
primary care provider.  
Page  11 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.[ADDRESS_601523]  family  history  of dementia  will be collected.  
 
5. Physical  Evaluation  Form  (NACC  Form  B1) Baseline  
The subject  will self-report  on height,  weight,  vision  and hearing.  
 
E. Eligibility  Following  clinician  diagnosis  
A telephone  pre-screening  will be conducted  to assess  preliminary  subject eligibility.  If successful, a  full 
Screening visit will be conducted to further assess eligibility.  
If the subject is determined to be ineligible during Screening, the visit will be ended at that point. 
Otherwise,  final study eligibility will be determined  upon clinician diagnosis of subject cognitive status 
following  the screening  assessments.  If a subject  is found  ineligible,  staff will provide  the subject with  a 
list of resources for social engagement.  
 
Previously ineligible subjects may be  rescreened fo r participation in the study if their eligibility status is 
believed  to have  changed.  Their  subject  identification  code  will be kept the same;  a new code  will not be 
assigned. If fewer than [ADDRESS_601524] elapsed since the original administration of the Screening 
cognitive assessments, the neuropsychological battery will not be repeated due to possible learning 
effects. The original scores will be used. Subjects will not receive additional compensation for 
rescreening. Other Screenin g procedures will be repeated per the Schedule of Events, including 
collection of informed consent.  
F. Clinician  Diagnosis  (NACC  Form  D1) Within  [ADDRESS_601525] results 
should be evaluated by [CONTACT_3452]’s designated neuropsychologist within approximately one week. 
The clinician will complete a clinician diagnosis, which identifies participants as having normal 
cognition,  MCI,  or dementia.  Subjects  must  have normal  cognition  or MCI  to be eligible  to participate  in 
the study. Subject MCI will be further characterized as amnestic or non -amnestic. If the site 
neuropsychologist is uncertain about the diagnosis, (s)he may consult with the designated trial 
neuropsychologist at other study site(s). The clinician diagnosis will be reconfirmed within 
approximately one week after the Month [ADDRESS_601526]’s cognitive status, as this 
study will not include subjects with dementia.  
 
G. Randomizati on Following  eligibility  determination  
Subjects with normal cognition or MCI per clinician diagnosis will be randomized to the intervention 
group  or to the control  group  once  the clinician  diagnosis  is available  to confirm  subject  eligibility.  This 
should be completed as soon as possible once the required eligibility confirmation is available.  
 
Randomization to the control group or intervention group will occur prior to the Baseline visit, but 
subjects  should  not be notified  of their group  assignment  until after the Baseline  visit to help prevent  the 
subjects from inadvertently unblinding the assessment staff.  
 
If subjects are randomized but then withdraw and do not complete the Baseline visit, they will be 
removed  from  the randomization  program  to ensure  study  arms  remain  balanced.  These  subjects  will be 
classified as drop -outs prior to randomization, as they are not informed of their group assignment.  
 
If cohabitating  subjects  enroll  in the trial,  forced  randomized  will be used to assign  the subjects  to the 
Page  12 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.[ADDRESS_601527] 
Baseline -period procedure (the Baseline assessment or the technology installation, as applicable).  
 
If a subject’s Week [ADDRESS_601528]’s  home.  The video  chats 
will b e audio and video recorded.  
 
Novel  conversation  stimuli  are provided  for each chat,  focusing  on a theme  with three  possible 
topi[INVESTIGATOR_469133], to be visually presented to the participant during the chat via 
the video  chat device.  Stimuli include  questions  targeting  three  domains  of cognition:  epi[INVESTIGATOR_6368], semantic memory, and executive function. Stimuli will be used to initiate each chat, 
however subjects may direct the conversation as they find interesting or engaging. Study s taff 
will attempt to maintain a neutral or positive chat tone.  
The full chat intervention  will last for [ADDRESS_601529]’s participation in the study. 
Chats ma y be rescheduled as needed. If a given day’s chat cannot be successfully rescheduled, 
the chat will be considered missed. Chats missed due to planned holiday office closures will not 
be considered  protocol  deviations.  If a technical  issue  renders  a video  chat impossible  for a given 
day, the chat may be conducted via telephone.  
 
After  every  chat,  study  staff will complete  a questionnaire  assessing  qualitative  aspects  of the 
chat such as perceived subject engagement level. Adverse events incidentally noted during 
intervention delivery will be handled as described in the Data & Safety Monitoring Plan 
(DSMP).  
 
2. Positive  and Negative  Affect  Schedule  (PANAS) Weekly  During  Inter vention  Period  & Dose 
Tapering  
The PANAS  is a self-report  mood  questionnaire  which  will be administered  to subjects  in 
the intervention group only. It will be administered at both the beginning and the end of 
the subject’s first video chat session each week.  
 
3. I-CONECT  Weekly  Questionnaire  Weekly  During  Intervention  Period  & Dose  Tapering  
Health and social activities will be monitored with a brief survey, the I -CONECT Weekly 
Questionnaire,  administered  verbally  during  a weekly  phone  call lasting  approxima tely 10-15 
Page  13 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.[ADDRESS_601530] cannot be reached after 
reasonable attempts, the weekly call will be considered missed.  
 
Adverse  events  will be noted  in the course  of conducting  the weekly  health  questionnaire. 
Adverse events will be documented, assessed and reported per DSMP and OHSU IRB 
requirements.  
 
4. Medication  Adherence  Intervention  Period  Weeks  1-4, Follow -Up Period  Weeks  25-27 
At the OHSU study site, daily vitamin -taking adherence will be tracked as a real -world measure 
of cognitive  function.  Subjects  will be provided  with electronic  pi[INVESTIGATOR_469134]-dose (250 mg) 
vitamin C tablets. Please refer to the Risks and Benefits section for additional information.  
 
A pi[INVESTIGATOR_469135]  [ADDRESS_601531]  feedback  about  the intervention  and study 
experience.  The questionnaire  will be  administered  immediately  following  the final video  chat 
session of Week 24. Administration and responses will be audio and video recorded.  
6. Intervention  Staff  Characteristics  Prior  to Interventions  
Intervention staff will document their age at study start, gender, and previous experience 
conversing  with elders.  They  will also complete  the NEO -FFI personality  inventory.  No personal 
health information will be collected from staff.  
I. In-Home  Technology  
 
1. Installation  (~1-2 hours;  variable  depending  on technology)  
Following  the Baseline  visit,  study  technology  will be installed  for all subjects  in the intervention 
group.  
Study  equipment  will be provided  to subjects  for self-install,  guided  by [CONTACT_317263],  unblinded  
Page  14 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.[ADDRESS_601532] of study expectations. The video chat device will be on loan for the 
duration of subjects’ participation, and subjects will be instructed to use it for study purposes 
only.  
 
2. Troubleshooting  
Study  technolo gy troubleshooting  will be done  remotely.  As-needed  technology  troubleshooting 
calls will be scheduled at the subject’s convenience. Study staff may replace malfunctioning 
devices as needed, either by [CONTACT_469161].  
 
3. Uninstallation  (~30  minutes;  variable  depending  on technology)  
At the conclusion  of the intervention  period,  the video  chat technology  (and vitamin  C pi[INVESTIGATOR_61194],  if 
applicable) and any accompanying study equipment will be returned, either via prepaid mail or 
contact[CONTACT_469162][INVESTIGATOR_469136]. Subjects will self -uninstall equipment for return to the study.  
J. Follow -Up 
1. Dose  Tapering  Weeks  25-[ADDRESS_601533] protocol.  
 
 
2. Follow -Up Call Week  28 
Subjects will receive a follow -up call approximately one month after the conclusion of the 
intervention  period  (refer  to Schedule  of Events).  If participants  become  depressed,  as evidenced  by 
[CONTACT_469163] (GDS), staff will provide information about mental 
health resources and may refer the subject to the subject’s primary care physician. Subjects will be 
encouraged to utilize the post -study social engagement resources.  
K. Subject  Discontinuation  
 
1. Early  Termination  
If at any point  during  the study  it is determined  that the subject  no longer  fulfills  study  eligibility 
criteria, the  investigator will assess whether  the subject should be  withdrawn and may choose to 
terminate the subject’s participation. To the degree possible, the investigators should avoid 
referencing  or considering  study  group  assignment  when  assessing  potential  discontinuation.  If a 
subject is terminated for any reason, study staff w ill arrange for the uninstallation of study 
equipment from the subject home, and subjects will be provided with post -study resources for  
Page  15 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.[ADDRESS_601534] participation in ongoing study 
activities (e.g., weekly calls, pi[INVESTIGATOR_469137], intervention) will be terminated immediately, and 
study staff will arrange for the uninstallation of study equipment from the participant home.  
 
If participation is discontinued due to low cognitive test scores, study staff will inform subjects 
that their scores  on memory  and thinking  tests indicate  they should  follow  up with their primary 
care physician for further testing and evaluation.  
 
2. Subject  Withdrawal  
Subjects  may discontinue  the study  at any point  in time without  any penalty.  The subject  will be 
reminded that if he or she chooses not to participate at any time, the decision will not affect his 
or her relationship  with the study  staff,  community  recruitment  partners,  or study  sites.  Subjects 
who choose  to discontinue  during  the intervention period  will be asked  to remain  in the study  to 
complete remaining study assessment visits, rather than withdrawing from the study entirely.  
Subjects  will be asked  to provide  their reason  for withdrawing  from  the study.  
 
In all instances of subject withdrawal, study staff will arrange for the uninstallation of study 
equipment from the subject home. Subjects will be provided with post -study resources for social 
engagement. Subjects may be asked to complete the [ADDRESS_601535] drives and/or recording devices used.  
Encrypted,  password -protected  computers will  be used to transfer  audio  data from  study  sites.  Audio 
files will be stored  for processing  on servers  at OHSU’s  Advanced  Computing  Center  (ACC),  which 
is behind OHSU’s main firewall. Staff will access ACC servers using a Virtual Machine.  
Page  16 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.2015   3. Video  Recordings  
Video chats will be conduc ted using Cisco Meeting or Cisco Webex software. Sessions will be 
recorded  on a limited -access  server  behind  OHSU’s  main  firewall.  The server  can only be accessed 
by [CONTACT_469164]. Videos will be moved from the server to  
OHSU Box at regular intervals.  
 
4. Electronic  Data  Capture  
Whenever possible, data will be collected using real -time electronic data capture, and this method 
will be consistent  across  staff and study  sites.  This study  is using  OHSU  REDCap  for electronic  data 
capture. Electronic data capture may include subject -completed REDCap surveys. Subject -specific 
survey links may be provided to individual subjects via the subject’s email.  Staff will use wireless 
hotspots and encrypted laptops to access RE DCap in the field. Paper downtime forms may be used 
in case of technical difficulties, in which case the paper data handling process will be followed.  
 
5. Electronic  Pi[INVESTIGATOR_469138] C  pi[INVESTIGATOR_469139] a 
wireless hub in the participant’s home. From there, it will be sent directly to servers stored at 
OHSU’s  ACC.  If self-install  is required  due to COVID -[ADDRESS_601536] ID code, and their screening data 
will be entered into the main REDCap study database.  
7. Saliva  Specimens  
Study staff will ship saliva samples via U.S. mail to the National Centralized Repository for 
Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias (NCRAD) at Indiana University, per the NCRAD 
Specimen Collection, Processing and Shipment Manual. Samples will be submit ted with the 
following  information:  collection  date,  Subject ID,  and the  subject’s  sex, year of birth, ethnicity,  and 
race.  In the event  that visits  must  be conducted  remotely  due to COVID -[ADDRESS_601537] saliva samples and mail samples directly to NCRAD, using provided kits and mailing 
materials.  
 
B. Sharing  of Results  with  Subjects  
 
Data  or results  will not be shared  with subjects.  
 
C. Data  and Specimen  Banking  
 
Saliva  samples  will be shipped  to the National  Centralized  Repository  for Alzheimer’s  Disease  and 
Related Dementias  (NCRAD) at Indiana  University. Samples will be  submitted with the following 
information: collection date, Subject ID, and the subject’s sex, year of birth, ethnicity, and rac e. 
NCRAD will provide the study team with APOE genetic results, and will store the saliva samples 
indefinitely.  Upon  completion  of the I-CONECT  study,  NCRAD  will make  the saliva  samples  available 
for future research in accordance with NCRAD policy.  
Page  17 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.[ADDRESS_601538] - 
protected OHSU servers, OHSU Box, and/or OHSU REDCap. All data will be coded prior to sharing. 
De-identified datasets are easily exported from OHSU R EDCap though the recordings contain 
voiceprints, images  of participants, and content that may identify the participant and therefore cannot be 
deidentified. Paper -based data collection forms will be destroyed after they have been digitized per the 
paper da ta handling process described in this protocol. Upon study closure, sites will send the signed 
consent forms, compensation paperwork, and other remaining paper source documents to OHSU via a 
courier  service  with tracking  number  and signature  [CONTACT_469170].  All signed  paper -based  consent 
forms will be stored in locked locations at OHSU for at least three years after study closure.  
 
Separate IRB approval will be required for each human subject research project using identifiable data 
from the reposito ry. Investigators wishing to obtain data from the repository for research beyond the 
specific aims of the original study may contact [CONTACT_469165], 
Hiroko Dodge, PhD. [CONTACT_469172] will ensure that data are released accordi ng to OHSU policy and this 
protocol.  A repository  sharing  agreement  will be used each time data are released  for research  purposes. 
All signed agreements will be electronically kept on file indefinitely on a secure storage server. [CONTACT_469173] will ensure the  security and confidentiality of data and specimens during both storage and 
transfer.  She will maintain  a secure  list of participants  who withdraw  their consent,  and she will ensure 
no future use or sharing of their data. [CONTACT_469172] will track data releases to be reported at annual IRB 
Continuing Review.  
VIII.  Data  Analysis  
The data analysis approach for this Remote Protocol remains as described in the main I -CONECT study 
protocol. Data for the subset of subjects anticipated to enroll under  this protocol ( N=40) will be included in 
analyses  as appropriate;  this subset  of subjects  will not have  data required  for certain  planned  analyses,  such 
as MRI data, and will therefore be excluded where necessary.  
 
Psychological  well-being and  person -specific levels  of social  interaction  (i.e., changes  in social  engagement 
measured  with the I-CONECT  Weekly  Questionnaire  administered  weekly  via telephone)  will be monitored 
and controlled in the analyses along with other relevant variables, including APOE [ADDRESS_601539] scores  (global  cognitive  function)  are our primary  outcome.   
Secondary  outcomes  include:  neuropsychological  test results  in the area of language -based  executive 
function,  measured  by [CONTACT_941] T-Cog category  fluency  test (animals),  and memory  domains  measured  by 
[CONTACT_3490]  18 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.2015   two T-Cog epi[INVESTIGATOR_469140] (Craft  Story  Immediate  and Delayed  Reca ll). We will allocate  a type I 
error rate of 0.05 for our primary outcome. The results will be cross -validated with NIH Toolbox 
cognitive batteries as exploratory analyses for those who had NIH Toolbox cognitive assessments.  
Potential mediation variables i nclude the Psychological Well -Being portion of the NIH Toolbox. If 
Psychological Well -Being shows significant improvement in the experimental group compared to the 
control group over 6 months (in univariate analysis using p <0.05), the measurement(s) will be 
examined  as potential  mediation  factors  in statistical  models  as secondary  analyses.  The Psychological 
Well -Being  portion  of the NIH Toolbox  consists  of 3 measurements:  Positive  Affect,  Life Satisfaction, 
and Meaning and Purpose. The questionnaire and references for these scales are detailed in: 
http://www.nihtoolbox.org/WhatAndWhy/Emotio n/PsychologicalWell -Being/Pages/default.aspx . 
 
B. Sample  Size Estimate  
 
Our previous pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] (based on a six -week intervention) showed Cohen’s d=0.[ADDRESS_601540] changes in language -based executive functions (Clinical Dementia Rating 0 and 0.5  groups 
combined)  in the  control and  experimental  arms.  The sample size  (n=72  completers  for each group) in 
this trial provides  80% power  to detect  this difference  at alpha=0.025,  using  a two-tailed  test (i.e., total 
type I error rate=0.025), based on simulation results using non -pooled standard deviation (SD).  
 
Two separate hypotheses are proposed. Stage I examines the efficacy of the high dose and Stage II 
examines  the efficacy  of the maintenance  dose.  Participants  covered  under  the current  protocol  will be 
included into the high dose analysis  
 
Changes in primary and secondary outcomes between the control and experimental groups will be 
examined  for the efficacy of high dose  (month 0 – month 6, Stage I) and maintenance  dose (month 6 – 
month 12, Stage  II) using the Mixed -Effect Model Repeated Measure (MMRM) model under ITT. We 
will conduct per protocol analysis using those who completed at least 80% of targeted conversational 
sessions (experimental group) and the number of telephone check -ins (control gr oup).  The subjects 
recruited  or in trial under  the current  remote  trial protocol  will be included  where appropriate  (i.e., high 
dose analysis).  
 
Changes in primary and secondary outcomes between the control and experimental groups will be 
examined  for the efficacy  of high dose (month  0 – month  6, Stage I)  and maintenance  dose (month  6 – 
month  12, Stage  II) using  the Mixed -Effect  Model  Repeated  Measure  (MMRM)  model  under  ITT. We 
will conduct per protocol analysis using those who completed at least 80% of  targeted conversational 
sessions (experimental group) and the number of telephone check -ins (control group).  
Changes in primary and secondary outcomes between the control and experimental groups will be 
examined  for the efficacy  of high dose (month  0 – month 6, Stage I)  and maintenance  dose (month  6 – 
month  12, Stage  II) using  the Mixed -Effect  Model  Repeated  Measure  (MMRM)  model  under  ITT. We 
will conduct per protocol analysis using those who completed at least 80% of targeted conversational 
sessions (experimental group) and the number of telephone check -ins (control group).  
Page  19 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.2015    
 
Figure  1. Trial  Dose  Stages:  Sample  size for one group  (MCI  or normal  cognition;  both groups 
have the same planned sample size)  
 
Changes in primary and secondary outcomes between the control and experimental groups will be 
examined for the efficacy of the high dose (Baseline -Month 6, Stage I) and the maintenance dose 
(Month  6-Month  12, Stage  II) using  the Mixed -Effect  Model  Repeated  Measure  (MMRM)  model  under 
intention -to-treat (ITT). We  will conduct  per-protocol  analysis using  those  who completed  at least 80% 
of the targeted conversational sessions (experimental group) and telephone check -ins (control group).  
 
C. Analyses  proposed  for the New  Aim 4 
 
The analysis  of the New  Aim 4 investigated  the effectiveness  of language  markers  from  conversation  in 
detecting early MCI subjects, where the key hypotheses are that 1) data -driven language and acoustic 
markers are predictive of early MCI subjects, 2) behavior markers from CART study are predictive of 
early MCI subjects, and 3) fuse both data to further  improve the ability of identifying MCI  
Aim 4 (1): To validate the first hypothesis of effectiveness of language and acoustic markers, we will 
first pre -process the data and extract acoustic markers and linguistic markers. We will apply automatic 
speech re cognition (ASR) models to convert the collected conversations to machine -readable text in 
computer. We will then use OpenSMILE to extract Mel -frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCC) from 
the raw acoustic recordings as acoustic features in our analysis.  For each recording, we will compute 
various  types  of feature  representations  (hand -crafted,  statistical,  and deep)  from  the MFCC  features  and 
compare them using their quality as evaluated in downstream analysis.  Next, we will investigate one 
conventional bag -of-words feature representation using linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) and 
deep -learning based embeddings.  
We will first investigate the correlation of the two linguistic feature representations and their 
effect on classification performance on MCI detection. We will then compare the inclusion of 
MFCC features and investigate the effects on the classification performance. For classification 
models,  we will use  the de-identified  interview  data from I -CONECT to  assess  the performance 
of the multi -modal  predictive models using standard performance measures such as the area 
under the ROC curve (AUC), sensitivity, specificity, etc. We will randomly divide the data into 
three sets (80% for training, 10% for validation, and 10% for test), and perform [ADDRESS_601541] -order gradient descent will be used for non -deep 
learners. To compare the performance of different algorithms, we will compute the p -value to 
measure the significance of improvements over the 10 -fold evaluations.  

Page  20 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.2015   Aim 4 (2): To validate the hypothesis of the effectiveness of behavior markers, we will first 
perform missing value  evaluation to estimate the missing values in the sensor -based monitoring 
data CART.  We will use the  missing  rate as a metric  of the uncertainty  of the estimation  and take 
the factor into account when making predictions. For modeling with long -term sequenc es, we 
will investigate the effectiveness of various imputation strategies, including commonly used 
smoothing -based imputation techniques (e.g., carrying next forward, carrying last backward, 
multiple imputation with chained equations, etc.), as well as mo del-based imputation using 
matrix completion and deep learning -based imputation methods. After we are done with the 
imputation, we will then develop a two -level multi -granularity feature extraction process with 
fine-granularity features describing short -term behavior patterns, and coarse -granularity features 
describing long -term ones. We will use a denoising autoencorder (DAE) model to extract a low - 
dimensional latent feature vector, a recurrent neural network to learn the temporal patterns over 
the fine-granularity features  extracted  from DAEs. We  will then  build  classification  models  from 
the multi -granularity features extracted and study its effectiveness, using the same training - 
testing scheme (training and testing procedures, evaluation metrics) menti oned above.  
Aim 4 (3): By [CONTACT_469166] (NACC UDS V3), we 
will examine whether combining linguistic/acoustic features (coming from I -CONECT) and 
behavioral markers (coming from CART)  can further improve the ident ification of MCI. We 
will conduct a joint analysis of language and behavior markers using a novel information fusion 
framework. In this analysis, we will conduct patient similarity evaluation using NACC UDS 
data, by [CONTACT_2329] a generalized Mahalanobis distance  derived from UDS data. Once the patient 
similarities are measured, we will use  behavior feature vectors from similar  patients to construct 
auxiliary  variables. Once  done,  we will investigate  two ways  of constructing  the enriched  feature 
representations:  1) simple  concatenation:  the original  patient  vector  representation  and the vector 
representations for similar  patients will be  simply concatenated to form a long vector  which will 
be feed into the MCI classifiers. 2) hierarchical concaten ation: the representations of the similar 
patients will be aggregated first, and then the aggregated vector will be concatenated with the 
original patient representation vector. For the classification model, we plan to investigate both 
conventional models such as logistic regression and decision tree, as well as advanced models 
such as gradient boosted decision tree and multi -layer perceptron. We will use the same 
evaluation metrics as done in last hypothesis.  
 
 
IX. Privacy,  Confidentiality  and Data  Security  
Privacy,  confidentiality,  and data security  approaches  for this Remote  Protocol  remain  the same  as those 
utilized in the main I -CONECT study protocol.  
X. Risks  and Benefits  
A. Potential  Risks  to Subjects  
1. Privacy  
There  is a risk of loss of confidentiality.  All study  personnel  will receive  training  about  HIPAA 
and the  responsibilities  that accompany the  conduct of research. Subject confidentiality will be 
protected in compliance with OHSU, research site, and HIPAA guidelines.  
 
2. Emotional  Risk  
Page  21 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.[ADDRESS_601542]-study  resources  for 
social connection, and will encourage participants to utilize the resources. Subjects will also 
receive  this information  if they fail scree ning.  If participants  become  depressed,  as evidenced  by 
[CONTACT_469163] (GDS), staff may provide information about 
mental health resources and may refer the subject to the subject’s primary care physician.  
 
3. Cognitive  Impairme nt 
There is a risk that subjects will develop dementia, becoming decisionally impaired during the 
course  of the study.  Should  the investigators  or staff become  aware  of a clinically  relevant  issue 
in a subject, such as the development of dementia, the investigator or qualified designee will 
discuss the issue with the subject and refer  the subject  to follow  up with his or her  primary  care 
physician. Subjects who develop dementia with be withdrawn from the study.  
 
4. Vitamin  C 
This study uses vitamin C (asco rbic acid) to assess medication adherence in some subjects. 
Though generally well tolerated, ascorbic acid may cause gastrointestinal side effects such as 
nausea, vomiting, heartburn, diarrhea, or abdominal cramps/pain. These effects are primarily 
observed  at high doses. Though this study uses a dose of vitamin C below the tolerable upper 
intake  level  of 2,000  mg/day,  there  may be a risk of these  effects,  especially  if subjects  are taking 
additional vitamin C supplements. High doses of vitamin C may also wo rsen medical conditions 
such as gout, cirrhosis or kidney stones. If it is noted that a subject is using additional vitamin C 
supplementation and/or has a medical condition for which high -dose vitamin C may be 
contraindicated, the subject may be asked to f orgo ingesting the vitamin C pi[INVESTIGATOR_469141].  
 
B. Potential  Benefits  to Subjects  
 
Participants may or may not directly benefit from participating in the study. However, their 
contribution  to research  may help further  the development  of user-friendly,  in-home  sustainable 
approaches to improving neurophysiological, cognitive, and emotional health into old age.  
Ultimately,  this research  may contribute  to the larger  goal of delaying  the onset  of Alzheimer’s 
disease.  
XI. Schedule  of Events  
 
A. Procedure  Timing  Guidelines:  
• All visits  from  Screening  through  the Technology  Installation  should  be completed  
Page  22 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.2015   approximately  within  a ten-week  window . 
• Screening  Time  Point:  Screening  procedures  should  all be completed  approximately within  
a two -week window . Events may be split across multiple days/visits at site discretion to 
accommodate  practical  concerns  such as  participant  fatigue,  scheduling,  or distance  from  the 
study center . 
• Clinician  Diagnosis:  Within  approximately  one week  of completing  final Screening 
procedures.  
• Baseline  Visit:  Within  approximately  one week  following  the clinician  diagnosis.  
• 24-Week  Intervention  Period:  starts  after the final Baseline  Period  visit.  Week  1 of the 
intervention period will always begin on a Monday.  
 
Baseline  Period  visits  include  the Baseline  assessment  visit,  the technology  installation  visit 
(as applicable),  and the Baseline  MRI  (as applicable).  For all subjects, Week  [ADDRESS_601543] Baseline Period procedure.  
• Month  6 Time  Point:  Procedures  should all  be completed within a  two-week  window , 
during  intervention  period  weeks  25-26. Events  may be split across  multiple  days/home 
visits at site discretion.  
Page 23 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.2015   B. Table:  Schedule  of Events  
 
 Screening  Period  Baseline  Period   
Intervention 
Period  Follow -Up Period  
Time Point Name  [CONTACT_469171]- 
Screening  Screening  Baseline  Tech  Install  Dose 
Tapering  Month  [ADDRESS_601544]  PCP/Contact  [CONTACT_469167]  X        
Demographics  (Form A1)  X        
Social Isolation  Assessment  X X     Xt  X 
GDS  (Form B6)p  X     X  X 
T-Cog Neuropsychological  Batteryq  X     X   
CDR  (Form  B4)  X     X   
Subject  Health  History  (Form A5)  X        
Medication  Assessment   X     X   
Subject  Compensation   Xb,s X    Xc   
NEO -FFI and NIH Toolbox 
Emotional  Domain  Questionnairesd   X    X   
Clinician  Diagnosiso  X     X   
Trial  Eligibility  Assessmentf X X        
Post-Study Resources   Xe     X  X 
Randomization   Xg       
Family  History of  Dementia    X       
Physical  Evaluation  (Form  B1)   X       
Saliva  Collection for  APOE4    Xl       
Vitamin  C Pi[INVESTIGATOR_469142]    X Xu  Xu X  
Video Chat Devicej    X    X  
PANASh, j     X X    
Video Chat Interventionj     X X    
I-CONECT  Weekly  Questionnairek     X X    
Vitamin  C Medication Adherencei     Xm Xm 
Qualitative  Evaluation (Subject)j     Xn     
Page 24 of 24 Remote  Protocol  Version  14.July.20  Template  Revised:  6.15.2015   a) Subjects  may choose  to provide  emergency  contact  [CONTACT_469168];  this is optional.  
b) Compensation  will be provided  to all subjects  who consent  to participate,  including  screen  failures.  
c) Compensation  to be provided  once  all procedures  are completed.  
d) Questionnaires  will be provided for subjects  to complete independently. If the  subject  does not successfully complete the questionnaires  on his  or her  own,  the 
questionnaires will be completed with staff assistance.  
e) Resources  to be provided  at this time point  only if subject  is a screen  failure.  
f) Final  eligibility  assessment  to be completed  upon  clinician  diagnosis.  
g) Randomization  to intervention/control  occurs  once  eligibility  is determined,  prior  to the Baseline  visit.  Subjects  should  not be notified  of group  assignment  until after 
Baseline to prevent them from unblinding the assessment staff.  
h) The PANAS  will be administered  at the beginning  and the end of the subject’s  first video  chat session  each week.  
i) OHSU  subjects  only.  
j) Intervention  group  only.  Control  group  does not receive.  
k) Administered  weekly  via telephone.  
l) This procedure  is optional  for subjects.  If sample  cannot  be obtained,  collection  will be re-attempted  at a future  time point.  
m) Occurs  daily in weeks  1-[ADDRESS_601545] the vitamin in t he pi[INVESTIGATOR_61194].  
n) To be completed  at the conclusion  of the Week  24 video  chats.  Administration  and responses  will be audio  and video  recorded.  
o) The clinician  diagnosis  should  be completed  within  [ADDRESS_601546]  be 
withdrawn from the trial immediately.  
p) If subject  scores  2 or more  in response  to questions  3, 7, 11, 12, or 14 (the suicide  ideation  subscale),  the Depression  Safety  Assessment  will be conducted.  
q) Administration  will be audio  recorded.  Battery  assessments  must  be completed  in the required  order  to ensure  appropriate  timing  for memory  assessments.  
r) If time point  assessments  are split into multiple  calls,  this form  should  be administered  at each assessment  call. 
s) Subjects  will not receive  additional  compensation  for rescreening.  
t) To preserve  assessor  blinding,  conversation  frequency  should  be assessed  at this time point  by [CONTACT_469169].  
u) Pi[INVESTIGATOR_469143],  used at Weeks  1-4, and returned.  A pi[INVESTIGATOR_469144]  25-27, and then returned.  