 
 
 
A Feasibility Study of Retinal Screening Using the RetinaVue 100 Hand -Held  
(non -mydriatic) Camera in Outpatient Dialysis Centers  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
September 2016  
RetinaVue 100 Feasibility Study  2  
 
A Feasibility  Study  of Retinal  Screening  Using  the RetinaVue  100 Hand -Held  (non -mydriatic)  Camera in 
Outpatient  Dialysis  Centers  
 
Short Title:  Retinal Screening with RetinaVue 100 in Outpatient Dialysis Center s 
Sponsor:  The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill 
Protocol Date:  04/26/2016 
Amendment 1 Date:  07/13/2016 
Amendment 2 Date: 09/16/2016 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill  
Chapel Hill, NC [ZIP_CODE]  
[LOCATION_002]  
Study Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_328585], MD, PhD  
5132 Bioinformatics Building  
Chapel Hill, NC [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone (919) 966- 5296
  
email: [EMAIL_6412]  
 
    
RetinaVue [ADDRESS_405796]  End-stage renal disease  
CSME  Clinically significant macular edema  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
RetinaVue 100 Feasibility Study  5 PROTOCOL SYNOPSIS  
Study Title  A Feasibility Study of Retinal Screening Using the RetinaVue 
100 Hand -Held (non- mydriatic) Camera in Outpatient Dialysis 
Centers   
Funder  WelchAllyn  
Clinical Phase  Feasibility  
Study Rationale  There are no studies evaluating (diabetic or non-diabetic) 
retinopathy in the renal dialysis patient population (~300,000 
Americans). Approximately 50% of this population has End-stage 
Renal  Disease (ESRD) due to diab etes. Dialysis patients are among 
the most debilitat ed patients, and thus, have even more barriers to 
receiving their recommended annual retinal evaluation.   The advent 
of the RetinaVue hand -held retinal camera holds great promise in 
this population, as dialysis patients access medical care 3 times a week,  for several hours at a time at their dialysis clinic.    
Study Objective(s)  Primary  
To evaluate the usability of the FDA -approved RetinaVue Hand -
Held 100 Camera in a population with multiple chronic conditions  
 
Secondary  
• To evaluate pre- and-post -screening rates in the diabetic dialysis 
population.  
• To determine the proportion of overall retinopathy in a dialysis 
population  
• To evaluate participant satisfaction of screening utilizing the  
FDA -approved  RetinaVue [ADDRESS_405797] Population 
key criteria for 
Inclusion and Exclusion:  Inclusion Criteria  
• The subject must currently be seeking treatment for end-stage renal disease (ESRD) at one of the specified dialysis 
clinics.  
• The subject must be ≥ 18 years of age.  
Exclusion Criteria  
• The subject is <[ADDRESS_405798]’s participation may last up to [ADDRESS_405799] about 1 year.  
Study Phases  
Screening  
Intervention  
Follow -Up    (1) S creening for eligibili ty and obtaining consent, (2) Obtaining 
retinal images, completion of satisfaction survey, and medical 
record abstraction (3) For those participants recommended for 
referral, they will be given the opportunity to follow up with the 
remote provider.   
Statistical And Analytic 
Plan  To assess usability of camera utilization, the primary objective, the proportion of inadequate images will be calculated.   
RetinaVue 100 Feasibility Study  6  
 
1 BACKGROUND AND RATIONALE  
1.1 Introduction 
 There are no studies evaluating (diabetic or non-diabetic)  retinopathy in the renal dialysis patient 
 population (~300,000 Americans).  Approximately 50% of this population has End-stage Re nal
 Disease (ESRD) due to diabetes.  Dialysis patients are among the most debilitated patients, and thus, 
 have even more bar riers to receiving their recommended annual retinal evaluation. The advent of the 
 RetinaVue hand -held retinal camera holds great promise in this population, as dialysis patients access 
 medical care 3 times a week,  for several hours at a time at their dialysis clinic.    
1.2 Non- Clinical and Clinical Study Findings  
Potential Benefits :   
The potential benefits to subjects from being in this study may include receiving a screening of their 
eyes, a diagnosis, and potential follow up that they may not have received unless the were in the study.  
 
Risk /Benefit Assessment :  
A possible side effect expected would be temporary discomfort in the eye/s due to the camera flash. This 
is seen infrequently in the clinical setting and sh ould not last more than [ADDRESS_405800] IVE  
Primary Objective:   
• To evaluate the usability of the FDA -approved RetinaVue Hand -Held 100 Camera in a population with 
multiple chronic conditions  
 
Secondary Objective  
• To determine rates of overall retinopathy in a dialysis population  
• To evaluate participant satisfaction of screening utilizing the FDA -approved RetinaVue 100 hand -held 
camera  
 
 
 
 
 
RetinaVue 100 Feasibility Study  7 3 INVESTIGATIONAL PLAN   
3.1 Study Design  
 This is a feasibility study to evaluate the usability of the FDA -approved RetinaVue 100 and contribute 
 to knowledge  about integrating teleheath into medical services.  
3.2 Study Duration, Enrollment and Number of Subjects  
 The study team anticipates the study duration to be about 1 year.  
 This study will recruit participants from four UNC outpatient dialysis clinics in the following 
 locations: Carrboro, Siler City, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_328586], and Mebane, North Carolina.  
 The study proposes enrolling up to 250 subjects across all four study sites.  
3.3 Study Population  
Inclusion Criteria  
• The subject must currently be seeking treatment for end -stage renal disease (ESRD) at one of the 
specified dialysis clinics.  
• The subject must be ≥ 18 years of age.  
 
Exclusion Criteria  
• The subject is <18 years of age.  
 
4 STUDY PROCEDURES (what will be done)  
• Determine last documented retinal examination (electronic medical record)  
• Determine cause of End -stage Renal  Disease (ESRD) and vintage, I.e. how long patient has  been on 
dialysis (paper chart)   
• Determine patient demographics (electronic medical record)  
•  DOS, DOB (age)  
•  Gender, race  
•  Medical history (coronary artery disease, stroke, hypertension, if diabete s -duration)  
•  Medical labs (HbA1c, cholesterol, blood pressure)  
•  Smoking history  
•  Social determinants of health (education level, insurance status, etc).  
• Check  bilateral  visual  acuit y with near card.  
• Obtain bilateral  retinal  photographs  with or without  dilation.  
• Complete the Usability  survey.  
• Complete the Participant  Satisfaction  survey.  
• Upload patient images and metadata.   
• Through the study PI, a board -certified ophthalmologist, interpret patient retinal images and  return 
of diagnosis and management plan to dialysis unit including a wellness report to be  given to 
individual subjects.  
• Analyze data with biostatistician consultant  
• Timeline. Quarter 1 (May – August 2016): Retinal image  and metadata acquisition, clinic 1  and 2; 
Quarter 2 (September 2016- November 2016): retinal image and metadata acquisition  clinic 3 and 4; 
Quarter 3 (December 2016-February 2017): data analysis; Quarter 4 (March 2017- May 2017): 
manuscript and presentation preparations.  
• Subject results will be entered into the medical record. If something of note is found in a subject's  
RetinaVue 100 Feasibility Study  8 retinal scan, then staff at the dialysis clinic will provide follow up for any abnormalities found as  
part of clinical care.  
 
5 STUD Y EVALUAT IONS AND MEASUREMENTS   
The following variables will be abstracted from medical records:  
• Last documented retinal examination , cause of End-stage Renal  Disease (ESRD) and vintage, I.e. how 
long patient has been on dialysis, DOS, DOB (age) , gender, race , medical history (coronary artery 
disease, stroke, hypertension, if diabetes -duration) , medical labs (HbA1c, cholesterol, blood pressure) , 
smoking history, social determinants of health (education level, insurance status, etc).  
Obtaining retinal images  
• Nonmydriatic fundus images of both eyes were obtained from participants using the WelchAllyn 
RetinaVue™ 100 Imager.  For those subjects with pupi[INVESTIGATOR_328587] 3 mm in either eye, a low dose 
dilation drop of 0.5% tropi[INVESTIGATOR_328588] t he pupil and assist in image capture. 
The images will be electronically sent via a HIPAA compliant portal to an offsite, board -certified 
ophthalmologist for remote interpretation.  Following interpretation, a report will be generated that details any clini cal findings and referral recommendations, which will then be distributed to individual 
subjects and uploaded to their electronic medical record.  For those participants recommended for referral, they will be given the opportunity to follow up with the rem ote provider.   
Participant satisfaction survey  
• Participants will be  asked to complete a brief participant satisfaction survey, which  asks questions 
regarding their satisfaction with their exam experience.  The survey utilizes  a five -point Likert  scale 
with responses ranging from strongly agree (1) to strongly disagree (5). The survey also allows  for 
participants to provide qualitative observations about their experience. The survey asks about 
satisfaction of time to complete exam, comfort during the exam, comfort after the exam, first eye 
recovery after the camera flash, second eye recovery after the camera flash, and satisfaction with overall 
experience.  
 
[ADDRESS_405801] deviation, and proportions for each of the 
six survey components. To assess overall retinopathy, a three -category outcome var iable for retinopathy 
and referral at the individual level will be determined: (1) No retinopathy, (2) retinopathy without referral, and (3) retinopathy with referral.  T he following definitions will be  determined (r esults for pairs 
of eyes will take into account that there may be  some unreadable images): If the diagnosis in both eyes 
is no ret inopathy then the individual has  no retinopathy; otherwise, if either eye is  considered severe, has 
proliferative diabetic retinopathy, clinically significant macular  edema (CSME), or an inad equate image, 
the individual will be  put into the retinopathy with referral categ ory; likewise, if either eye is  
RetinaVue 100 Feasibility Study  9 mild/minimal or moderate retinopathy withou t CSME, then the individual will be placed into the 
retinopathy non -referra l category.  
6.[ADDRESS_405802] data from all individuals currently receiving treatment at the 
specified dialysis clinics. As such, the proposed sample (N=250) reflects the number of patients actively 
seeking tre atment at those sites. Furthermore, this is a feasibility study and therefore [ADDRESS_405803] udy, a power calculation is not indicated.  
 
7  SAFETY MANAGEMENT  
This study presents no more than minimal risk to participants and as such, the study team does not  
anticipate any obvious safety concerns. However, the study team and/or a representative for 
WelchAllyn, Inc. will periodically monitor the data for the study duration.  
 
As defined by [CONTACT_11604]’s IRB, unanticipated problems involving risks to study subjects refers to any 
incident, experience, or outcome that:  
Is unexpected (in terms of nature, severity,  or frequency) given (a) the research procedures that are 
described in the protocol -related documents, such as the IRB -approved research protocol and informed 
consent document; and (b) the characteris tics of the subject population being studied; Is related  or 
possibly related to a subject’s participation in the research; and suggests that the research places subjects 
or others at a greater risk of harm (including physical, psychological, economic, or social harm) related 
to the research than was previously known or recognized.  
 
Any events that meet the criteria for “Unanticipated Problems,” as defined by [CONTACT_11604]’s IRB will be 
reported by [CONTACT_328590]’s web -based reporting system.  
 
Though the likelihood of adverse events and other UPs for this tr ial is low, the study team plans to 
review data on a weekly or biweekly basis in order to determine whether there are safety concerns or 
other unexpected problems occurring. In the event that safety concerns or other problems arise, the study 
team will mee t to create a plan to remedy any issues.  
 
[ADDRESS_405804] may access the  data.  
 
When the study has been terminated with the UNC IRB, hardcopy files which may include identifiable 
data will be stored onsite within the Research Manager's office for a period of [ADDRESS_405805]. All protocol and/or identifiable data, when it 
can be destroyed, will be placed in a secured, university issued, confidential recycling bin for shredding.  
 
[ADDRESS_405806] and/or their representa tive allowing ample time for 
questions, answers and clarifications. After a thorough review, with all parties satisfied about the 
research trial, subjects wishing to participate will be asked to sign and date the Informed Consent 
document. Once the subject  signs and dates the informed consent along with the individual obtaining 
consent, the appropriate copi[INVESTIGATOR_328589], and a copy given to the subject for 
their own records.  