Version  8.6 
 01/22/2019   PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]  
J. McNeely  | 1 of 20  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LEVERAGING  TECHNOLOGY  TO ADDRESS  UNHEALTHY  DRUG  USE 
IN PRIMARY  CARE  SETTINGS  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
 
Principal  Investigator:  [INVESTIGATOR_651986],  MD, MS 
Department  of Population  Health 
NYU  School  of Medicine  
 
 
 
 
Co-Investigator:  Donna  Shelley,  MD, MPH 
Department  of Population  Health 
NYU  School  of Medicine  
 
 
 
 
 
Funding:  National  Institute  on Drug  Abuse  (NIDA)  
Version  8.6 
 01/22/2019   PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]  
J. McNeely  | 2 of 20  
  
 
 
TABLE  OF CONTENTS  
 
1. Purpose  of the Study  and Background  
1.1. Specific  aims  
1.2. Background  
1.3. Study  design  
 
2. Characteristics  of the research population  
2.1. Demographic  characteristics  
2.2. Inclusion  and exclusion  criteria  
2.3. Vulnerable  subjects  
 
3. Methods  and procedures  
3.1. Methods  and procedures  
3.2. Data  analysis  and data monitoring  
3.3. Data  storage  and confidentiality  
 
4. Risk/benefit  assessment  
4.1. Importance  of the knowledge  to be gained  
4.2. Risk 
4.3. Protections  against  risks 
4.4. Potential  benefits  to the subjects  
 
5. Subject  identification,  recruitment  and consent  
5.1. Method  of subject  identification  and recruitment  
5.2. Process  of consent  
5.3. Subject  capacity  
5.4. Consent  forms  
5.5. Costs  to the subject  
5.6. Payment  for participation  
 
6. Research  Team  
Version  8.6 
 01/22/2019   PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]  
J. McNeely  | 3 of 20  
  
1. Purpose  of the Study  and Background  
 
 
The proposed  study  involves  developi[INVESTIGATOR_651987]  a computer -assisted  approach  to delivery  of 
screening  and brief interventions,  using  a ‘Substance  Use Screening  and Intervention  Tool (SUSIT)’ 
in primary  care patients.  Our central  hypothesis  is that introducing  the SUSIT  will facilitate  the 
integration  of substance  use screening and  interventions  into primary  medical  care,  resulting  in 
higher  rates  of brief intervention  by [CONTACT_652008],  as opposed  to screening  only.  We propose  to develop 
clinical  decision  support  (CDS)  and then test the full SUSIT  model,  incorporated  into primary  care 
medical  visits.  A mixed methods  approach  will assess  its acceptability  and adoption  among 
providers  and patients,  and gather  preliminary  data on its efficacy  for reducing  ‘moderate -risk’ drug 
use (defined  as unhealthy  use that is below  the threshold  of a substance  use disorder).  In the main 
study  period,  a pre-post design  will ascertain  the dose  of substance  use intervention  received  and 
changes  in drug use among  patients with  moderate -risk drug use enrolled  in the screening  only (SO)  
versus  SUSIT  intervention  period  (n=75  in each  period).  
 
 
1.1. Specific  aims  
This study  has 3 specific  aims:  
Aim [ADDRESS_875051] majority  of unhealthy  substance  use is not severe  enough  to rise to the 
threshold  of a substance  use disorde r,3 it nonetheless  confers  a significant burden  of health  risk. 
Individuals  with ‘moderate -risk’ use, who use drugs  or alcohol  at hazardous  levels  but have  not 
developed  dependence  or severe  problems  related  to use, are at elevated  risk for developi[INVESTIGATOR_007]  a 
substance  use disorder  and for experiencing  negative  health  effects  including  overdose  death, 
traumatic  injury,  direct  health  effects  of substance  use, and poor treatment  of other  medical 
conditions.4-8   These  individuals  rarely  receive  assistance,  because  substance  use is  not addressed 
in general  health  care settings,  and addiction  treatment  programs  serve  only those  with more  severe 
disorders.  Screening,  brief intervention,  and referral  to treatment  (SBIRT)  programs  have  been 
advanced  as a strategy  for addressing  the gap  in services  for early  identification  and intervention, 
but these  programs  have  been  difficult  to implement  and sustain,  and have  not proven  efficacious 
for reducing  drug use.[ADDRESS_875052]  tested  a ‘specialist’  model,  which  shifts  the 
responsibility  for screening  and interventions  onto a specialized  health  educator  who is not part of 
the regular  primary  care team.  An alternative  model,  which  integrates  screening  and interventions 
into regular  primary  care,  using  the same  approaches  that are effective  for other  common chronic 
health  conditions,  may be more  effective  for reducing  unhealthy  drug use. Innovative  application  of 
health  information  technology can  overcome  barriers  to implementing  a primary  care-integrated 
approac h. 
 
The significance  of our proposal  is that it develops  and tests  an alternative  model  that fully integrates 
screening  and interventions  for unhealthy  drug use into regular  primary  care services.  By [CONTACT_652009]  8.6 
 01/22/2019   PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]  
J. McNeely  | [ADDRESS_875053]  greater  efficacy  for reducing  unhealthy 
drug use. Research  on behavioral  health  treatment  in primary  care has clearly  established  that 
primary  care provider  involvement  is a key component  of effective  interventions. Studies  on alcohol 
and tobacco  interventions  show  that PCP-provided  counseling  is more  effective  than that delivered 
by [CONTACT_652010].10-12   The PCP is at the center  of evidence -based  approaches  to chronic 
disease  management  in primary  care,  including  collaborative  care models  for treatment  of 
depression.13-17   The importance  of the PCP-patient  relationship  appears  to hold true for drug 
interventions  as well; preliminary  results  from a study  testing  a model  in which  PCPs  participated  in 
the brief intervention  demonstrated  reduced  drug use at [ADDRESS_875054]  a clinical  assessment,  and deliver a  brief intervention  during  the medical  visit. 
Innovative  application  of existing  health  information  technology  can overcome  these  barriers.  The 
three  elements  of our Substance  Use Screening  and Intervention  Tool (SUSIT)  are designed  to 
facilitate  a primary  care-integrated  approach  to substance  use intervention.  1) Time  and workflow 
constraints  are addressed  with patient  self-administered  screening  completed  before  the clinical  
encounter,  with results  presented  to the primary  care provider  at 
the point  of care.  2) Clinical decision  support  (CDS)  assists  the 
primary  care provider  in carrying  out a brief  intervention,  while  3) 
clinical  reminders  at each  follow -up visit prompt  PCPs  to address 
drug use in a longitudinal  fashion.  These  features  facilitate 
implementation  and support  effective  clinical  intervention  in the 
context  of the medical  visit. Substance  Use Screening  and 
Intervention  Tool  (SUSIT)  
1. Self-administered  screening  
2. Clinical decision  support  
3. Clinical  reminders  
 
The SUSIT  screener  consists  of the Substance  Use Brief Screen  (SUBS),  followed  by [CONTACT_652011].  Dr. McNeely’s  K23 research  established  the SUBS  and ACASI  ASSIST  as reliable  and 
accurate  self-administered  screening  tools  that are brief enough  for use in primary  care settings,  and 
well accepted  by [CONTACT_1962].19-[ADDRESS_875055] year  unhealthy  use of tobacco  (sensitivity  98%,  specificity  96%, 
AUC  0.97);  alcohol  (sensitivity  85%,  specificity  77%,  AUC  0.81);  and drugs  (sensitivity  83%, 
specificity  91%,  AUC  0.87 for illicit or prescription  drug use).  The ACASI  ASSIST  was modified  from 
the WHO  Alcohol,  Smoking  and Substance  Involvement  Screening  Test (ASSIST)23 to integrate 
items  on prescription  drug misuse  (stimulants,  opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438])  and to be delivered  as an audio  computer - 
assisted  self-interview  (ACASI).  In the TEST  screening  approach,  the ACASI  ASSIST  functions  as a 
brief structured  assessment  that flows  seamlessly  from the SUBS,  to collect  substance -specific 
information  about  what  drugs are  used  and risk level (low,  moderate,  high).  In the validation  study 
(N=393),[ADDRESS_875056]  (ICC=0.[ADDRESS_875057]  score ).[ADDRESS_875058]  was 
feasible  even  in a study  population  with relatively  low levels  of education:  5% required  assistance, 
and median  completion  time was 3.7 minutes  (range  0.7-15.4).  Qualitative interviews  and surveys 
indicated  that the ACASI  ASSIST  was well accepted  by [CONTACT_1962]:  27% preferred  the computer  over 
an interviewer,  while  58% had no preferenc e.24 
 
 
1.3. Study  design  
The proposed  study  will develop  (in Phase  1) a clinical  decision support  tool that assists  primacy 
care providers  in carrying  out substance  use interventions,  and then compare  (in Phase  2) two 
Version  8.6 
 01/22/2019   PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]  
J. McNeely  | 5 of 20  
 clinical  scenarios,  screening  only (SO)  vs. SUSIT,  on dose  of substance  use brief intervention  
Version  8.6 
 01/22/2019   PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]  
J. McNeely  | [ADDRESS_875059] the full SUSIT  approach,  using  mixed  methods  to assess  its 
acceptability  and adoption,  and gathering  preliminary  data on its efficacy  for reducing  unhealthy  drug 
use. CDS  development  is concurrent  with the SO phase  to avoid  losing  valuable  time,  but will be 
conducted  at a secondary  study  site to avoid  contaminating  the SO condition.  In each  treatment 
condition  we will enroll  75 patients  with moderate -risk drug use, who present for a medical  visit with 
one of ten PCPs  (Figure  1). A pre-post design  will ascertain  the dose  of substance  use intervention 
received  and changes  in drug use among  patients  enrolled  in the screening  only (SO)  versus  SUSIT  
intervention  period.  
 
 
 
Figure  1: Study  design  
 
  
2. Characteristics  of the research  population  
Main study sites: Bellevue  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_58578]  (BHC)  and Gouve neur Health  will serve  as the main 
study  sites.  Both sites serve  a diverse  and medically  underserved  population.  The proposed  study  
will recruit  patients  and primary  care providers  (PCPs)  from the adult  primary  care clinics  and the 
virology clinic at Bellevue Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_54246] . Up to 265 participants  will be enrolled  in the study.  In 
Phase  1, up to 50 patients  from Gouverneur  Health  and 35 PCPs  from Bellevue  and Gouverneur  
will participate in  CDS  development.  In Phase  2, 150 patients  and up to 30 PCPs  from all study 
sites will participate.  
 
Enrollment only sites:   Two additional clinics are enrollment only sites, with limited study activities, in 
Phase [ADDRESS_875060] the same 
inclusion and exclusion criteria.  The patients and PCPs from these sites are included in the overall 
limit (maximum 150 patients and 30 PCPs in Phase 2) for enrollment across all st udy sites.    
 
 
2.1. Demographic  characteristics  
Race/Ethnicity  and Gender:  We anticipate  that study  participants  will reflect  the gender  and racial 
characteristics  of the participating  clinic(s).  Forty -five percent  of Bellevue  patients  are of Hispanic 
ethnicity  (representing  many  countries), 40%  are African  American  (including  Caribbean  and African 
immigrants),  and 10% are Asian American.  No one will be excluded  from participation  on the basis  
of gender,  race,  or ethnicity.  
 
Age: Study  participants  will be adults  18 years  of age and older.  

Version  8.6 
 01/22/2019   PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]  
J. McNeely  | 7 of 20  
  
2.2. Inclusion  and exclusion  criteria  
Primary  Care  Providers:  Up to 65 PCPs  are anticipated  to participate  in the  study.  In Phase  1, up to 
35 PCPs  from Gouverneur  Health  and Bellevue  will participate  in content  development,  usability 
testing  and clinical  testing  of the clinical  decision  support  tool. In Phase  2, up to 30 PCPs  from 
Bellevue  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_651988].  Participating  PCPs  can be medical  doctors  (MDs),  doctors  of 
osteopathic  medicine  (DOs),  nurse  practitioners  (NPs),  or physician  assistants  (PAs).  Medical 
students  and residents  are not included.  There  are no additional  eligibility  or exclusion  criteria  for 
providers.  
Version  8.6 
 01/22/2019   PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]  
J. McNeely  | 8 of 20  
  
 
Patients:  Up to 200 patients  are anticipated  to participate  (50 in Phase  1, and 150 in Phase  2). 
Patients  are recruited  if they have  a medical  visit with one of the participating  PCPs.  Because the 
SUSIT  self-administered  screening  instrument  is currently  available  in English  and Spanish , the study  
is restricted  to English  and Spanish speaking  patients.  
Inclusion  criteria:  
• Substance  use screening  results  (collected  using  the tablet -based  screening  tool) indicating 
current  moderate  risk drug use,  based  on a substance  specific  involvement  score  (SSIS)  indicating 
curren t (past  3 months)  use of at least  one drug with a moderate  risk level (SSIS  4-26), in the 
absence  of any high-risk drug or alcohol  use (SSIS  27+);  
• 18 years  or older;  
• English  and Spanish speaking;  
• Presenting  for visit with a participating  PCP;  and 
• Able to provide  informed  consent  
• Available to complete two follow up visits (3 months and 6 months after baseline 
appointment)  
Exclusion  criteria:  
• Prior  participation  in the study  (i.e. participation  in the SO study phase  would  preclude 
participation  in the SUSIT  phase);  
• Attending  a formal addiction  treatment  program  (not including  informal treatment  such  as 
Alcoholics  Anonymous,  Narcotics  Anonymous),  in the past 3 months;  
• Pregnant  (based  on self-report).  
• Unable  to read  text on the tablet -based  screening  tool, or physically  unable  to operate the  
tablet.  
 
The PI’s prior study  in this clinic  indicates  that 17% of all patients  will meet  eligibility  criteria.  
 
2.3. Vulnerable  subjects  
The study  will not enroll  high-risk drug and alcohol  users  because  a preponderance  of evidence 
indicates  that brief intervention  alone  is not sufficient  to address  severe  (high -risk, dependent) 
substance  use. While  primary  care-based  pharmacotherapy  can be  effective  for drug and alcohol 
dependence,  these  more  intensive  interventions  are out of the scope  of the proposed  study.  
Pregnant  women  are excluded  because  the potential risks  to the fetus  of ongoing  drug use changes 
the threshold  for intervention, may  alter the motivation  of the patient  to change  their use, and can 
hinder  follow -up at 6 months.  We will offer  treatment  referrals  to high-risk and pregnant  patients,  as 
detailed  in section  4.3. No other  vulnerable  populations  are enrolled.  
 
3. Methods  and procedures  
 
3.1. Study  conditions,  methods,  and procedures  
 
3.1.a. Phase  1: Development  of CDS:  
We will develop  the CDS  using  accepted  best practices,25-[ADDRESS_875061]  and widely  adopted  approac h.29   This is a 3-phase  process 
consisting  of definition,  usability  testing,  and clinical  testing,  as portrayed  in Figure  2. 
J. McNeely  | 9 of 20 Version  8.6 
01/22/2019  PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]   
  
Figure  2: Procedure  for developi[INVESTIGATOR_651989].  The expert  panel  will include  nationally  recognized  HIT experts  as well as a 
medical  director  and two primary  care providers  from the participating  study  sites.  Structure  of the 
CDS  is based  on the Brief Negotiated  Interview  (BNI),30 which  assists  providers  in conducting  a brief 
(3-5 minute)  intervention  by [CONTACT_652012] a brief negotiated 
interview:  raising  the subject,  providing  feedback,  enhancing  motivation,  and negotiating  a plan.  
As an initial  step in content  development,  semi -structured interviews  will be conducted  with a 
purposively  selected  sample  of [ADDRESS_875062]  ‘perceived  usefulness’  and ‘perceived  ease  of use’ of the CDS 
component.  Recommendations  of PCPs  and the expert  panel  will be reviewed  by [CONTACT_473], 
and then incorporated  by [CONTACT_652013] a  CDS  prototype.  The prototype 
design  will follow  accepted  best practices  for CDS,  as defined  by a growing  body  of heuristics 
developed  for displaying  guideline  information  for different  types  of systems  and disease  areas  (that 
have  emerged  from systematic  reviews  and usability  engineering ).25-28, 31-34 
 
 
Usability  testing: The prototype  CDS  will be tested  by [CONTACT_652014]-users  recruited  from Gouverneur 
Health,  and Bellevue  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_58578].  Users  will be given  simulated  clinical  scenarios  and asked  to 
‘think -aloud’  while  interacting  with the CDS.  The user’s interaction  with the CDS  will be recorded  in 
its entirety  by [CONTACT_652015]  (capturing  their computer screen,  with no image  of 
the participant),  and digital  audio  recording.  This data will be analyzed  to identify  usability  issues 
and areas  for potential  optimization.  We plan 3 cycles  of usability  testing.  
 
Clinical  testing:  A refined  prototype  will then be tested  in clinical  practice  by 5 PCPs.  PCPs  will be 
asked  to use the CDS  in their regular  practice  for 2 weeks,  at the end of which  they will participate  in 
a semi -structured  interview  with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_651990] a  structured  questionnaire  (modified  TAM2) 
that gathers information  on their attitudes  and experiences  with using  the tool. Up to 45 patients  will 
be recruited  and enrolled  following  the procedures  detailed  in Section  5, and PCPs  will be provided 
with screening  results  for those  with moderate -risk drug use. 
 
3.1.b. Phase  2: Screening  Only (SO)  vs. SUSIT  
Phase  2 is conducted  at Bellevue  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s Adult  Primary  Care  Clinic  and Virology Clinic . Adult  
patients  of the participating  PCPs  will be recruited  and enrolled  following  the procedures  detailed  in 
Section  5. The participating  PCPs  will receive  screening results,  CDS,  and clinical  reminders  during  
the SUSIT  condition,  to help them  address  unhealthy  drug use  in their patients.  The intervention  
that patients receive  is determined  by [CONTACT_652016]  (i.e. Screening  Only (SO)  

J. McNeely  | 10 of 20 Version  8.6 
01/22/2019  PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]   
 vs. SUSIT),  as indicated  in Figure  3.Participating  patients  in both the SO and the SUSIT  condition  
will enter  responses  to the tablet  computer  self-administered  substance  use screening  tool. 
Screening  is self- administered  using  a touch -screen  tablet,  and completed  by [CONTACT_652017].  Substance  use screening  is part of a brief ‘healthy  lifestyle 
survey,’  which  also includes  items  on diet and exercise  adapted  from an existing  health  risk 
assessmen t.35    After  the baseline  medical  encounter,  patients  will provide  verbal  responses  to 
structured  interviews.  They will also  complete  a demographics  form,  and a self-administered  
computerized  exit survey to  ascertain whether  their PCP provided  elements  of a substance  use brief 
intervention  during  the medical  visit, and  various  assessments described  below.  The exit survey  will 
be administered  again  at any follow - up medical  visits with  the PCP that occur  during  the study  
period . 
 
Figure  3. Study  conditions  
 
 
 
 
 
Screening  Only (SO)  condition:  Patient  and PCP are not presented  with screening results.  The 
PCP does  not receive  clinical  decision  support,  or clinical  reminders.  
 
SUSIT  condition:  Following  completion  of substance  use screening,  the tablet  computer  presents 
screening  results  (including  level of risk)  to the patient  for each  substance  used,  asks them  to 
identify  their drug of most  concern  (DOMC),  and assesses  readiness  and confidence  to change 
behavior.  Results  are delivered  to the PCP at the point  of care,  paired  with clinical  decision  support 
tailored  to the patient’s  screening results.  This information  is delivered  on the  tablet  computer, 
which  is handed  to the PCP by a Medical  Assistant.  CDS  guides  the PCP through  a brief 
intervention  specific  to the DOMC,  recommends  clinical  actions  pertaining  to the substance  and 
risk level,  and generates  a printed  summary  for the patient.  At each  scheduled  follow -up medical  
visit, the  PCP receives  a clinical  reminder  containing  a summary  of the patient’s  substance  use and 
level of  risk, paired  with CDS  that guides  them  through  a follow -up brief intervention.  A member  of 
the study  team  will call, email, or text patients  prior to these  scheduled  follow -up medical  visits,  to 
confirm  that they will  be attending.  
 
Phase 2 SUSIT Condition at Enrollment Only Sites :  Enrollment only sites will participate only in the 
Phase 2 SUSIT condition.  All resear ch activity at these sites is conducted by [CONTACT_652018] .  
The NYU research staff will obtain consent and enroll study participants (including both PCPs and 
patients), and only those individuals who give consent for participation will have any involve ment with 
the study at these sites.  After obtaining consent, the NYU research staff will conduct assessments 

J. McNeely  | 11 of 20 Version  8.6 
01/22/2019  PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]   
 with enrolled patients at the baseline, 3 month, and 6 month study visits.  
 
Patient  participant  assessments  in SO and SUSIT  conditions  (Table  1) 
In both the SO and SUSIT  conditions,  study  visits  are at baseline  (same  day as the primary  care 
visit),  [ADDRESS_875063]  scheduled  follow -up medical 
appointments,  and call , email or text  participants  several  days  prior to appointments.  
 
At the baseline  study  visit, and at the 3- and 6-month  study  visits,  the RA will administer  substance 
use assessments:  Timeline  follow -back  (TLFB) ,36 Composite  International  Diagnostic  Interview, 
Second  Edition,  Substance  Abuse  Module  (CIDI -SAM),37-41  for Spanish speaking patients the 
M.I.N.I (Mini -International Neuropsychiatric Interview) will be used as the measure of substance use 
disorder, because the CIDI is not currently available in Spanish, t he Short  Inventory  of Problems  for 
alcohol  and drugs  (SIP and SIP-DU),[ADDRESS_875064] 8 items  of the Patient  Health  Questionnaire  (PHQ - 
8), and the  Generalized  Anxiety  Disorder  7-item scale  (GAD -7).Participants  will provide  hair samples 
for drug toxicology  testing  at the month -[ADDRESS_875065]  common  drugs  of abuse,  as a 
means  of corroborating  self-report  of recent  drug use.  If after repeated outreach attempts, and the 
participant is still not able to meet with RA in person, a phone interview w ill be scheduled with the 
participant for  either the 3 or 6 month  follow -up interview.   This will be a one -to-one phone interview, 
with t he RA or RC (whomever is conductin g the interview) will be a private area.  When scheduling  
the phone interview will ask the participant to ensure being in private space during the  phone  
interview.   For those participants that will have their 6 month interview by [CONTACT_648], the hair sample will 
become not applicable for those participants.  
 
Chart review:  Research staff will perform a structured c hart review of the participant’s medical record 
that examines the content of notes written by [CONTACT_2299]’s primary care provider(s) during the 12 
months following study enrollment (inclusive of the data of enrollment).  The chart review collects 
similar information to the patient exit survey; namely, documentation of any discussion by [CONTACT_652019], tobacco, or alcohol use.  The chart abstraction form will be 
approved by [CONTACT_1201].   
 
Individual  in-depth  interviews  with patient  participants  will characterize  the acceptability  to patients  of 
conducting  substance  use screening  and interventions  in primary  care.  A purposive  sampling 
approach  will be used  to select  [ADDRESS_875066]  reporting  of stigmatizing  behaviors ,43-46 
some  patients  might  prefer  face-to-face communication  with their providers.  
 
Table  1. Phase  2 Outcomes  and measures  
 
Outcome  Measures  Source  Collected  at 
Primary  Outcome:  
J. McNeely  | 12 of 20 Version  8.6 
01/22/2019  PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]   
 Patient  receipt  of a substance 
use intervention  Audio  recordings  of 
medical  visits, 
transcribed  and coded 
with BAS scale  Audio 
recording  of 
medical  visit Baseline  and all follow -up 
PCP visits  
(SUSIT  condition  only)  
Patient  exit survey:  
-Frequency  of 
intervention  
-Elements  of 
intervention  Patient  (self- 
administered)  Baseline  and all follow -up 
PCP visits  
 Chart review  
-Frequency of 
intervention  
-Elements of intervention  Medical 
Record  Baseline and all follow -up 
PCP visits  
Secondary  Outcomes:  
Disclosure  of substance  use 
on screening  ACASI  ASSIST  
vs. TLFB  and hair test 
results  Patient  Baseline  
3- and 6-month  study  visit* 
Self-reported  drug and 
alcohol  use 90-day TLFB  Patient  Baseline  
3- and 6-month  study  visits  
Drug  or alcohol  use severity  CIDI-SAM  Patient  Baseline  
3- and 6-month  study  visits  
Problems  related  to drug or 
alcohol  use SIP, SIP-D Patient  Baseline  
3- and 6-month  study  visits  
Psychological  well-being  GAD -7, PHQ -8 Patient  Baseline  
3- and 6-month  study  visits  
Biologic  measure  of any drug 
use Hair testing  Lab result  6-month  study  visit* 
Acceptability  to patients  of 
screening  and interventions  In-depth  interviews  Patient  Individual  interviews  with 6 
patients  in each  study  period  
* Hair testing  will become not applicable for any  patient participant  that complete s 6 month interview over the 
phone  
 
PCP assessments  in Phase  2, SO and SUSIT  conditions:  
PCP focus  groups:  All participating  PCPs  will be  invited  to participate  in focus  groups,  which  occur 
prior to the SO period,  and again  [ADDRESS_875067]  on adoption.  In the focus  group  conducted  during  the SUSIT  period,  themes  will be 
explored  in the context  of their experience  with the SUSIT.  
 
Substance  abuse  attitudes  survey:  Provider  attitudes  can influence  delivery  of SBI to patients .47,[ADDRESS_875068]  substance  use and users  in a 
focus  group,  we will use the validated  Substance  Abuse  Attitudes  Survey  (SAAS)  to measure 
subjective  norms.49   Because  PCP attitudes  may change  in response  to increased  experience 
addressing  substance  use in their patients,  the SAAS  and modifie d TAM2 questionnair e will also be 
given at the end of the SUSIT  period.  
 
 
 
3.2. Data  analysis  and data monitoring  
 
 
3.2.a. Data  analysis  
Qualitative  data analysis  (Phases  1 and 2): 
J. McNeely  | 13 of 20 Version  8.6 
01/22/2019  PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]   
 In-depth  interviews  and focus  groups  (conducted  in Phases  1 and 2) will be audio  taped  and 
transcribed,  then coded  using  Atlas.ti.[ADDRESS_875069] (i.e. emergent  themes)  using  a grounded  theory 
approach.  Analysis  will be conducted  by a 3-person  team  of Dr. McNeely,  [CONTACT_652054],  and the 
Research  Coordinator  (RC).  Initial  coding  of the transcripts  will be done  by [CONTACT_652020]  a coding 
guide  jointly  developed  by [CONTACT_652021].  The coding  schemes  will be continually  compared  for 
consistency.  The investigators  will independently  read and analyze  the transcribed  sessions,  then 
discuss  the findings  until a consensus  is reached  on the core categories  and main  findings.  
 
Audio  recordings  of medical  encounters  (conducted  in Phase  2, SUSIT  condition)  will be reviewed 
and coded  by [CONTACT_652022] 
(BAS).[ADDRESS_875070]  developed  for the purpose  of assessing  the content  of brief 
intervention  delivered  by [CONTACT_652023],  and has been  used  as a fidelity  measure  in alcohol 
SBI trials.52, 53 
 
Quantitative  data analysis  (Phase  2): 
The data structure  follows  a hierarchy  of patient -level data nested  within  providers,  during  the SO vs. 
SUSIT  study  period.  For analysis  of the  primary  outcome,  which  is measured  at the patient  level, we 
will first examine  whether any  brief intervention  occurred,  in at least  one visit, during  the study 
period.  For additional  descriptive  information  we will count  the number  of visits  in which  an 
intervention  occurred,  and the number  of elements  of the brief negotiated  interview  documented  in 
each  visit. The “receipt  of brief  intervention”  outcome  analyses  will use a generalized  linear  mixed 
model  (i.e., multi level logistic  regressio n)54-57   with a random  intercept  and patients  nested  within 
primary  care providers.  The key explanatory  variable  will be treatment  condition  (SUSIT  vs. SO).  
When  the fixed  effect  of treatment  condition  is exponentiated,  this coefficient  indicates  how the odds 
of receiving  brief intervention  are multiplied  when  an individual  receives  the SUSIT  condition  rather 
than screening  only.  Patient -level and PCP-level covariates  (e.g.,  substances  used,  provider  SAAS  
score)  can be added  to the multilevel  logistic  regression  analysis  if they are significantly  related  to 
the odds  of intervention.  Any patient -level covariates  will be grand  mean  centered  following  our 
focus  on treatment  condition  effects.58  
3.2.b. Data  monitoring  
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_651991],  quality  assurance  and adverse  events.  Monitoring  of data 
quality  will be conducted  on an ongoing  basis  by [CONTACT_827].  Data  on study  enrollment  and 
measures  will be reviewed  by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_135]  3 months.  
 
While  no study -relate d adverse  events  (AEs)  are anticipated,  any study -relate d adverse  event  that 
may occur  will be recorded  with the name  [CONTACT_12581],  the relationship  to study  participation,  the 
severity  and resolution.  These  reports  will be reviewed  by [CONTACT_305407]  24 hours  and reported  to 
the IRB within  3 days  of the adverse  event’s  occurrence.  These written  reports  will be stored  in each 
subject’s  case  file. The PI [INVESTIGATOR_651992] -relate d AEs reported  during  the previous  month  for 
the determination  of seriousness,  severity  and relatedness,  and will  classify  each  AE as serious  or 
non-serious.  Study -related  serious  adverse  events  (SAEs)  and unanticipated  problems  involving 
risks to participants  or others  (UAPs)  related  to study  procedures  will be reported  to the IRB 
following  NYU  SoM reporting  requirements.  New information  that may affect  study  participation  will 
be provided  to participants  in a timely  fashion.  Study -related  AEs and SAEs  will be followed 
through  resolution,  stabilization  or study  end, and any serious  and study -related  AEs will be followed 
until resolution  or stabilization,  even  beyond  the end of the study.  Subjects  may be withdrawn  from 
the study  if continued  participation  would  be harmful  or for non-compliance  with study  procedures  or 
for a serious  adverse  reaction  to study  procedures.  The study  may be discontinued  on the 
recommendation  of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_651993]. 
J. McNeely  | 14 of 20 Version  8.6 
01/22/[ADDRESS_875071]  (DSMB).  A safety  monitoring  board  will be established  for 
ongoing  protocol  review,  including  data,  protocol  compliance,  safety  and efficacy  data,  in compliance 
with NIH and NYU  guidelines.  The DSMB is  comprised  of John  Rotrosen,  MD (Chair),  Joshua Lee, 
MD, MSc,  and Ryan  McCormack,  MD, MS.. All board  members  will meet  NIH requirements 
regarding  background  and experience,  and none  will have  ethical  conflicts,  including  financial 
interest  related  to study  outcome.  Individuals  invited  to serve  on the board  will disclose  any potential 
conflicts in  writing.  The board  will meet  every  six mont hs (unless  more  frequent  meetings  are 
deemed  necessary).  At each  meeting,  Dr. McNeely  and other  research  personnel  will report  on the 
trial status.  This will be followed  by a closed  session  under  the direction  of the DSMB  chairperson, 
during  which  time the investigators  and research  team  may be present. This  will be followed  by [CONTACT_652024].  Issues  discussed  may include  those  related  to 
subject  safety  and benefit,  whether  the primary  study  question  is being  answered,  conflict  of interest, 
confidentiality,  and ongoing  study  review  (including  AEs,  SAEs,  and regulatory  issues).  Following 
each  DSMB  meeting,  recommendations  will be made  by [CONTACT_652025]. McNeely,  and a final 
report  (edited  by [CONTACT_652026])  will be prepared  and submitted  to NIDA  and the  NYUMC  IRB. 
Stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_651994].  
 
3.3. Data  storage  and confidentiality  
Data  from the screening  tool will be securely  transferred  to a database  that resides  on a HIPAA  
compliant  cloud -based  server;  no data is stored  on the tablet  itself.  The data will be backed  up daily 
onto a password -protected  secure  storage  drive.  All computerized  data (including  substance  use 
screening  data,  interviews,  transcripts, audio  recordings,  screen  recordings)  is stored in  a secure, 
double  password -protected,  storage drive  that is maintained  on a remote  server  by [CONTACT_652027],  and accessible  only to members  of the research  team.  Access  to research  offices  at 
NYU  is restricted  to research  staff,  and the buildings  where  these  offices  are located  are secure  and 
monitored  by [CONTACT_652028].  File drawers  containing  participant  information  are located  only at the 
NYU  research  office.  These  files are kept locked  when  not in use, and only research  staff members 
have  keys to these  file cabinets.  When  the researchers  are collecting  data at the clinical  sites,  they 
will hand -carry  a minimum  amount  of participant  information  required  for that day’s  study visits  on 
site, in a locked  cabinet.  At the end of each  recruitment  day, this information  will be hand  carried  
back  to the research  office  and stored  in a locked  cabinet.  Personal  health  information  required  to 
carry  out the study  (name,  contact  [CONTACT_3031],  medical  record  number)  will be stored  separately 
from any study  assessments.  The only link between  identifying  information  and the study  ID will be 
kept in an electronic  database,  stored  on a secure  server  under  a separate  password  from that 
required  to access  the other  study  information.  
 
Digital  audio  recordings  and screen  recordings  will be uploaded  within [ADDRESS_875072]  on NYULMC  Box. The 
recordings  will be accessible  only to members  of the research  team.  Audio  recordings  will be sent 
for transcription  within  one week  following  the focus  group  or interview  session,  and only written 
transcripts  will be used for  analysis.  Digital  audio files  will be deleted  when  data collection  and 
transcription  are completed,  and video  screen  recordings  will be deleted  as soon  as the usability 
testing  analysis  is completed.  
 
4. Risk/benefit  assessment  
 
4.1. Importance  of the knowledge  to be gained  
Substance  use accounts  for more  morbidity,  mortality,  and disability  than any other  preventable 
condition,1, 2   yet only a small  fraction  of individuals  with unhealthy  substance  use are served  by [CONTACT_652029].  The technology -assisted  approach  to screening  and intervention  that we 
J. McNeely  | 15 of 20 Version  8.6 
01/22/[ADDRESS_875073]  by [CONTACT_652030].  As an additional 
protection,  we will apply  for a NIH/NIDA  for a Certificate  of Confidentiality.  Personal  identifying 
information  collected  for the study  will be kept to the minimum  required  to collect  the specified  study 
measures.  
 
Primary  care providers:  Providers  are employees  of the  study  sites Adequate  protections  will be 
implemented  to ensure  that participation  in the research  does  not jeopardize  their employment or  
professional  standing.  No information  about personal  substance  use will be solicited.  Rather,  the 
information  gathered  will address  practice patterns  and professional  opi[INVESTIGATOR_6153].   Provider participants 
at enrollment only sites will have the same protections as those at the main study sites (Bellevue and 
Gouverneur Health).  
 
Patients:  There  is a possibility  that participants  may feel uncomfortable  while  completing  some  study 
assessments.  We will minimize  discomfort  by [CONTACT_652031] a trained  and qualified 
research  assistant,  and in a private  space.  Participants  will be informed  that all aspects  of their 
participation  are voluntary  and that they  may choose  not to complete  assessments  or to discontinue 
their participation  entirely,  without  repercussion  or penalty.  
 
In Phase  2, samples  are collected  from patient  participants  for hair testing  at the 6-month  study  visit. 
This will detect  common  drugs  of abuse,  as a means  of corroborating  self-report  of recent  drug use. 
Results  of hair testing  will not  be shared  with the patient  or medical  provider.   If a participant has to 
result in having their [ADDRESS_875074] on our findings, as the hair analysis results are only 
one of many secondary mea sures (for Aim 3).  The primary Aim 3 measure is self -reported drug 
use, assessed by [CONTACT_652032] -back interview, which will be done by [CONTACT_648]. There are thus two  
exclusion criteri a for the hair sample: (1) having  no hair on  the head  that is at least  one-and-one-half 
inches  long; and if the interview is conducted over the phone . RAs  will be trained  in hair collection  
procedures  through  an on-line training  provided  by [CONTACT_652033] (Omega  Laboratories,  Inc.).  
Hair samples  will be collected  by [CONTACT_652034].  Hair 
samples  will be obtained  by [CONTACT_652035][INVESTIGATOR_651995]-and-one-half inches of  head  hair using  scissors,  cut close  
to the scalp,  preferably  snipped  from the vertex  posterior,  located  at the back  of the head,  just below  
the crown.  Approximately  60-80 strands  of hair are required  (in general,  the amount  needed  is the 
thickness  of a shoelace  tip). If necessary,  hair can be collected  from several  locations  on the head  
and combined  to obtain  the required  amount  of hair. If head  hair is not available,  body  hair may be 
collected  from the axilla(e)  or chest.  The sample will  be identified  only by [CONTACT_2299]’s  Study  ID, 
which  will be recorded  on the Omega  Laboratories collection  envelope.  Samples  will be mailed  to 
the Omega  laboratory  for analysis  on the same  day they  are collected.  
 
4.3. Protections  against  risks 
 
4.3.a.  Informed  Consent: Informed  consent  will be obtained  by [CONTACT_652036], 
as per the human  subjects  research  procedures  described  in Section  5.2. It will be made  clear  to 
patients  that participation  is entirely  voluntary.  Study  staff will err on the side of caution  (i.e. lack of 
eligibility)  in deciding  if someone  is cognitively  able to give consent  and participate  in the study.  
 
4.3.b.  Treatment  Referral: Individuals  who are identified  as having  high-risk use of alcohol  or any 
J. McNeely  | 16 of 20 Version  8.6 
01/22/2019  PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]   
 drug during  screening,  or who self -report  pregnancy  at baseline,  will not be enrolled  in the study.  
They  will be linked  to the primary  care clinic’s  Social  Worker , or that designated clinics’ behavioral 
health care staff,  for referral  to appropriate  substance abuse  treatment .  Referrals may be made to 
on-site resources  or off-site treatment  facilit ies. The social  worker,  with assistance  from the 
research  team,  will facilitate  entry  to treatment.  Bellevue  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]’s  addiction  treatment services,  
also serve  patients  from Gouverneur  Health , and are anticipated to be the primary referral site for 
both of the main study sites . Bellevue  offers  a wide range  of treatment  services,  including a  
structured  outpatient  drug and alcohol  treatment  program,  dual- diagnosis  treatment  for individuals  
with co-occurring  psychiatric  and addiction  disorders,  and opi[INVESTIGATOR_651996]  
(provided  through  an office -based  buprenorphine  treatment  and a methadone  maintenance  
treatment  program).  Participants from enrollment only sites, or those from main study sites who 
prefer  to seek  treatment  outside  of Bellevue  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307],  or whose  needs  may be better  met 
elsewhere,  will be offered  referral  to outside programs  by [CONTACT_652037] , or other behavioral 
health care staff . These patients  will additionally  receive  from the research  staff a printed  resource  
list of treatment  options , including  information  on intake  procedures.  Tobacco screening  and 
cessation  assistance  are already  integrated  into usual  care at the participating primary  care clinics.  
Bellevue  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_651997] a smoking  cessation  program,  offering  group  and individual  counseling  
and access  to pharmacotherapy,  which  is available to  all clinic  patients  at the main study sites.  
 
Because  all patients  being  screened  for study  eligibility  are current  patients  of the primary  care 
clinics  or Virology clinic where  this study  is being  conducted,  they have  the opportunity  to seek 
assistance  from their primary  care provider  or other  resources  (for example,  social  worker,  nurse,  
mental  health  provider, etc.)  in the clinic.  Participant s with PHQ or GAD score s indicatin g sever e 
depressio n or anxiet y will be advise d to spea k to their primar y care provide r and referre d by [CONTACT_652038] y walk-in clinic , or emergency room . Patients  who become  pregnant  
during  the study  will not be withdrawn,  but they will be advised  by [CONTACT_652039]  (OB/GYN,  nurse,  social  worker,  
etc.).  The participating  clinics  are well equipped  to provide patients  the behavioral  health  and other  
supportive  care they need.  These  resources  are provided as  part of regular  care in  the study  clinics,  
and patients  will not be  restricted  from accessing  them  in any  way. Medical  and psychiatric  
emergencies  will be handled  accord ing to the  study’s  Standard Operating  Procedures  (SOP).  
 
 
 
4.3.c.  Privacy  and Confidentiality: The personal  identifying  information  collected for  the study  is kept 
to a minimum.  All consent  processes  and study  assessments  will take place  in private  rooms.  Focus 
groups  and interviews  will be held in a private  room,  and will include  only participants  and members 
of the research  staff.  Participants  will be informed  that audio  recordings  are made  of the focus 
groups,  interviews,  and medical  visits.  For medical  visits  that are being  recorded,  the RA will place  a 
digital  audio  recorder  in the exam  room  and begin  recording  when  the patient  and PCP both enter  
the room.  The RA will  stop the recording  and take possession  of the digital  recorder  as soon  as the  
patient  exits the room.  The patient  and PCP will have  the option  of stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_651998].  
 
 
Several  measures  will be taken  to insure  the confidentiality  of the data.  Confidentiality  will be 
maintained  at all times  through  the use of unique  study  numbers on  all assessments.  We will apply 
for a Certificate  of Confidentiality  from NIH/NIDA.  Information  concerning  the Certificate  of 
Confidentiality  and its implications  will be provided  to participants  in the consent  form(s).  
 
For patients  who enroll  in Phase  2, the researchers  will collect contact  [CONTACT_3031]  (telephone 
numbers,  address , and email address ) to facilitate  study  retention and  scheduling  of follow -up 
study  visits.  Because  in this  urban  safety  net primary  care popul ation  patients  may have  unstable  
housing,  participants  will also  be asked  to provide contact  [CONTACT_652040] 
J. McNeely  | 17 of 20 Version  8.6 
01/22/2019  PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]   
 contacts  (family,  friends) who  the researchers  could  contact  [CONTACT_652041].  No personal  information  will be shared  with 
these  close  contacts.   We will also ask if they work with a social worker or case manager, and if 
they would allow us to contact [CONTACT_652042].   
 
For participants  in the SUSIT  study  phase, the  research  staff will send  a clinical  reminder  to the 
patient’s  PCP at each  scheduled  medical  visit that occurs  during  the study  period.  Research  staff will 
send  these  reminders  using  email or the clinic’s  secure  EHR -integrated  message  system.  It will be 
sent directly  to the PCP only,  and will not be accessible  to any other  than the PCP and the research  
staff who sent the message.  The message  sent to the PCP will include  the patient’s  name,  medical 
record  number,  and substance  use screening  results  from the baseline  visit. 
 
At enrollment only sites, the NYU research staff will not access the EHR to view patient information 
or to communicate with the patient’s PCP.  The research staff will communicate with PCPs through 
either secure H+H System email or secure  NYU  email  communi cations only, and will work with 
participants and front desk staff to determine the patients’ upcoming scheduled appointments.  
 
Transcripts  will not  contain names  or other  information  that could be  used  to identify  individuals. 
Participants will  be informe d in the  informed  consent  sheet  that these  sessions are  recorded  for 
purposes  of transcription.  Data  will be analyzed  and reported  anonymously.  
 
All study  personnel  have  already  taken  or will take the mandatory  training  required  by [CONTACT_50812],  
including  HIPAA  and Patient  Privacy/Confidentiality  training,  to ensure  that they are aware  of the 
importance  of patient  confidentiality  and all  appropriate  laws regarding  the protection against  patient 
privacy  breaches.  Procedures  will be in place  to ensure  that all files containing  patient  information 
will be kept in locked  filing cabinets  and/or  password -protected  electronic  databases.  There  will also 
be a system  in place  for breaches  in patient  privacy  or other  adverse  events  to be reported  to the 
study  PI, who will take the appropriate  steps  to ensure  that they are documented  and that there  is 
minimal  risk that it could  happen again.  
 
4.4. Potential  benefits  to the  subjects  
There  are no direct  benefits  to patients or  primary  care providers  participating  in the study.  
Participants  will receive  incentive  payments  that compensate them  for the time spent  in study 
activities.  The community  at large,  including  patients  and providers,  benefits  from knowledge  gained 
about  substance  use, screening  and assessment  methods,  and medical  practice  that is gathered 
through  this study.  The risks to subjects  mentioned  above  are reasonable  in relation  to these 
anticipated  benefits.  
5. Subject  identification,  recruitment  and consent  
5.1.Method  of subject  identification  and recruitment  
The study  protocol  and informed  consent  documents  will be reviewed  and approved  by [CONTACT_652043][INVESTIGATOR_651999].  Consent  will be obtained  by [CONTACT_652044].  Participants  will be given  a written 
consent  form that includes  required  language  regarding  HIPAA  and the Certificate  of Confidentiality, 
as well as name  [CONTACT_3669]  [CONTACT_652045] [INVESTIGATOR_652000],  a description  
of the study,  the payment  schedule,  a description  of potential  risks and benefits,  a statement  of 
confidentiality,  and an  indication  of the right to refuse  or withdraw  participation  at any time without 
any consequence.  Research  staff will review  this form verbally  and in detail  with participants.  
 
Primary  care providers:  PCPs  will be recruited  by [CONTACT_652046],  email,  and in -
J. McNeely  | 18 of 20 Version  8.6 
01/22/2019  PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]   
 person.  
 
Patients:  Patient  participants  will be recruited  from the adult  primary  care and virology clinics  of 
Bellevue  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_652001] , and from the enrollment only 
sites. The research  team  will obtain  from the clinic  administrator,  on a weekly basis,  a list of 
patients  scheduled  to see participating  PCPs  for a routine  medical  appointment. Patients  will be 
approached  by a RA in the waiting  room,  when  they present  for their medical  visit. The  RA will 
inform  them  of the study,  and obtain  verbal  consent  to screen  them  for study  eligibility.   Research 
staff will nt have any information about patients of non -participating PCPs, and no patients of non -
participating PCPs will be approached by [CONTACT_21118].  
 
Screening  for study  eligibility:  Patients  who agree  to screening  for eligibility  and meet  the inclusion 
criteria  for age and language  will receive  the tablet -based  screening  tool. The screening  tool will be 
described  as a ‘computerized questionnair e about healt h behavior’ , to avoid biasin g participan t 
responses . The RA will presen t intereste d patient s with an informatio n sheet , and will be present 
and available  for patients  who have  any questions.  Patients  will be required  to provide  verbal 
consent  to proceed.  Those  who agree  to participate  will be assigned  an anonymous  study  ID by [CONTACT_652047]. Those  who agree  to continue  the screening  process  will self-administer  the 
substance  use screening  questionnaires on  the tablet  computer.  When  substance  use screening  is 
complete,  research  staff will view the patient’s  substance  specific  involvement  scores  (SSIS)  on the 
tablet  computer. Patients  having  moderate -risk use of at least  one drug (SSIS  4-26 for any drug),  in 
the absence  of any high-risk drug  or alcohol  use (SSIS  27+ for any drug or alcohol),  and meet  all 
other  inclusion/exclusion  criteria,  will be offered  participation  in the main  study.  Individuals  who do 
not qualify  for the study  due to high-risk drug or alcohol  use will be informed  by [CONTACT_652048].  They  will be  offered  treatment  referrals  as detailed  in section 
4.3. 
 
5.2. Process  of consent  
Primary  Care  Providers:  For interviews  and usability  testing  activities,  a member of  the research 
team  will obtain  consent  in English and/or Spanish via an IRB-approved  consent  form (described  in 
Section  5.4 below).  Participants  will provide  consent  for audio  recording  of focus  groups,  interviews,  
and medical visits.  PCPs  participating  in Phase  1 usability testing  will provide  consent  for both audio  
and video screen  recording,  and those  participating  in Phase  2 will provide  consent  for audio 
recording.  
Signed  consent  forms  will be filed in a secured  cabinet  located in  the offices  of the research  team  at 
NYU  School  of Medicine.  
 
Patients:  Patients  recruited  to Phase  1 will receive  paper  copi[INVESTIGATOR_652002],  and will be 
asked  to provide  verbal  consent for  participation.  Patients  recruited  to Phase  2 (SO and SUSIT  
conditions)  will be asked  to sign a written  consent  document.  For participants at Bellevue only 
there will be one copy of the enrolled patient consent form made for the Clinical Research Center at 
Bellevue, where interviews are conducted.   Those consent forms are stored in a double locked unit 
at the Clinic al Research Center (CRC) in Bellevue and only the CRC staff has access to the record 
room.  At all other study sites, including enr ollment only sites, interviews will be conducted in a 
private room that is not located in the CRC, and no copy of the consent  form will be made.  
Individuals  who enroll  in a study phase  that requires  having  their screening  results  delivered  to the 
PCP (i.e. Phase  1 clinical  testing phase,  or Phase  2 SUSIT  condition)  will additionally  sign a HIPAA  
authorization  for sharing  their screening  results  with the medical  provider.  Patients  who choose to enroll  
in Phase 2  SUSIT  condition  will go through a detailed information sheet which will review procedures 
for sharing the screening results with their provider, the RAs will obtain  verbal consent to share those 
results with their PCP.  A separate signed authorization for Audio Recording will be collected before 
patients meet with their provider.  
 
J. McNeely  | 19 of 20 Version  8.6 
01/22/2019  PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]   
 Beginning in January 2019, for Phase 2 patient participants we will obtain consent to allow the research 
staff to review primary care provider notes that are documented in the patient’s medical during the 12 
months following study enrollment (inclusive of the date of enrollment).  For participants enrolled in the 
SUSIT phase, the chart revi ew is included in a revised IRB -approved informed consent document 
(version date 01/09/19).  Participants who previously completed informed consent will be re -consented 
using the revised informed consent document when they come back for any follow -up appoi ntment with 
their primary care provider, or at their 3 month or 6 month follow -up study visits.   
Participants who were previously enrolled (in the SO or SUSIT phase) and have completed all study 
visits, and who are not able to meet with research staff in person to complete the revised informed 
consent document, we will obtain verbal consent over the telephone.  In the telephone consent process,  
research staff will provide information verbally about the study using an IRB -approved script, and will 
offer to  send participants a written information sheet (via regular mail and/or email, depending on the 
participant’s preference).  Participants will be given an opportunity to ask questions, and then will be 
asked to give verbal consent for the chart review.  If we cannot reach a study participant over the 
telephone or in person, we will not conduct the chart review for that individual.  
 
 
For PCPs  and patients,  the RA will meet  individually  with the potential  participant , after they have 
finished with their PCP,  in a private  area of the clinic  and give them  a copy  of the consent  document.  
The RA will review  the contents  of the consent  document,  which  contains  a description  of the purpose  
of the study  and the participant’s rights  of confidentiality , and review the remaining study activities  
(which are the baseline and follow -up research assessments) . The RA will offer to answer  any 
questions.  Following  this discussion,  and prior  to any collection  of any study -related  information,  
consent  to participate  in the study  will be obtained.   The written consent may be obtained either before 
or after the visit with the primary care provider, depending on the amount of time that is available (i.e. if 
patients are called to see their provider before the full consent process has been completed, or if the 
patient is more comfortable doing this after the visit, the signed consent may be obtained after the 
patient finishes t heir visit with the provider).  
 
The [ADDRESS_875075]  capacity  
Prior  to enrollment,  subjects  will be asked  to describe  the activities  required  for study  participation. 
Those  who are unable  to describe  these  study  activities  without guidance  from the researchers  will 
not be permitted  to enroll.  Study  staff will err on the side of caution  (i.e. lack of eligibility)  in deciding 
if someone  is cognitively  able to give consent  and participate  in the study.  
 
5.4. Consent  forms  and Documentation  of Consent  
All consent  documents  will include  the name  [CONTACT_3669]  [CONTACT_652049] [INVESTIGATOR_652003],  a description  of the study,  the payment  schedule,  a description  of potential  risks and 
benefits,  a statement  of confidentiality,  and an indication  of the right to refuse  or withdraw  at any 
time without  any consequence.  A separate  consent  form will be obtained  for audio  recording  of 
individual  interviews,  focus  groups,  or medical  visits,  and for audio/video  recording  of usability 
testing  sessions.  PCP consent  documents  will inform  them  that a decision  not to participate  will 
have  no bearing  on the individual’s  employabili ty, reputation,  professional  relationships, or 
relationship  with NYU,  [LOCATION_001] City  Health  and Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600],  or any affiliated  individuals.  
 
Patients  who enroll  in a study  phase  that requires  having  their screening  results  delivered  to the 
J. McNeely  | 20 of 20 Version  8.6 
01/22/2019  PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]   
 PCP (i.e. the Phase  1 clinical  testing  phase,  or Phase  2 SUSIT  condition)  will additionally  sign a 
HIPAA  authorization  for sharing  their screening  results  with the medical  provider.  The authorization 
forms  will not contain  the participant’s  Study  ID or any other  links to their study  data.  
 
Signed  consent  documents  will be hand  carried  by [CONTACT_652050],  at 
the end of each recruitment  day. They  will be stored  in a locked  cabinet  that is accessible  only to 
study  personnel.  The consent  documents  will be stored  separately  from all other  personal  health 
information  or assessments  that are collected  for the study.  When  a verbal  consent  is obtained, 
subjects  will be offered  the option  of having  their name  [CONTACT_652053] a study  participant,  but this is 
entirely  voluntary.  
 
The following  consent  documents  will be used  in carrying  out this study:  
Phase  1 consent  documents:  
1. Phase  One PCP interview  for CDS  development:  Information  sheet  
2. Phase  One PCP usability  testing:  Information  sheet  
3. Phase  One PCP clinical  testing:  Information  sheet  
4. Phase  One Patient  screening:  Information  sheet  
5. HIPAA  authorization  for patients  
6. Audio/video  recording  consent  for PCPs 
Phase  2 consent  documents:  
1. Phase  Two Patient  screening:  Information  sheet,  paper  and electronic  
2. Phase  Two Patient  SO phase  participation:  Written  consent  
3. Phase  Two Patient  SUSIT  phase  participation:  Written  consent  
[Note  that the SO and SUSIT  patient  consents  are the same,  except  that the SUSIT  
consent  includes  delivery  of substance  use screening  information  to the medical  provider 
and consent  to audio  recording  (Section  4-5).] 
 4. Phase  Two PCP participation:  Written  consent  
5. Phase  Two Patient  interview:  Information  sheet  
6. HIPAA  authorization  (for patients  in the SUSIT  condition)  
7. Audio  recording  consent  (for PCPs  and for patients  in the SUSIT  condition)  
8. Phase Two Chart Review Information Sheet (for participants who provide consent for 
chart review by [CONTACT_756])  
 
5.5. Costs  to the subject  
There  are no costs  to the subjects  associated  with this study.  
 
5.6. Payment  for participation.  Incentives  will be provided to participants  in the form of cash or  a 
gift card,  in the amounts  specified  below.   For interviews conducted over the phone, if they are 
unable to come to site for incentive, a gift card will be mailed to participant . 
 
Phase  1: 
• PCPs  who participate  in usability  testing  will receive  a $50 incentive.  
• PCPs  who participate  in interviews  for CDS  content  development  and clinical  testing  will take 
part in a 30-60 minute  semi -structured  interview  with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_229954] a  $50 incentive.  
• Patients  who participate  in CDS  clinical  testing  will complete  the tablet -based  screening  tool, 
and receive  a $5 incentive.  
 
Phase  2: 
• PCPs  who participate  in a 45-minute  focus  group  will receive  a $50 incentive.  
• PCPs  who participate  in the SAAS  survey  (administered  twice)  will receive  a $25 incentive 
for each  survey  completed.  
J. McNeely  | 21 of 20 Version  8.6 
01/22/2019  PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]   
 • Patients  enrolled  in the SO or SUSIT  condition  will receive  an incentive  for their participation. 
Incentives  escalate  in amount  with each  study  visit, to assist with  study  retention.  The baseline  visit 
amount  is $20, the month -3 visit is $25 and the month -6 visit (which  includes  hair testing)  is $30. 
Incentives  are not provided  for follow -up medical  visits.  
• Patients  who participate  in individual  in-depth  interviews  (45 minutes) will  receive  an 
incentive  in the amount  of $50. 
• Patients who contact [CONTACT_111549] a change in primary contact (phone number or email 
address) will receive $5.  They can receive this payment at their next scheduled follow -up 
appointment, or they can be pi[INVESTIGATOR_652004] a scheduled time.  
 
6. Research  Team  
PI [INVESTIGATOR_651986],  MD, MS is a NIH-funded  researcher  who developed  the computerized 
screening  tools  that will be used  in the study.  She successfully  conducted  a large  study  at the 
Bellevue  Adult  Primary  Care  Clinic  (which  is the proposed  site for the current  study)  to evaluate  the 
validity,  reliability,  and feasibility  of these  tools.  
 
Co-Investigator  Donna  Shelley,  MD, MPH  is a senior  investigator  and a leader  in tobacco  cessation 
research  whose  work  has focused  on implementation  of guideline -recommended  tobacco  screening 
and treatment  in health  care settings.  Her work  has included  developi[INVESTIGATOR_652005]  a tablet -based 
tobacco  clinical  decision  support  device  similar  to the SUSIT,  and using  qualitative  methods  to 
examine  the impact  of a CDS  system  on hypertension  management  in federally  qualified  health 
centers.  As Vice Chair  for Research  in the Dept.  of Population  Health,  [CONTACT_652054]  supports  the 
development  of junior  investigators,  and she and Dr. McNeely  have  a history  of collaboration  on 
research  related  to SBIRT  interventions  in dental  clinics.  
 
Study  personnel  will have  research  training  including  training  in protection  of human  subjects,  and 
will be directly  supervised  by [CONTACT_978]. All study  personnel  have  already  taken  or will take the 
mandatory  HIPAA  and Patient  Privacy/Confidentiality  training  modules  for the NYU  School  of 
Medicine  to ensure  that they are aware  of the importance  of patient  confidentiality  and all 
appropriate  laws regarding  the protection  against  patient  privacy  breaches.  
Version  8.6 
01/22/2019  PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]  
J. McNeely  | 20 of 20  
  
 
1. Mokdad,  A.H.,  et al., Actual  causes  of death  in the United  States,  2000.  JAMA,  2004.  291(10):  p. 1238 - 
45. 
2. Robert  Wood  Johnson  Foundation  and Schneider  Institute  for Health  Policy  Substance  abuse:  The 
nation’s  number  one health  probl em. 2001.  
3. Substance  Abuse  and Mental  Health  Services  Administration,  Results  from  the 2012  National  Survey  
on Drug  Use and Health:  Summary  of National  Findin gs, in NSDUH  Series  H-46, HHS Publication  
No.(SMA)  13-4795. 2013,  Substance  Abuse  and Mental  Health  Services  Administration:  Rockville,  
MD.  
4. Mack,  K.A.,  Drug -induced  deaths  - United  States,  1999 -2010.  MMWR  Surveill  Summ.,  2013.  62(Suppl  
3): p. 161 -3. 
5. Mertens,  J.R., et al., Medical  and psychiatric  conditions  of alcohol  and drug  treatment  patients  in an 
HMO:  comparison  with  matched  controls.  Arch  Intern  Med.,  2003.  163(20):  p. 2511 -7. 
6. Malta,  M., et al., Adherence  to antiretroviral  therapy  for human  immunodeficiency  virus/acquired 
immune  deficiency  syndrome  among  drug  users:  a systematic  review.  Addiction,  2008.  103(8): p. 
1242 -57. 
7. Danaei,  G., et al., The preventable  causes  of death  in the United  States:  comparative  risk assessment  
of dietary,  lifestyle,  and metabolic  risk factors.  PLoS  Med,  2009.  6(4): p. e1000058.  
8. Centers  for Disease  Control  and Prevention,  Unintentional  poisoning  deaths --United  States,  1999 - 
2004.  MMWR  Morb  Mortal  Wkly  Rep,  2007.  56(5): p. 93-6. 
9. Saitz,  R., et al., Screening  and brief  intervention  for unhealthy  drug  use in primary  care  settings: 
randomized  clinical  trials  are needed.  J Addict  Med,  2010.  4(3): p. 123-30. 
10. Sullivan,  L.E., et al., A Meta -analysis  of the Efficacy  of Nonphysician  Brief  Interventions  for Unhealthy  
Alcohol  Use:  Implications  for the Patient -Centered  Medical  Home.  American  Journal  on Addictions,  
2011.  20(4): p. 343-356.  
11. Fiore,  M. and United  States  Tobacco Use  and Dependence  Guideline  Panel.,  Treating  tobacco  use and 
dependence  : 2008  upda te. Clinical  practice  guideline.  2008,  Rockville,  Md.:  U.S. Dept.  of Health  and 
Human  Services,  Public  Health  Service.  
12. Jonas,  D.E.,  et al., Behavioral  counseling  after  screening  for alcohol  misuse  in primary  care:  a 
systematic  review  and meta -analysis  for the U.S. Preventive  Services  Task  Force.  Ann Intern  Med,  
2012.  157(9): p. 645-54. 
13. Bower,  P., et al., Collaborative  care  for depression  in primary  care.  Making  sense  of a complex 
intervention:  systematic  review  and meta -regression.  Br J Psychiatry.,  2006.  189: p. 484-93. 
14. Gilbody,  S., et al., Collaborative  care  for depression:  a cumulative  meta -analysis  and review  of longer - 
term  outcomes.  Arch  Intern  Med.,  2006.  166(21):  p. 2314 -21. 
15. Katon,  W., et al., Rethinking  practitioner  roles  in chronic  illness:  the specialist,  primary  care  physician,  
and the practice  nurse.  Gen Hosp  Psychiatry.,  2001.  23(3): p. 138-44. 
16. Katon,  W.J.,  et al., Collaborative  care  for patients  with  depression  and chronic  illnesses.  N Engl  J Med.,  
2010.  363(27):  p. 2611 -20. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1003955.  
17. McLellan,  A.T.S.,  J.L.; Gordon,  A.J.; Brown,  R.; Ghitza,  U.; Gourevitch,  M.N.;  Stein  J.; Oros,  M.; Horton,  
T.; Linblad,  R.; McNeely,  J., Can substance  use disorders  be managed  using  the chronic  care  model?  
Review  and recommendations  from  a NIDA  consensus  group.  Public  Health  Reviews,  2014.  35(2). 
18. Gelberg,  L., The efficacy  of the QUIT  intervention  for reducing  risky  drug use  and drug -related  harm  
behavior  of patients  of community  health  cente rs, in College  on Problems  of Drug  Dependenc e. 2013:  
San Diego,  CA. 
19. McNeely,  J., et al., A Brief  Patient  Self-administered  Substance  Use Screening  Tool  for Primary  Care:  
Two -site Validation  Study  of the Substance  Use Brief  Screen  (SUBS).  Am J Med,  2015.  128(7): p. 784 
e9-19. 
Version  8.6 
01/22/2019  PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]  
J. McNeely  | 21 of 20  
  
20. McNeely,  J., et al., Validation  of an audio  computer  assisted  self interview  (ACASI)  version  of the 
alcohol,  smoking  and substance  involvement  screening  test (ASSIST)  in primary  care  patients.  
Addiction,  2015  (in press).  
21. McNeely,  J., et al., Test-retest  reliability  of a self-administered  Alcohol,  Smoking  and Substance 
Involvement  Screening  Test (ASSIST)  in primary  care  patients.  J Subst  Abuse  Treat,  2014.  10(14):  p. 
[ADDRESS_875076] (ASSIST)  in primary  care  patients.  
Subst  Abus,  2016.  37(2): p. 299-305.  
23. Humeniuk,  R., et al., Validation  of the Alcohol,  Smoking  And Substance  Involvement  Screening  Test  
(ASSIST).  Addiction.,  2008.  103(6): p. 1039 -47. doi: 10.1111/j.1360 -0443.2007.[ZIP_CODE].x.  Epub  2008  
Mar 28. 
24. McNeely,  J., et al., Validation  of an audio  computer -assisted  self-interview  (ACASI)  version  of the 
alcohol,  smoking  and substance  involvement  screening  test (ASSIST)  in primary  care  patients.  
Addiction,  2016.  111(2): p. 233-44. 
25. Bates,  D.W.,  et al., Ten commandments  for effective  clinical  decision  support:  making  the practice  of 
evidence -based  medicine  a reality.  J Am Med  Inform  Assoc.,  2003.  10(6): p. 523-30. Epub  2003  Aug 4. 
26. Maviglia,  S.M.,  et al., Automating  complex  guidelines  for chronic  disease:  lessons  learned.  J Am Med  
Inform  Assoc.,  2003.  10(2): p. 154-65. 
27. Sim,  I., et al., Clinical  decision  support  systems  for the practice  of evidence -based  medicine.  J Am Med  
Inform  Assoc.,  2001.  8(6): p. 527-34. 
28. Wright,  A., et al., Best  Practices  in Clinical  Decision  Support:  the Case  of Preventive  Care  Reminders.  
Appl  Clin Inform,  2010.  1(3): p. 331-345.  
29. Wyatt,  J. and D. Spi[INVESTIGATOR_192636],  Evaluating  medical  expert  [INVESTIGATOR_652052]:  what  to test and how?  Med  Inform  
(Lond).  1990.  15(3): p. 205-17. 
30. D'Onofrio,  G.P.,  M.V.;  Degutis,  L.C.;  Fiellin,  D.A.;  O'Connor,  P., The Yale  Brief  Negotiated  Interview  
manu al. 2005,  New  Haven,  CT: Yale University  School  of Medicine.  
31. Carvalho,  C.J., E.M.  Borycki,  and A. Kushniruk,  Ensuring  the safety  of health  information  systems:  
using  heuristics  for patient  safety.  Healthc  Q, 2009.  12(Spec  No Patient):  p. 49-54. 
32. Dexheimer,  J.W.,  et al., Prompting  clinicians  about  preventive  care  measures:  a systematic  review  of 
randomized  controlled  trials.  J Am Med  Inform  Assoc.,  2008.  15(3): p. 311-20. doi: 
10.1197/jamia.M2555.  Epub  2008  Feb 28. 
33. Kushniruk,  A.K.P.,  C.; Patel,  V.L.;  Cimino,  J.J., “Televaluation”  of information  systems:  An integrative 
approach  to design  and evaluation  of Web -based  systems.  International  Journal  of Medical 
Informatics,  2001.  61(1): p. 45-70. 
34. Kushniruk,  A.W.  and V.L. Patel, Cognitive  and usability  engineering  methods  for the evaluation of 
clinical  information  systems.  J Biomed  Inform.,  2004.  37(1): p. 56-76. 
35. My Own  Health  Report  (MOHR)  Proje ct. [cited  [ADDRESS_875077] 15]; Available  from:  
http://healthpolicy.ucla.edu/programs/health -economics/projects/mohr/Pages/default.as px. 
36. Sobell,  L.C. and M.B.  Sobell,  Timeline  follow -back, in Measuring alcohol  consumpti on. 1992,  Springer. 
p. 41-72. 
37. Forman,  R.F.,  et al., Selection  of a substance  use disorder  diagnostic  instrument  by [CONTACT_652051].  J Subst  Abuse  Treat.,  2004.  27(1): p. 1-8. 
38. Compton,  W.M.,  et al., Comparing  assessments  of DSM -IV substance  dependence  disorders  using 
CIDI-SAM  and SCAN.  Drug  Alcohol  Depend,  1996.  41(3): p. 179-87. 
39. Cottler,  L.B.,  Composite  International  Diagnostic  Interview  - Substance  Abuse  Module  (SAM). 2000,  St. 
Louis,  MO:  Department  of Psychiatry,  Washington  University  School  of Medicine.  
Version  8.6 
01/22/2019  PROTOCOL  
s16-[ZIP_CODE]  
J. McNeely  | 20 of 20  
  
40. Cottler,  L.B.,  L.N. Robins,  and J.E. Helzer,  The reliability  of the CIDI-SAM:  a comprehensive  substance  
abuse  interview.  Br J Addict,  1989.  84(7): p. 801-14. 
41. Robins,  L.N.,  et al., The Composite  International  Diagnostic  Interview. An  epi[INVESTIGATOR_652006].  Arch  Gen  
Psychiatry,  1988.  45(12):  p. 1069 -77. 
42. Allensworth -Davies,  D., et al., The Short  Inventory  of Problems -Modified  for Drug  Use (SIP-DU):  
validity  in a primary  care  sample.  Am J Addict,  2012.  21(3): p. 257-62. 
43. Perlis,  T., et al., Audio -computerized  self-interviewing  versus face -to-face  interviewing  for research  
data  collection  at drug  abuse  treatment  programs.  Addiction,  2004.  99: p. 885-96. 
44. Tourangeau,  R. and T.W.  Smith,  Asking  sensitive  questions  the impact  of data  collection  mode,  
question  format,  and question  context.  Public  opi[INVESTIGATOR_652007],  1996.  60(2): p. 275-304.  
45. Wight,  R.G.,  et al., Screening  for transmission  behaviors  among  HIV-infected  adults.  AIDS  education  
and prevention:  official  publication  of the International  Society  for AIDS  Education,  2000. 12(5): p. 
431-441.  
46. Newman,  J.C., et al., The differential  effects  of face -to-face  and computer  interview  modes.  Am J 
Public  Health,  2002.  92(2): p. 294-7. 
47. Anderson,  P., Overview  of interventions  to enhance  primary -care  provider  management  of patients  
with  substance -use disorders.  Drug  Alcohol  Rev,  2009.  28(5): p. 567-74. 
48. Anderson,  P., et al., Attitudes  and managing  alcohol  problems  in general  practice:  an interaction  
analysis  based  on findings  from  a WHO  collaborative  study.  Alcohol  and Alcoholism,  2004.  39(4): p. 
351-6. 
49. Chappel,  J.N.,  T.L. Veach,  and R.S. Krug,  The substance  abuse  attitude  survey:  an instrument  for 
measuring  attitudes.  J Stud  Alcohol,  1985.  46(1): p. 48-52. 
50. Muhr,  T., ATLAS.  ti (Version  6.0. 15). 2012,  Scientific  Software  Development:  Berlin.  
51. Pantalon,  M.V.,  et al., Development  of a scale  to measure  practitioner  adherence  to a brief 
intervention  in the emergency  department.  J Subst  Abuse  Treat,  2012.  43(4): p. 382-8. 
52. D'Onofrio,  G., et al., A brief  intervention  reduces  hazardous  and harmful  drinking  in emergency  
department  patients.  Ann Emerg  Med,  2012.  60(2): p. 181-92. 
53. D'Onofrio,  G., et al., Brief  intervention  for hazardous  and harmful  drinkers  in the emergency  
department.  Ann Emerg  Med,  2008.  51(6): p. 742-750 e2. 
54. McCulloch,  C.E.S.,  S. R., Generalized,  linear,  and mixed  model s. 2nd ed. 2008,  New  York:  Wiley.  
55. Hox,  J., Multilevel  analysis:  Techniques  and application s. 2010,  New  York:  Routledge.  
56. Raudenbush,  S.W.B.,  A. S., Hierarchical  linear  models:  Applications  and data  analysis methods  in 
Advanced  Quantitative  Techniques  in the Social  Sciences  1. 2002,  Sage:  Newbury  Park,  CA. 
57. O'Connell,  A.A.G.,  J.; Rogers,  H. J.; Peng,  C. J., Multilevel  logistic  models  for dichotomous  and ordinal  
data, in Multilevel  Modeling  of Educational  Data. 2008,  Information  Age Publishing,  Inc. p. 199-242.  
58. Enders,  C.K.T.,  D., Centering  predictor  variables  in cross -sectional  multilevel  models:  a new  look  at an 
old issue.  Psychological  Methods,  2007.  12(2): p. 121.  