A Disposable Device NAS to Treat Obstructive Sleep Apnea and Snoring  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
October 27, [ADDRESS_563309] a new approach for  treating patients with 
snoring and obstructive sleep apnea (OSA). A  special device (NAS -nasal stent) appears 
to be a useful alternative  or additive treatment for patients with OSA.  
b. Objectives  
We hope to learn through this study if this device provides a better  alternative treatment 
for obsturctive sleep apnea and snoring.  
c. Rationale for Research in Humans  
2. STUDY PROCEDURES  
a. Procedures  
This research study is seeking to enroll up to [ADDRESS_563310] Sleep Medicine  Center.  The NAS (straight type ) supports 
the soft palate from "collapsing"  by [CONTACT_442993], as well as securing the 
passage of  airflow both inside and outside of the tube.  Participants in the proposed study 
will undergo any or all of the  following procedures.  
 
After the consent process (30 min ), each participant will be asked  to complete eith er 
paper questionnaires which inquires about his  or her demographic information and 
medical history (Sleep  Disorders Questionnaire, 30 min ) and level of daytime sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_442988] (Epworth Sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_7110], 5 min ) or an  electronic questionnaire 
(Alliance Sleep Questionnaire, 20 min ). 
 
Each participant will be asked to submit to an initial evaluation  (60 min ), which consists 
of a discussion of the participant's  sleep habits and problems, medical history of 
participant and  family, review of systems, medications, education, employment, and  
personal habits. A general physical examination, including but not  limited to examination 
of the mouth and throat, and measurements  of his or her weight and height; 
circumference of neck, wa ist, and  hip; pulse and respi[INVESTIGATOR_1487]; and blood pressure.  
 
The participants will undergo two sleep studies: one sleep study  at our center prior to 
using the NAS device (Baseline ) and another  after 7 days of use of the device at their 
October 27,  2016   Page 2 of 10 homes (Treatment ). The  participants will wear the NAS device during the sec ond sleep  
study.  
 
The sleep study will be conducted in routine fashion, with  recording electrodes and 
equipment attached to the participant to  enable monitoring of the electroencephalogram 
(EEG, C3 -A2 and C4 - A1, O2 -A1 and O1 -A2), electro -oculogram (EOG, ROC -A1, 
LOC -A2), chin and anterior tibialis electromyograms (EMG ), heart rate by  [CONTACT_1192]-lead 
electrocardiogram (EKG ), snoring intensity (anterior n eck microphone ), nasal pressure 
(nasal cannula ), oral  airflow (thermocouple ), thoracic and abdominal movement 
(inductance  plethysmography bands ), and oxygen saturation (pulse oximetry ). The 
duration of the application of all of these electrodes and  recordin g devices to the 
participant is approximately 1.[ADDRESS_563311] 7 hours but  no more than 9 hours of time in bed for the participant during the  night.  
 
The participants will be provided the following instructions for  handling the NAS device:  
-Before handling the NAS, wash hands and nails thoroughly with  
soap. Make sure to thoroughly rinse off the soap as we ll. 
-Check NAS package carefully for breakage on the package. In case  
of breakage, do not use and contact [CONTACT_243126].  
-Check right or left nostril for intended insertion  
-Open NAS package, and take out NAS device.  
-Insert the tube to the a ppropriate side and slide NAS device  
slowly into the nasal airway.  
-Clip the stopper on to the nasal septum / bridge to secure the  
device.  
-Open the mouth in front of a mirror; check that there is the tip  
of the NAS device showing 3mm from the soft palate.  
-Go to sleep with the NAS applied.  
-Remove the NAS through nose and dispose once awake.  
-Limit use of this device to a maximum of [ADDRESS_563312] sleep study (baseline ) and second  sleep  study (treatment ), 
subject will be asked to come back for a  follow -up visit to discuss the results of his/h er 
sleep studies with the  study  doctor, [CONTACT_442999]. During this visit, the study doctor or  
research  coordinator will ask the subject to place the nasal stent into  his/her nostril, and 
the PI [INVESTIGATOR_442989]'s mout h, 
where the nasal stent  should be resting. Subject's face will not be included in the  photos. 
If after meeting with the study doctor and the subject  would  like to try the nasal stent in a 
different size, the subject may  have  a repeat treatment PSG.  
October 27,  [ADDRESS_563313] pressure (CPAP ), upper airway surgery, and oral 
appliance  therapy. There are risks/benefits to all these alternative  treatments t hat will be 
discussed with the participants; these are  standard of care treatments.  
f. Will it be possible to continue the more (most) appropriate therapy for the 
participant(s) after the conclusion of the study?  
Yes 
g. Study Endpoint (s) 
The study will end after [ADDRESS_563314] Experimental and/or Clinical Findings  
Nasal airway stents  have been tried in sample populations with mixed  results. The 
sponsor of the proposed study has developed several  versions of their device, of which 
the device for the proposed study  appears to be the most promising as tested in a few 
subjects by [CONTACT_442994].  
b. Findings from Past Animal Experiments  
Not Applicable  
4. RADIOISOTOPES OR RADIATION  MACHINES  
a. Standard of Care (SOC) Procedures  
Identify Week/Month of Study  Name [CONTACT_208129] 
b. Radioisotopes  
i. Radionuclide(s) and chemical form(s)  
NA 
October 27,  2016   Page 4 of 10 ii. Total number of times the radioisotope and activity will be administered (mCi) and 
the route of administration  for a typi[INVESTIGATOR_208076]. If not FDA approved:  dosimetry information and  source documents (package insert, 
Medical Internal Radiation Dose [ MIRD ] calculation, and peer reviewed literature ) 
NA 
c. Radiation Machines  – Diagnostic Procedures  
i. Examination description (well -established procedures)  
NA 
ii. Total number of times each procedure will be performed  (typi[INVESTIGATOR_187753])  
NA 
iii. Setup and techniques to support dose modeling  
NA 
iv. FDA status of the machine and information on dose modeling  (if procedure is not 
well-established)  
NA 
d. Radiation Machines  – Therapeutic  Procedures  
i. Area treated, dose per fraction/number of fractions, performed as part of normal 
clinical management or due to research participat ion (well -established p rocedures ) 
NA 
ii. FDA status of the machine, basis for dosimetry, area treated, dose per fraction and 
number of fractions (if procedure is not well -established)  
NA 
5. DEVICES  USED IN THE STUDY  
a. Investigational Devices  (Including Commercial Devices Used Off -Label)  
Investigational  Device 1  
Name:  [CONTACT_442996]:  The Nasal Airway Stent (NAS ) is inserted into the nose and serves as a 
mechanical spl int to prop open  the upper airway . 
Significant Risk? (Y/N)  No 
Rationale for Non -Significant Risk  Device does not provide for any significant risk. The device is extremely 
soft and flexible and would be  highly unlikely to cause any problems 
with the soft palate, thr oat, and/or upper airway.  
 
b. IDE-Exempt Devices  

October 27,  2016   Page 5 of 10 IND-Exempt Device 1  
Name:  [CONTACT_442997]:  NA 
 
6. DRUG S, BIOLOGICS , REAGENTS , OR CHEMICALS  USED IN THE STUDY  
a. Investigational Drugs, Biologics, Reagents, or Chemicals  
Investigational  Product 1  
Name:  [CONTACT_442998] : NA 
Administration Route : NA 
b. Commercial Drugs, Biologics, Reagents, or Chemicals  
Commercial Product 1  
Name:  [CONTACT_442998]:  NA 
Administration Route  NA 
New and different use? (Y/N)  NA 
7. DISINFECTION PROCEDURES  FOR MEDICAL EQUIPMENT USED ON BOTH HUMANS AND 
ANIMALS  
Not Applicable  
 
8. PARTICIPANT POPULATION  
a. Planned Enrollment  
Our plan is to enroll [ADDRESS_563315] will be the only 
site. The population will be 18 years of age and older with snoring and obstructive sleep 
apnea and exclusion  criteria of adults with body mass index (BMI) greater than 30 
kg/m2.  
b. Age, Gender, and Ethnic Background  
Age range is 18 years and older. There are no gender or ethnic background specific 
criteria.  
c. Vulnerable Population s 
- No children will be asked to participate in the study.  
- Pregnant women, homeless and economically disadvantaged people  will be excluded.  
- Persons who are not able to comprehen d or understand English.  
- Persons who are unable to follow instructions will be excluded.  
- Persons with body mass index greater than 30 kg/m2 will be excluded.  
d. Rationale for Exclusion of Certain Populations  
No children will be included in the study, since standard -of-care treatment for sleep 
disorder management in  children is less well defined and standardized than that of adults . 
October 27,  [ADDRESS_563316] Populations  
Laboratory personnel, employees, and/or students will not be excluded from the study, 
since they will be  part of our normal clinic population. No specific number or share of 
laboratory personnel, employees,  and/or students can be part of the study.  
 
Those participants in this research study will also be eligible for the standard study 
cooperation fee of $[ADDRESS_563317].  
h. Eligibility Criteria  
i. Inclusion Criteria  
The population under study will be clinical outpatients 18 years of age or older with 
symptoms of  obstructive sleep apnea and snoring, and with body mass index less 
than 30 kg/m2.  
ii. Exclusion Criteria  
Children, pregnant women, homeless, economically disadvantaged individuals, and 
those who are unable to  comprehend or understand English, or follow instructions 
will be excluded. Persons with body mass index  greater than 30 kg/m2 will also be 
excluded.  
i. Screening Procedures  
Patients at age over 18 will be screened. Clinical outpatients will be recruited from our 
normal clinic  population. No telephone screening will be performed. In addition, flyers 
will be pos ted to recruit subjects  outside of our normal clinic population.  
October 27,  2016   Page 7 of 10 j. Participation in Multiple Protocols  
Our research team will ask this question, and this question will be on our informed 
consent form. Patients  will be given the choice as to whether they want to participate in 
this study if they are already enrolled in  another study.  
k. Payments to Participants  
The patient will be paid to participate in this research study. It is a cooperation fee of 
$700. The payments  will be prorated based on the length  of participation. Payments may 
only be made to U.S. citizens, legal  resident aliens, and those who have a work eligible 
visa. Patients may need to provide their social security  number to receive payment.  
 
Participants will have the option to receive the na sal device after the second sleep study. 
The participant  will be allowed to receive complimentary nasal stents until the time the 
device becomes commercially  available.  
l. Costs to Participants  
There is no cost for participating in this study, other than basic expenses like 
transportation and the personal  time it will take to come to all of the study visits. The 
study will pay for t hose services, supplies,  procedures, and care associated with the study 
that are not a part of routine medical care. The patient will be  responsible for any co -
payments and/or deductibles as required by [CONTACT_123864].  
m. Planned Duration  of the Study  
The consenting time will take about [ADDRESS_563318] sleep studies 
(without the NAS at baseline and  while wearing the NAS at day 8 ). 
9. RISKS 
a. Potential Risks  
i. Investigational devices  
If you insert the NAS into the nostril there can be a little nose bleeding because of the 
damage of the  mucous membrane while inserting the NAS device.  
 
There may be some soreness and swelling due to the  pressure of the device.  
ii. Investigational drugs 
Not Applicable  
iii. Commercially available drugs, biologics, reagents or chemicals  
October 27,  [ADDRESS_563319]'s physician as part of their clinical care 
only.  
iv. Procedures  
Insertion of the NAS tube to the appropriate side of the nostril.  
v. Radioisotopes/radiation -producing mac hines  
Not Applicable  
vi. Physical  well-being  
There can be a little nose bleeding because of the damage of the mucous membrane.  
 
There may be some soreness and swelling due to the pressure of the device.  
vii. Psych ological  well-being  
No appreciable risks  
viii. Economic well -being  
No appreciable risks  
ix. Social  well-being  
No appreciable risks  
x. Overall evaluation of risk  
Low - innocuous procedures such as phlebotomy, urine or stool collection, no the rapeutic 
agent, or safe  therapeutic agent such as the use of an FDA approved drug or device.  
b. International Research  Risk Procedures  
Not Applicable  
c. Procedures to Minimize Risk  
This is a low -risk study, given that the participants will have procedures described above 
that are part of  normal routine medical care.  
 
Protections Against Risks  
 
Treatment: We will have close monitoring of the particip ants while they are on treatment, 
including  regularly scheduled visits to our center to maintain safety and adherence.  
Testing Information: We will keep all of the information collected about the participants 
in locked files at  our center. For computerized  data, the data will be stored in password -
protected computers at our center.  
 
Further, staff will have completed human subjects training.  
October 27,  [ADDRESS_563320] safety is at risk. 
The protocol director and/or study coordinator will be reachable by  [CONTACT_442995] 24/7 by 
[CONTACT_1766].  
 
Regarding an adverse/unexpected event, the lab personnel typi[INVESTIGATOR_442990]'s healthcare provider. Upon 
becoming aware of an adverse event, the  principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_442991]:  
1. unexpected;  
2. related or possibly related to part icipation in the research; and  
3. serious or otherwise one that suggests that the research places subjects or others at a 
greater risk of  physical or psychological harm than was previously known or recognized.  
e. Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMC)  
i. Data and/or events subject to review  
Data Collected From the P articipant. Data from forms, questionnaires, and interviews 
will be entered  into a secure, password -protected web portal. All data will also be 
collected and transferred in  compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA ). 
ii. Person(s) responsible for Data and Safety Monit oring  
The protocol director  
iii. Frequency of DSMB meetings  
Not Applicable  
iv. Specific triggers or stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_442992] 24 hours of learning of a death, or within 5 days of learning of an 
unanticipated problem  involving risks to participants or others.  
v. DSMB Reporting  
Not Applicable  
vi. Will the Protocol Director be the only monitoring entity? (Y/N)  
Not Applicable  
vii. Will a board, committee, or safety monitor be responsible for study monitoring? 
(Y/N)  
October 27,  [ADDRESS_563321] benefit; however future  sleep medicine patients may 
benefit.  This information about NAS (nasal stent) appears to be a use ful alternative or additive 
treatment for patients with OSA. We hope  to gain through this study if this new device provides a 
better or  alternative treatment of OSA.  
11. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
All participant information  and specimens are  handle d in compliance with the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)  and privacy policies of Stanford University, Stanford 
Health Ca re, and Stanford Children’s Health.  