V.05.14.19  
 Title: Modulating Impulsivity in Suicidal Adolescents With Transcranial Direct Current Stimulation 
(tDCS)  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Latest approval date: 8/16/[ADDRESS_997937] current stimulation (tDCS), a form of 
neurostimulation in which electrodes attached to the scalp deliver constant, low current 
stimulation to the brain . Although widely studied with adults, tDCS has rarely been applied in 
experiments with adolescents. Moreover, the mechanisms by [CONTACT_730592]. One method to clarify the neural 
pathways underlying its effects is electroencephalography (EEG) and event -related potentials 
(ERPs).  
As a necessary first step in assessing state -sensi tive impulsivity as a causal risk factor for 
suicidality, this study will assess the short -term effect of tDCS on impulsivity. That is, the 
researchers will evaluate the potential for tDCS to the right inferior frontal gyrus (rIFG) and left 
orbitofrontal c ortex  (lOFC) to modulate behavioral and cognitive impulsivity, respectively, in 
adolescent suicide attempters. Adolescents in a psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_730585] a ttempt as 
measured on the C -SSRS (attempt initiated within a day of thinking of it). Participants will be 
randomized to receive either anodal tDCS to the rIFG, anodal tDCS to the lOFC.  Randomization  
will occur through a computer program (like flippi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a co in with participants having an equal 
chance of being in each group). This will occur after we determine if the participant is eligible 
for the study. There will be 20 participants in each group. Participants will not be told which 
group they are randomized  into. Baseline impulsivity measures will be re -given after tDCS or 
sham stimulation to assess changes in impulsivity. Additionally, EEG/ERP data will be collected 
during the impulsivity tasks, and resting -state EEG data will be collected pre - and post -tDCS. 
Participants Adolescents (N = 60) between the ages of [ADDRESS_997938] been admitted to an 
adolescent psychiatric hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (inpatient or partial). Adolescents will be eligible to participate if 
they: (i) have attempted suicide prior to admission; (ii)  had made an impulsive attempt as 
measured on the C -SSRS (attempt initiated within a n hour  of thinking of it); (iii) speak and read 
English fluently, (iv) have no significant cognitive disability based on a standard psychiatric 
exam, and (v) are not active ly psychotic.  
Exclusion criteria  are: (i) a significant general medical or neurological condition; (ii) history of 
seizure, head injury, brain surgery or tumor; (iii) intracranial metallic implants or implanted 
electrical devices; (iv) substance abuse or dependence in the past six months.  
V.05.14.[ADDRESS_997939] found in other studies 
recruiting from this site to allow for ad equate time for in -depth assessment batteries larger than 
that of the proposed study.  
Consenting and Screening Evaluation.  Parents and adolescent will be approached about 
participating in the study after review of their medical charts upon admission to the  Bradley , 
Butler, or Hasbro . Study staff will obtain consent. All research staff will be trained in the steps 
necessary to obtain consent. All participants and their parents will be fully informed about the 
purpose and procedures of the study both verbally  and through a written description contained in 
the assent/consent forms. All participants will be required to provide assent and their 
parents/guardians to sign an informed consent document in order to participate in the study.  
Once consented, participant s will be assessed for a suicide attempt prior to index psychiatric 
admission using the C -SSRS . Next participants will be screened for current psychosis and 
cognitive disability using the K -SADS -PL and the WASI, respectively, and complete the 
screening for m. Those meeting all eligibility criteria will complete the PROMIS and Connors -3, 
which will be included as covariates in analyses. Eligible participants will also be asked about 
their current medication use, and the information they provide will be confir med with a parent.  
After completing these assessments, participants will be randomly assigned to receive either 
anodal tDCS to rIFG, anodal tDCS to lOFC, or sham stimulation. tDCS at a constant current of 
1.[ADDRESS_997940] from a single -sessio n of tDCS. The side 
effects questionnaire will be administered following the tDCS session. Ordering of tasks will be 
counterbalanced.  These assessments will take about 3.5 hours total and they will be audio 
recorded for supervision and training purposes w ith participants’ permission. They will take 
place in an interview room in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], outside of any clinical care . Adolescent participants 
and parents will be paid $100 and $25, respectively, upon completion of the study.  
Assessment Measures.  
i. Self-report measures  
Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence (WASI; Wechsler, 1999 ): The WASI uses 
vocabulary, similarities, block design, and matrix reasoning subtests similar to those 
of the WAIS to provide an estimate of full scale IQ in approximate ly [ADDRESS_997941] greater symptom severity.  
 
The Conners -3 Self -Report (Conners -3 SR; Kollins, Epstein, & Conners, 2004) : 
Current ADHD sy mptoms will be assessed with the Connors -3, with higher scores 
reflecting greater severity. ADHD will be a covariate in all analyses, as impulsivity is 
a hallmark of this disorder.  
 
Suicidal ideation will be measured using the Passive and Active Suicidal I deation 
Scale (PASIS) . Higher scores reflect greater severity of ideation.  
 
Suicide Intent Scale (SIS):  The SIS is an interviewer rating scale that assesses the 
degree of suicidal intent of a suicide attempt. Higher scores reflect greater suicidal 
intent.  
 
 Screening questionnaire: The screening questionnaire was adapted from those used 
in other tDCS studies conducted by [CONTACT_15957] -I Carpenter. This questionnaire is meant to 
check for potential head trauma and metallic implants.  
 
Side effects questionnaire: The sid e effects questionnaire was adapted from those 
used in other tDCS studies conducted by [CONTACT_15957] -I Carpenter This questionnaire is meant 
to check for any adverse events from the  tDCS stimulation.  
Lastly, participants will be asked to report their current medication use, and the 
information they provide will be confirmed with a parent.  
 
ii. Semi -structured interview assessments  
 
Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School Aged Childre n - 
Present and Lifetime Versions (K -SADS -PL; Kaufman et al., 1997) : The K -SADS -PL 
is a semi -structured diagnostic interview which provides a reliable and valid 
assessment of DSM -IV psychopathology in children and adolescents. Probes and 
objective criteria  are provided to rate individual symptoms. Inter -rater agreement is 
high (range: 93% to 100%). Test -retest reliability and kappa coefficients are in the 
excellent range for present and lifetime diagnoses. Modules selected on the basis of 
relevance to suici de risk will be administered. These include depressive disorders, 
mania, psychosis, anxiety disorders, eating disorders, conduct disorder, alcohol and 
substance abuse, and post -traumatic stress disorder.  
 
Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C -SSRS; Pos ner et al., 2011) : The C -SSRS 
is an interviewer -rating scale, will be used to assess the occurrence of suicide 
attempts, and to differentiate suicide attempts from interrupted attempts and aborted 
attempts. To differentiate suicide attempts from nonsuicida l suicidal self -injury, the 
V.05.14.19 former will be defined as any “self -destructive behavior with at least implied intent to 
die.”   
 
iii. Computerized neurological tasks – DDT (TCIP), SST  
 
Two Choice Impulsivity Paradigm (TCIP; Dougherty et al., 2003) : The TCIP will be 
used as a delay discounting task (DDT) to assess impulsive choice, which requires 
participants to choose between immediate but small rewards and delayed but larger 
rewards over 50 trials. Delay discounting (or impulsive choice), is the te ndency to 
undervalue an anticipated future reward as the time delay to obtaining the reward 
increases. A higher discounting rate (i.e., preference for smaller immediate rewards 
over larger delayed rewards) is viewed as reflecting greater cognitive impulsiv ity.  
 
Stop-Signal Task (SST; Hamilton et al., 2015) : The SST will be used to assess 
behavioral impulsivity. The SST requires participants to respond to a target stimulus 
as quickly and accurately as possible by [CONTACT_7326] a button, but also to withhold thei r 
response when they hear an auditory signal. Thus, this task involves a competition 
between activating and inhibiting processes.  
 
iv. tDCS and EEG. tDCS will be applied and EEG recordings made using a 
starstim/enobio device, with stimulation and recording el ectrodes located inside the 
cap. This device provides the user with up to [ADDRESS_997942] 10 -10 coordinates corresponding t o the rIFG (anode 
over F8 and cathode over FP1), which has been associated with behavioral 
impulsivity, and the lOFC (anode over FP1 and cathode over FP2), which has been 
linked with cognitive impulsivity.  
 
 
Data analysis  
Aim Hypothesis  Dependent  Independ ent
 Analysis  MDE
  
[ADDRESS_997943] tDCS/rIFG, time, 
tDCS/rIFG
 time GLM (repeated -measures 
ANOVA)  d=0.[ADDRESS_997944] As above, plus reduced 
theta power (EEG), 
increased P3 (ERP)  As above with effects for 
EEG and ERP added; 
change in tDCS 
parameter estimate 
informs mediation  r=0.35  
EA EH1 DDT  tDCS/IOFC, time, 
tDCS/IOFC
 time GLM (repeated -measures 
ANOVA)  d=0.35  
EH2 DDT  As above, plus reduced 
VLFO (EEG), reduced 
SCPs (ERP)  As above with effects for 
EEG and ERP added; 
change in tDCS r=0.35  
V.05.14.19 parameter estimate 
informs mediation  
 All analyses will include PROMIS (depressive symptoms) and Connor ‐3 (ADHD symptoms) 
as covariates  
 MDE minimal detectable effect, expressed as standardized mean difference (Cohen’s d) for 
aim 1 and minimal detectable correlation for aim 2 (n=60), assuming type ‐I error level 5% and 
type‐II error level 20%. Repeated -measures ANO VA assumes correlation of 0.[ADDRESS_997945], and, if appropriate, present and explain the consent forms. All patients and parents will be 
fully informed of the purposes and procedures of the study. PI [INVESTIGATOR_730586]. All participants and parents will be fully informed about  
the purpose and procedures of the study both verbally and through a written description 
contained in the assent/consent forms. PI [INVESTIGATOR_730587]/assent after any questions have b een addressed. All 
participants will be required to provide assent and their parents or guardians to sign an informed 
consent document in order to participate in the study. Patients will be provided with a copy of the 
consent document, and the original wil l be placed in the PHI filing cabinet.  
Potential Risk  
This study does not pose greater than minimal risk. Risks associated with participating in this 
study include some emotional discomfort that may be elicited by [CONTACT_730593] d to harm him - or herself. The 
child may refuse to answer any questions that lead to too much discomfort. If he or she expresses 
suicidal thoughts, we will notify the child’s doctors so that they can take appropriate precautions. 
During the interviews and assessments, and when the child is completing the computer tasks he 
or she may become bored or tired. We will offer breaks frequently, and the child will be told that 
he or she can quit at any time if he or she gets tired.  
Additionally, there is minimal r isk in participating in EEG testing or tDCS, as both of these 
procedures have been demonstrated to be safe for adolescents. tDCS has also been shown to be 
safe in adults. It has been studied less among children, but studies that have been done so far 
demon strate it to be safe for this age group  (Andrade et al., 2014; Kessler et al., 2013; Krishnan 
V.05.14.19 et al., 2015; Moliadze et al., 2015). In particular, stimulations at 1.5mA (which will be used in 
the current study) have been found to be safe and well tolerated  in pediatric samples (Kessler et 
al., 2013).  In a recent safety study of tDCS conducted by [CONTACT_730594] (2007) the most 
common effects were mild tingling sensations (75%), light itching sensation (30%), moderate 
fatigue (35%), and transient mild  headache (11.8%); and most of these effects did not differ from 
those of placebo stimulation.  For the current study, the participant will be asked to report any 
discomfort immediately.  If the participant reports discomfort, the stimulation can be turned  off 
immediately. Participants’ parents will be encouraged to bring acetaminophen or ibuprofen in the 
case of a headache . These medications have promptly resolved discomfort in all prior cases of 
headaches or neck ache induced by [CONTACT_32101]. EEG is a safe and painless technique that is routinely 
used in clinical medicine. Lastly, all equipment has been tested by [CONTACT_730595] , who have certified their safety . 
Protection against Risk  
All study procedures will be explained to the participants with an emphasis on the 
voluntary nature of the study. Furthermore, staff members will be trained to respect participa nts’ 
wishes regarding their participation in the study or certain aspects of the study’s procedure (see 
Appendix).  
 Potential risk from breach of confidentiality will be minimized by [CONTACT_730596] n IRB, Rhode Island state law, the Federal Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 and its regulations (“HIPAA”), and the 
DHHS Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects (45 CFR Part 46 Subpart D). This 
will include identifying  participant research data by [CONTACT_730597]. Research 
data, as mentioned, will be accessible only to research staff and, and all electronic data wi ll be 
password protected. Participant confidentiality will be breeched only to protect the safety and 
welfare of research participants and only in accordance with state and federal law. All records 
will be kept in a locked file and will be available only t o research personnel who are 
knowledgeable of human subjects protection guidelines. A password will be necessary to access 
the computer data file. No names, only identification codes, will be used in presenting data in 
lectures, seminars, and papers. No na mes will be released without written consent of the parents 
or young adults who provided consent. Patients will be given full access to their data and 
professional interpretation if requested after completion of the study.  
 Participant confidentiality will  be breached only to protect the safety and welfare of 
research participants and only in accordance with state and federal law. It is possible that 
situations will arise in which children or parents provide the study staff with information that 
they are le gally and ethically obligated to disclose (e.g., suicidal or homicidal intent, IV drug use, 
sexual abuse). All participants are informed in advance through the process of informed consent 
of the legal and ethical obligations of study staff should these iss ues arise. Whenever possible, 
study staff will handle these situations therapeutically. For example, if time limits and safety 
concerns allow, parents will be informed in advance and provided the opportunity to participate 
in the mandated report process. R esearch staff will contact [CONTACT_976] [INVESTIGATOR_730588] 
V.05.14.[ADDRESS_997946] been approved by [CONTACT_55295] .  
 Research data (written records and tapes of interviews) will be  kept in a locked file and 
electronic data will be password protected. All of these study related materials will only be 
accessible to research staff. To minimize the risk of distress stemming from assessment 
procedures, the interviewers will be trained on  how to monitor participant response to answering 
questions about sensitive/stressful topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]. Interviews will be scheduled at times most convenient 
for the families, and they will be compensated for time, travel, and any inconvenience entailed 
by [CONTACT_188064] g the interview.  
 All patients will be monitored with regard to suicidality and a safety plan will be 
implemented as needed. The safety plan will include: 1) the adolescent telling a designated adult 
if suicidal; 2) developi[INVESTIGATOR_007] a copi[INVESTIGATOR_112272]; and 3) parents ’ commitment to providing a safe 
environment. The participant’s psychiatrist or treatment provider will also be contact[CONTACT_730598].  
 A safety plan will also be implemented as needed with regard to tDCS. Participants will 
be monit ored closely during the study period and any side effects will be documented.  All 
adverse events will be recorded and scored for severity and for relationship to the study as 
described, and all serious and unexpected adverse events will be reported to the  IRB within [ADDRESS_997947] information is listed below:  
 
Felipe Fregni, MD, PhD, MPH  
Director, Laboratory of Neuromo dulation, Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_730589], Harvard Medical School  
Associate Professor of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical School  
[PHONE_15189]  
[EMAIL_13922]  
  
Jorge Leon Morales -Queza da, MD  
Research Associate, Laboratory of Neuromodulation, Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_730590], Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Harvard Medical School  
[PHONE_15190]  
jmor [EMAIL_13923]  
 
Noah Philip, MD  
Associate [CONTACT_730600] of Brown University  
401-273-7100x2369  
[EMAIL_7284]  
 
Daniel Press, MD  
V.05.14.19 Associate [CONTACT_730601]  
[PHONE_15191]  
[EMAIL_6898]  
 
Sarah Garnaat, PhD  
Assistant [CONTACT_730600] of Brown University  
 
Brian Kavanaugh, PsyD  
Assistant [CONTACT_730600] of Brown University  
  
 Altho ugh the physiological effects of tDCS at the intended dose wears off within an hour, 
we will follow -up with the parents, at the end of the study after the minor has received this 
stimulation to ensure the safety of the minor and ask that they monitor the m inor. 
Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research  
 There are no direct benefits from participating in the study. However, the information 
obtained from this study will further our understanding of impulsivity in suicidal adolescents and 
elucidate potential methods for modulating impulsivity among these ado lescents. The potential 
benefits also include a more thorough understanding of impulsivity in suicidal adolescents will 
help inform future research and treatment of this population.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V.05.14.19 Dougherty, D.M., Bjork, J.M., Harper, R.A., Marsh, D.M., Moeller, F.G., Mathias, C.W., 
Swann, A.C. (2003). Behavioral impulsivity paradigms: A comparison in hospi[INVESTIGATOR_730591]. J Child Psychol Psychiatry , 44(8), 114 5–1157.  
Andrade AC, Magnavita GM, Allegro JVBN, Neto CEBP, Lucena R de CS, Fregni F. Feasibility 
of transcranial Direct Current Stimulation use in children aged 5 to 12 years. J Child Neurol . 
2014;29(10):1360 –1365.  
Hamilton, K.R., Littlefield, A.K., Anasta sio, N.C., Cunningham, K.A., Fink, L.H.L., Wing, V.C., 
Mathias, C.W., Lane, S.D., Schütz, C.G., Swann, A.C., Lejuez, C.W., Clark, L., Moeller, F.G., 
Potenza, M.N. (2015). Rapid -response impulsivity: Definitions, measurement issues, and clinical 
implication s. Personal Disord Theory, Res Treat , 6(2), 168 –181. 
Kaufman, J., Birmaher, B., Brent, D., Rao, U., Flynn, C., Moreci, P., Williamson, D., Ryan, N. 
(1997). Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School -Age Children -Present 
and Lifetime vers ion (K -SADS -PL): Initial reliability and validity data. J Am Acad Child 
Adolesc Psychiatry , 36(7), 980 –988. 
Kessler SK, Minhas P, Woods AJ, Rosen A, Gorman C, Bikson M. Dosage considerations for 
transcranial Direct Current Stimulation in children: A computational modeling study. PLoS One . 
2013;8(9):e76112.  
Kollins, S.H., Epstein, J.N., Conners, C.K. (2004). Conn ers’ Rating Scales --Revised. In: Maruish 
ME, Maruish ME (Ed), eds. Mahwah, NJ, US: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers, 215 –
233. 
Kovacs, M. (2010) Children’s Depression Inventory - Second Edition (CDI -2) Manual . North 
Tonawanda, NY: Multi -Health Systems  Publishing.  
Krishnan C, Santos L, Peterson MD, Ehinger M. Safety of noninvasive brain stimulation in 
children and adolescents. Brain Stimul . 2015;8(1):76 –87. 
Moliadze V, Andreas S, Lyzhko E, Schmanke T, Gurashvili T, Freitag CM, Siniatchkin M. Ten 
minute s of 1mA transcranial direct current stimulation was well tolerated by [CONTACT_730599]: Self -reports and resting state EEG analysis. Brain Res Bull . 2015;119(Pt A):25 –33. 
Posner, K., Oquendo, M.A., Gould, M., Stanley, B., Davies, M. (2007). Columb ia Classification 
Algorithm of Suicide Assessment (C -CASA): Classification of suicidal events in the FDA’s 
pediatric suicidal risk analysis of antidepressants. Am J Psychiatry , 164 (7):1035 –1043.  
Wechsler, D. (1999). Wechsler Abbreviated Scale of Intelligence. San Antonio, TX: The 
Psychological Corporation.  
 