 
 
 
Protocol version: 7 .0  Dated: 22DEC2020  Page 1 of 32 
 Protocol  
Optimizing a Mobile Mindfulness Intervention for ICU Survivors (LIFT2)  
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
Version: December 22, 2020   
 
 
 
Protocol version: 7 .0  Dated: 22DEC2020  Page 2 of 32 
  
Study Title:  Optimizing a self -directed mobile mindfulness 
intervention for improving cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_512406]' 
psychological distress  
 
Short Title : LIFT2  
 
Study Design : A multi -phase optimization strategy (MOST) 
Framework  
 
Study Site(s):  
Duke University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]  
[ADDRESS_663017]  
Denver, CO [ZIP_CODE]  University of Washington-
Seattle/Harborview Medical 
Center  
[ADDRESS_663018]  
Seattle, WA [ZIP_CODE]  
 
Principal Investigator  
[INVESTIGATOR_104267] E. Cox, MD, MPH  
Duke University  
Division of Pulmonary Allergy & Critical Care  
Box 102043  
Durham, NC [ZIP_CODE]  
Phone: 919- 681-7232  
Email: [EMAIL_2035]  
 
Co-Investigator(s)  
Catherine (Terri) Hough, MD  
Oregon Health Science University  
 
Marc Moss, MD  
University of Colorado -Denver   Ruth Engelberg, MD  
University of Washington- Seattle/Harborview Medical 
Center
  
Collaborator(s)  
Tina Gremore, PhD  
Duke University  
 
Laura Porter, PhD  
Duke University  Jeffrey Greeson, PhD  
Rowan University  
  
 Maren Olsen, Ph.D.  
Duke University  
 
John Gallis  
Duke University
 
IRB #: Pro00100252  
 Clinicaltrials.gov identifier: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 3 of 32 
  
Table of Contents  
 
Table of Contents  2 
Abbreviations and Definitions  5 
Clinical Protocol Synopsis  7 
1. Title 7 
2. Background  7 
3. Study Design  8 
4. Study Objectives, Hypotheses, and Outcomes  9 
5. Study Population  10 
Eligibility Criteria:  10 
Inclusion Criteria (at the time of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_063])  10 
Exclusion Criteria (at the time of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_063])  11 
Inclusion Criteria (at the time of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345]; at home)  10 
Exclusion Criteria (at the time of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345]; at home)  [ADDRESS_663019] risks:  [ADDRESS_663020] risk  18 
Suicidality Response Plan 19 
Patient Death While in Study  21 
Patient Withdraw While in Study  21 
Vulnerable Populations  21 
Adverse events (AEs), serious adverse events, (SAEs) and unanticipated problems (UPs).  21 
Period and Frequency for Event Assessment and Follow -Up 21 
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 4 of 32 
 Characteristics of an Adverse or Serious Adverse Event  22 
Relationship to Study Intervention  22 
Expectedness  22 
Severity  22 
Reporting Procedures  22 
Protocol Deviations and Other Unanticipated Problem Reporting 23 
Privacy 23 
12. Data management  24 
13. Data & Safety Monitoring Plan [ADDRESS_663021] (DSMB).  25 
Quality Assurance and Confidentiality  26 
Confidentiality  26 
14. Privacy, Data Storage & Confidentiality  – see Research Data Security Plan.  [ADDRESS_663022]  26 
Appendix 1: Schedule of Events  30 
Appendix 2: Study Workflow  310 
Appendix 3: Randomization Arms  31 
 
             
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 5 of 32 
 Abbreviations and Definitions 
• Activities of Daily Living (ADLs)  
o An assessment designed to assess one’s ability to complete basic self -care skills.  
• Adverse Event (AE)  
o Any untoward medical occurrence associated with or observed in the context of a study procedure. For this study and patient population, an AE will be considered any suicidal 
ideation. No other events will be considered AEs as this patient population is ill  and it is 
expected that other untoward medical occurrences will occur.  
• Clinical Trial Management System (CTMS)  
o For this study, a CTMS known as OnCore will be utilized to manage the study’s 
administrative responsibilities and subject level documentation.  
• Duke Regional Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (DRH)  
o Study site in which eligible patients will be enrolled.  
• Duke University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] (DUH)  
o Study site in which eligible patients will be enrolled. 
• Oregon Health & Science University (OHSU)  
o Study site in which eligible patients will be enrolled.  
• University of Colorado -Denver (COL)  
o Study site in which eligible patients will be enrolled.  
• University of Washington -Seattle (UW)  
o Study site in which eligible patients will be enrolled.  
• Electronic Data Capture (EDC)  
o For this study, the EDC will be supported and secured by [CONTACT_512431], such as screening, enrollment, and clinical variables  both 
from research participants’ medical records and app will be documented.  
• Electronic Health Record (EHR)  
o Used interchangeably with EMR; the EHR is the patient -specific medical record located 
in the secure MaestroCare (aka: EPIC) or other electronic medical record platform.  
• Electronic Medical Record (EMR)  
o Used interchangeably with EHR; the EMR is the patient -specific medical record located 
in the secure MaestroCare (aka: EPIC) or other electronic medical record platform. 
• Electronic Patient Reported Outcomes (ePRO)  
o ePRO can be used to describe study source, such as the patient -completed 
questionnaires (e.g., PHQ -9, GAD -7, PTSS, PHQ -10), or can refer to the system that 
houses patient -derived data. For this study, ePRO may refer to the patient -
questionnaires for psychological distress OR it may refer to the system, which  houses 
the patient -derived data, which is the m MT app known as “ LIFT.”   
• General Anxiety Disorder (GAD -7) 
o An assessment designed to assess anxiety and depression symptoms  
• Institutional Review Board (IRB)  
o Ethical and regulatory committee who provides approval and oversight of clinical trial at 
study site.  
• Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL)  
o An assessment designed to assess one’s ability to complete complex self -care skills.  
• Intensive Care Unit (ICU)  
o Defined as any medical, surgical, trauma, neurological, cardiac, or cardio- thoracic unit in 
which a patient is receiving cardiac or respi[INVESTIGATOR_104269].  
• Mindful Attention Awareness Scale (MAAS)  
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 6 of 32 
 o 15-item scale designed to assess a core characteristic of mindfulness.  
• Mobile Mindfulness Training app (mM T, also known as ‘ LIFT’) 
o A native mobile  app that uses  a self -contained program and is subject to the device 
operating system. The mMT created for this study known as “ LIFT”, was developed,  and 
is maintained by [CONTACT_104329] ([ADDRESS_663023], Durham, NC [ZIP_CODE]).  
• Patient Health Questionnaire- 9 and Patient Health Questionnaire- 10 (PHQ -9 and PHQ -10) 
o Physical and emotional symptoms  assessment, including suicidal ideations with intent to 
act.  
• Post-Traumatic Stress Scale survey (PTSS)  
o Scale designed to assess P ost Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)  symptoms  
• Protocol Deviation (PD)  
o An inadvertent event or event this is out of the control of the study team and/or the 
subject that occurs outside of the study protocol design and/or procedures.  
• Protocol Violation  
o An act of intentionality that is committed by [CONTACT_76846]/or the subject that occurs outside of the study protocol design and/or procedures.  
• Serious Adverse Event (SAE)  
o Defined as an adverse event that is both serious and expected in nature; the event may 
have a reasonable possibility that it is related to a study. SAEs for this study are defined 
as a suicide attempt, a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or death.  
• Suicide Ideation (SI)  
o The idea of committing self -harm and/or the intent to act on the idea of committing self -
harm.  
• Unanticipated Problem (UP)  
o Any other event, not meeting the definition of PD, UP, AE or SAE that, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_14371], merits documentation as it occurred outside the expected 
design of the study and/or study procedures. These events, like PDs, UPs, AEs, or SAEs, may be reported to the IRB and/or the study sponsor, as applicable.  
 
                
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 7 of 32 
  
Clinical Protocol Synopsis   
 
1. Title  
Optimizing a self -directed mobile mindfulness intervention for improving cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_512406]' 
psychological distress (a.k.a., ‘LIFT2’)  
 
2. Background & Rationale 
As survival has improved for the 2 million people with cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_512407] (ICUs), it has become apparent that these patients suffer from severe and persistent 
post-discharge symptoms of psychological distress including depression, anxiety, and post -traumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD).  However, few targeted interventions exist that are relevant to patients' experiences and 
that accommodate their many physical,  and social barriers to personalized care. To f ill this gap, we 
developed an innovative app- based mobile mindfulness training program that promotes automated care 
delivery and self -management of symptom -related distress.  
 Previously, a  pi[INVESTIGATOR_83021] (RCT)  called LIFT (R34 AT00819) in which this project  is built 
on, compared mobile mindfulness to both a standard telephone mindfulness program and an ICU 
education control among survivors of cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_1399]. LIFT demonstrated that mobile mindfulness was feasibly delivered, acceptable, usable, and had a greater clinical impact on psychological distress than 
either comparator. This trial also highlighted opportunities to improve the intervention's impact related to its 
targeted population, content delivery, and system technology.  
 Therefore, we propose a 5- year, multi -site project titled “LIFT2” that is conceptualized as the Optimization 
Phase of a multiphase optimization strategy (MOST) framework. The project will be conducted at Duke 
University, Oregon Health & Sciences University (OHSU), and University of Colorado (COL). Mobile 
mindfulness will be optimized via four specific aims  (Figure 1):  
 
• Aim 1:  Optimize the usability of the mMT intervention's key technological features.  
• Aim 2:  Using a factorial experimental trial, identify mMT intervention components that contribute most meaningfully to feasibility, usability, and impact on psychological distress.  
• Aim 3:  Explore barriers and facilitators to mMT implementation and dissemination.  
• Aim 4:  Using lessons learned from Aims 2 & 3, operationalize the final optimized mMT system.  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: [ADDRESS_663024] that is conceptualized as the Optimization Phase of a multiphase 
optimization strategy (MOST) framework. As mentioned in section 2, this project consists of four distinct 
aims :  
 Aim 1:  Optimize the usability of the mMT intervention's key technological features  
Informed by [CONTACT_512432] R34, we will  add and refine the mMT app user interface features to 
improve interaction and engagement of participants, and thus dose, adherence, and retention. Participants  
eligible for Aim [ADDRESS_663025] of patients, 
caregivers of patients, and other volunteers. Each participant will be asked to sign and date informed consent and then complete one 30- 60 minute visit in which they will complete usability testing. Usability 
testing involves the following: 1) registration of user in app, 2) completion of baseline survey, and 3) randomization via completion of T1 survey. Additionally, participants will be asked to test certain scenarios, such as chat room functionality, suicide ideation, and moving from task to task on a given study day. Tasks 
completed by [CONTACT_512433]: 1) enable a 
"recommender system" which will permit sophisticated logic -driven personalized app- user interaction, 
which includes guidance to specific app content based on response to the weekly ePRO survey; 2) update the mMT user interface to ensure that the app is in compliance with the Americans with Disability Act (ADA) standards; and 3) automate post -discharge distress screening. During the study visit, participants 
and delegated study team members will be asked to provide their feedback, input and note any errors (e.g., typographical or technical) that occur during the usability visit. At the completion of the study visit, 
participants will be asked to complete a standardized usability survey to assess their overall opi[INVESTIGATOR_512408]. All feedback, input, and errors, as well as 
survey results, will be provided to the study PI, study manager, and Pattern Health for review. The study PI, 
study manager and Pattern Health will implement necessary changes and updates to ensure excellent 
usability (mean Systems Usability Scale > 85)  and ensure 100% success rate of post -randomization 
distress and randomization. The completion of Aim 1 will ready the mMT for Aim 2.  
 Aim 2:  Using a factorial experimental trial, identify mMT intervention components that contribute 
most meaningfully to feasibility, usability, and impact on psychological distress . 
Aim 2, which is the focal point of this project is to determine which mMT factors optimize MOST constraints 
(i.e., outcomes). The primary objective of Aim 2's is to determine which mMT factors optimize MOST 
constraints (i.e., outcomes).  The main effects of each factor will be tested as well as the conditional effects 
of factor combinations on a priori- defined operational targets  (feasibility, acceptability, usability) as well as 
improvements in psychological distress symptoms (depression, anxiety, PTSD) at  [ADDRESS_663026] a 3- factorial experimental trial with a 3 month follow -up in which 240  patients, 
meeting eligibility criteria as outlined in section 5, will be consented, enrolled and randomized to 1 of 8 
combination of mMT factors :  
• Group 1: Team Introduction, High Dose and Team Help 
• Group 2: App Introduction, High Dose and Team Help  
• Group 3: Team Introduction, High Dose and App Help  
• Group 4: App Introduction, High Dose and App Help 
• Group 5: Team Introduction, Regular Dose and Team Help  
• Group 6: App Introduction, Regular Dose and Team Help  
• Group 7: Team Introduction, Regular Dose and App Help 
• Group 8: App Introduction, Regular Dose and App Help 
 
Each randomized group will allocate a combination of 3 factors to each participant :  
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 9 of 32 
 1. Dose (standard [4 weeks] versus  high [the standard [ADDRESS_663027] -proctored 
in-app support function]),  
2. Stepped approach to intervening for worsening or persistent symptoms (therapi[INVESTIGATOR_512409]. app), and  
3. Method of initiating mMT (therapi[INVESTIGATOR_512410]).  
 Prior to randomization, each patient will be asked to review, sign, and date the informed consent; register 
the Pattern Health LIFT app using their own personal device (i.e., cell phone, laptop), and complete a 
baseline survey. The participant will then be  asked to complete a randomization survey (T1) that will 
ultimately assess psychological distress for enrollment into the trial. If the patient is eligible for randomization, he/she will be assigned to 1 of 8 intervention combinations  and asked to complete the 
following over a period of 3 months:  
• 4 weeks of daily mMT  
• Four (4) weekly check -ins to assess distress and anxiety  
• 1 month (T2) survey  
• 3 month (T3) follow -up survey  
 
The weekly check -ins and surveys completed at baseline, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2345] (T1), 1 (T2) and 3 (T3) 
months will be used to assess changes in distress and anxiety levels. Each survey includes a combination 
of the following assessments: PHQ -9, PHQ -10, GAD- 7, PTSS, MAAS, as well as medical services, 
sociodemographic, financial and social support, quality of life questions, and ADL/IADL assessments.  
 
Adherence to the mMT plan will be assessed throughout the patient’s participant. Depending on 
randomization group , patients may receive therapi[INVESTIGATOR_512411]- ups from the study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_512412], education 
and support. The mMT app provides a built -in safety mechanism that detects increased levels of distress 
and may alert the study team (i.e., site PI, study manager, and study therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]) of the increased distress 
levels. In doing so, a delegated member of the study team will follow- up with the patient and assess their 
safety and overall well -being, as outlined in section 12.  
 Aim 3:  Explore barriers and facilitators to mMT implementation and dissemination.  
Using qualitative analysis of semi- structured interviews in  up to 40 participants enrolled from Aim 2's trial, 
we will explore perceived barriers to accessing, using,  and applying mMT effectively. Purposive sampling 
informed by [CONTACT_512434]-responders, as well as infrequent and frequent app users.  Patients who participate in this Aim will be 
asked a series of questions to determine app access, use and content during a single stud y visit lasting 30 -
60 minutes.  
 
Aim 4:  Using lessons learned from Aims 2 & 3, operationalize the final optimized mMT system . 
Consistent with NIH guidelines on mixed methods research
1 we will integrate quantitative (Aim 2) and 
qualitative (Aim 3) data from Years [ADDRESS_663028].  After updating app software to current standards, we will ensure 
mMT reaches 'excellent' usability (mean SUS score ≥85) among a diverse purposive sample of up to 25 
individuals —and is ready for off -the-shelf use in a next -step RCT.  
 
4. Study Objectives, Hypotheses, and Outcomes 
The overall objective is to optimize the mobile mindfulness training intervention (i.e., mMT) by [CONTACT_512435], usability, and clinical impact on symptoms of 
psychological distress assessed over a 3- month follow up period.  
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 10 of 32 
  
We hypothesize that the optimal mMT use case will include the following factor components: high dose, 
app-based approach to responders, and app- initiated study introduction.  
 Feasibility will be evaluated by [CONTACT_512436] (70%), 
completion of weekly surveys (75%), and 3 -month retention (75%).  We will use server analytics to quantify 
participants’ app adherence (e.g., frequency of daily use, average session duration).  More specifically, 
adherence will be monitored closely using the app -integrated data system and automated web analytics.  
In particular, mobile web app analytics will allow real -time monitoring of each participant's frequency of app 
use, average duration of app use per session, completion of weekly components, and other behaviors.  
Weekly reports generated by [CONTACT_512437] (e.g., reminder emails and calls) if needed to either get the participant back on schedule or to 
address a logistical need.  Acceptability will be measured with the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ; 
target mean ≥10) and by [CONTACT_512438] 3’s semi -structured interviews.  Usability will be assessed with the 
Systems Usability Scale (SUS; target mean ≥85).  Secondary outcomes will be assessed to ascertain information on the multidimensional effects of the 
intervention.   
• Anxiety symptoms: Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7- item scale (GAD -7). 
• Post-traumatic dist ress disorder (PTSD) symptoms: Post -Traumatic Stress Syndrome Inventory 
(PTSS).  
• Quality of life: The EuroQOL -5D (EQ -5D) and its 100- unit visual analog scale (VAS).  
• Physical symptoms: Patient Health Questionnaire 10- item symptoms scale (PHQ -10). 
 
5. Study Population  
LIFT2 is centered around Aim [ADDRESS_663029] experienced an ICU admission and meet eligibility criteria as outlined below. For Aim 1, we intend to enroll 2- 5 patients who meet eligibility criteria for the clinical trial, 2 -
5 caregivers of patients admitted at the enrolling ICU, and up to 5 -10 other individuals, if necessary, to 
ensure an adequate sampling of usability. These “other individuals” could include members of our patient 
and caregiver stakeholder cohort whom we have called on in past projects to give feedback on apps and 
websites. For Aim 3, patients previously enrolled in Aim 2 will be purposively sampled and will include both responders and non- responders, as well as frequent versus non- frequent app users. For Aim 4, the 
targeted population will be new patients, not previously enrolled in Aim 2 or 3, that meet the  criteria outlined 
below or healthy volunteers.   
 
Eligibility Criteria: Patients who are deemed eligible for study   participation will ultimately be those 
individuals who experience high levels of psychological distress (i.e., PHQ -9 > 5).  
 
Specifically, patients enrolled into this pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268], RCT will meet the following criteria:  
 
Inclusion Criteria (at the time of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_063]) 
1. Adult patient > 18 years of age.  
2. Acute cardiorespi[INVESTIGATOR_1399], defined as > 1 of the following *:  
a. Mechanical ventilation via endotracheal tube for > 12 hours  
b. Non-invasive ventilation (CPAP, BiPAP) for > 4 hours in a 24- hour period provided for acute 
respi[INVESTIGATOR_512413] (not for obstructive sleep apnea or other stable use) 
c. High flow nasal cannula or face mask for >  4 hours in a 24 -hour period  
And/or  
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 11 of 32 
  A cute cardiac/circulatory failure, defined as > 1 of the following:  
d. Use of vasopressors for shock of any etiology for > 1 hour  
e. Use of inotropes for shock of any etiology for > 1 hour  
f. Use of aortic balloon pump for cardiogenic shock for > 1 hour  
 
*In an ICU setting, NOT including the operating room or emergency department  
 
3. Managed in an adult medical, cardiac, trauma, surgical, or neurological ICU  for ≥24 hours during 
the time inclusion criterion #[ADDRESS_663030], defined as:  
a. No history of significant cognitive impairment (e.g., dementia)  per electronic medical records  
b. A bsence of current, significant cognitive impairment ( > 3 errors on the Callahan cognitive 
status screen)  
c. D ecisional capacity present  
5. Absence of severe and/or persistent serious mental illness that could disrupt study participation, as noted in the electronic medical record (EMR) or affirmed by [CONTACT_104338].  
Defined as any of the following:  
a. Treatment for severe or unstable mental illness (e.g., psychosis, bipolar affective disorder, 
schizoaffective disorder, schizoid personality disorder, schizophrenia [as per medical 
record], hospi[INVESTIGATOR_104297]) within the 6 months preceding the current hospi[INVESTIGATOR_063] 
b. No endorsement of active suicidality at time of admission or informed consent  
c. No active substance abuse at a severity that impairs ability to participate  
6.  English fluency  
 
Exclusion Criteria (at the time of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_063]) 
1. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_512414] 3 months with life- threatening illness or injury.  
a. Patients may be enrolled into the study if they had a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_272827] 3 
months that is determined to be non -serious. Non -serious admissions are defined as those 
admissions that are non- life threatening and/or potentially impacting pati ent’s well- being 
long- term or likely to precipi[INVESTIGATOR_512415]. Examples of non- serious, non -
life threatening hospi[INVESTIGATOR_512416], but may not be limited to, admission for a 
bronchoscopy, admission for deep vein thrombosis, or admission to ED resulting in overnight stay for cardiac work -up.  
2. Admitted from a location other than home (e.g., nursing home, long- term acute care facility, 
inpatient rehabilitation facility).  
3. Anticipated or actual discharge to a location other than an independent in home setting (e.g., 
nursing home, long- term acute care facility, inpatient rehabilitation facility, home hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6125]).  
4. Complex medical care expected soon after discharge (e.g., planned surgeries, transplantation evaluation, extensive travel needs for hemodialysis, disruptive chemotherapy/radiation regimen)  
5. Unable to complete study procedures as determined by [CONTACT_3655].  
6. Lack of  reliable smartphone with cellular data plan or Wi-Fi. 
 
Exclusion Criteria (at the time of arrival home) 
1. Low baseline psychological distress symptoms, defined as the absence of the following at T1:  
a. PHQ -9 score < 5  
2. Failure to randomize within 2 months (60 days) post -discharge.   
  
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 12 of 32 
 7. Study Procedures    
Screening, Recruitment and Consent  
For aim 1, eligible patients will be recruited from a pool of diverse individuals willing to participate in the 
study. Prior to approaching individuals for aim 1 consent, the study team will obtain the applicable 
research introduction from the clinical team and ensure approach is acceptable by [CONTACT_512439]. If the individual is willing to speak with the study team, the study team will approach the 
individual, provide an overview of the study and review the informed consent with the individual. Should 
the individual opt to participate in Aim 1, they will sign and date the informed consent, and then 
complete a singular 30- 60 minute study visit in which they will complete usability testing. Usability 
testing involves the following: 1) registration of  user in app, 2) completion of baseline survey, and 3) 
randomization via completion of T1 survey. Additionally, participants will be asked to test certain scenarios, such as chat room functionality, suicide ideation, and moving from task to task on a given 
study day. Tasks completed by [CONTACT_512440]: 1) enable a "recommender system" which will permit sophisticated logic -driven 
personalized app- user interaction, which includes guidance to  specific app content based on response 
to the weekly ePRO survey; 2) update the mMT user interface to ensure that the app is in compliance with the Americans with Disability Act (ADA) standards; and 3) automate post -discharge distress 
screening. During the study visit, participants and delegated study team members will be asked to provide their feedback, input and note any errors (e.g., typographical or technical) that occur during the 
usability visit. At the completion of the study visit, participants will be asked to complete a standardized usability survey to assess their overall opi[INVESTIGATOR_512417]. All feedback, input, and errors, as well as survey results, will be provided to the study PI, 
study manager, and Pattern Health for review. The study PI, study manager and Pattern Health will 
implement necessary changes and updates to ensure excellent usability (mean Systems Usability Scale > 85).  
 For aim 2, screening for eligible patients will occur daily via MaestroCare by [CONTACT_104349].  The study team will maintain a robust screening log of all individuals  reviewed and will 
document whether or not each individual  was eligible for the study. Additionally, they will document  if 
each individual  was approached for consent  and the outcome of consent. It will be essential, for the 
future projects that it is understood why individuals are or are not eligible for approach and/or subsequent consent, therefore the screening log will track reason for ineligibility and reason for non-
consent.  
 For those individuals  who are eligible to consent, the study team will recruit the individual in- person or 
remotely . Patients for aim [ADDRESS_663031]. If a patient chooses to not participate, he/she will be documented as a ‘declined’ patient and the date of decline, as 
well as reason  for decline  (if available) will be documented. Should a patient  be approached while in the 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_512418], they will be asked to complete the app registration and baseline survey, 
and then a study team member will contact [CONTACT_476], once home, to remind them to login to the app to 
complete T1 for randomization. Should a patient be approached post -hospit al discharge, he/she will be 
asked to complete app registration, baseline survey and T1 on the same day for study enrollment and 
randomization purposes. As with screening, the study team will be required to maintain a robust 
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 13 of 32 
 enrollment log that documents the patient’s consent status, version of informed consent with reference 
date of IRB approval , and then ultimate study status with associated visit milestones.  
 It is important to note that for this study, there are several statuses an individual  can have. They are 
listed below:  
• Screened (in screening or screened): defined as any individual  who’s  EMR  or other general 
data that has been reviewed against protocol for eligibility purposes. Individuals  who are 
assigned this status must be noted on the screening log.  
• Consented: defined as any individual  who is approached for consent and voluntarily chooses to 
consent to the study, the procedures, risks and benefits with the understanding that they may withdraw at any time. A signed/dated informed consent must be on record to account for this 
individual. Patients , enrolled in the aim 2,  who reach this status will be required to complete T1 
at the time of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_104299] [ADDRESS_663032] be noted on the enrollment log.  
• Declined: defined as any individual who was approached for consent, but opted to NOT 
consent and therefore  to NOT  participate in the study. Individuals  who are assigned this status 
must be noted on the screening log.  
• Randomized: defined as any patient who was consented to the study, is discharged from 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_21104], completes T1 survey, and continues to meet all eligibility criteria (see Eligibility 
Criteria, section 5). Patients who reach this status will be required to interact with the app on a 
daily basis for [ADDRESS_663033] be maintained on the enrollment log.  
• Screen Failed: defined as any patient who  
o consents to the study and completes the initial study visit, but prior to discharge is 
determined by [CONTACT_512441] a long- term acute 
care facility (LTAC), skilled nursing facility (SNF), acute rehab facility (ARF), or other in-
patient rehabilitation center, the patient’s study participation will be terminated and the 
study team will replace the patient.  
OR 
o consents to the study, completes the initial study visit, is discharged to an independent 
home setting, but is subsequently re -admitted to the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_490005] (i.e., 
completion of survey T1), the patient’s study participation will be terminated.  
 Note: the study team may re -approach the individual in this scenario, re -consent, 
and repeat all study visit procedures.  
• P
ost Randomization Failure:  defined as any patient who consents to the study, completes the 
initial study visit, is discharged to an independent home setting, completes survey T1 and is 
randomized to the study, and anytime during the first month study participation is re- admitted to 
the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. Should this occur, the patient may be terminated if the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_512419] > 7 
days and/or the patient is unwilling or unable to continue study procedures.   
o N ote: If the participant  is terminated, he/she will be included in the analyses up to the 
point that they were excluded.  
• Withdraw by [CONTACT_976] [INVESTIGATOR_104300]:  defined as any individual  who voluntarily consents to participate in the 
study, but is then withdrawn from the study.  
o The PI [INVESTIGATOR_21552] a participate at any time without their consent if the PI [INVESTIGATOR_512420].   
o The patient may withdraw themselves at any time; the study team will be asked to document the reason for withdraw for study records.  
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: [ADDRESS_663034] be maintained on the enrollment log.  A reason for withdraw 
should be recorded in the study records.  
• Lost to Follow -Up (LTF):  defined as any individual who voluntarily consents to participate in 
the study but after non- compliance and at least 3 documented, attempted contacts appropriately 
spaced 1- 5 days apart, the individual will be considered LTF.  
o For aim 2 only:  
 Patients who reach this status will have no additional follow -ups or study 
requirements. Patients who are assigned this status must be maintained on the 
enrollment log.  
 A patient who returns the study team’s contacts within [ADDRESS_663035] may resume study participation.  
• Completed : defined as any individual  who both consented and randomized to the study and 
completed T1- T3 (aim 2 only) or any individual who completed assigned study visit (aim s 1, 3 
and 4).  Individuals  who reach this status have no additional follow -up or study requirements. 
Individuals  who are assigned this status must be maintained on the enrollment log.  
 
Study Visits  
 
For aim s 1, [ADDRESS_663036] consent, the individual may  be asked to do 
the following:  
• Find and install the Pattern Health app (aim 1 and aim 4)  
• Register to the LIFT2 study  (aim 1 and aim 4)  
• Complete baseline survey  (aim 1 and aim 4)  
• Randomize to 1 of 3 groups  or screen fail purposely (aim 1 and aim 4)  
• Audio- recording for interview using qualitative analyses (aim 3)  
• Provide feedback on app content and usability (aim 1, 3, and 4)  
 For aim 2, each consented patient will be asked to complete up to four individual study visits.  
• Baseline:  this visit is to occur post -consent (same day, ideally) at the time of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_104303]. However, this visit may occur at the time of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_104299] 7 
days of returning to home. At this visit, the following will occur:  
o App Registration 
o Baseline Survey Completion 
• T1 (Day 0) ( +30 days):  this visit is to occur at the time of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_104304], ideally 
within the first week (7 days) of returning to home; however, it can occur up to 1 month (30 
days) from the time of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_104304]. At this visit, the patient will complete the T1 survey via the app, which includes the PHQ- 9, PTSS, PHQ -10, and MAAS  surveys. Score 
dependent, the patient will be randomized to 1 of 8 intervention combinations . If the patient’s 
psychological distress score is too low; he/she will receive an automated alert via the app 
describing they are not eligible and their study participation is complete.  
• T2 (Day 30) (+60 days):  this visit is to occur post 1 month randomization for those patients who 
remain eligible to participate in the study. PHQ -9, PTSS, PHQ -10, and MAAS surveys will be 
administered again. If the patient’s survey scores indicate high levels of distress, as defined by 
a triggered SI alert or increased distress score from T1, a delegated study team member will 
contact [CONTACT_104342].  
• T3 (Day 90) (+30 days):  this visit is to occur post 3 months randomization for those patients 
who remain eligible to participate in the study. PHQ -9, PTSS, PHQ -10, and MAAS surveys will 
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 15 of 32 
 be administered again. If the patient’s survey scores indicate high levels of distress, as defined by a triggered SI alert or increased distress score from T1, a delegated study team member will 
contact [CONTACT_104342]. At the completion of this survey and assuming no additional follow- up is required due to high levels of distress, the patient’s participation in the 
study is comp lete.  
 Additionally, each patient who is randomized will be asked to complete:  
• Weekly Check- In: for those patients who are eligible for randomization, a weekly check -in will 
be completed via the app. This weekly check in will be available beginning day 4 of the week 
until day 7 of the week.  
 
Compensation  
Compensation for study participation will be provided. Participates  in aim 1 will receive $20 for study 
participation and completion of the singular study visit. Participants in aim 2 may receive up to a total of 
$60 for study completion, $20 for each survey  (T1, T2 and T3)  to be paid after the participant has 
completed the trial.  Participants in aims 3 and 4 will receive $20 for each completed study visit.  
 
8. Enrollment Sites 
This study will be conducted at 3 health systems: Duke University in Durham, NC (includes Duke Medical 
Center [Clinical Coordinating Center] and Duke Regional Community Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]); Oregon Health & Sciences University (OHSU) in Portland, Oregon; and the University of Colorado -Denver in Denver, Colorado.  
 Each of the 3 sites is expec ted to randomize approximately 80 patients over 36 months for Aim 2’s factorial 
trial for a total of 240  patients across the network, with the aim of 192  patients  completing assessments 
and mindfulness through T2 ([ADDRESS_663037] -randomization).  
 
Sites, PIs, Targets, and Available Patients*  
Site PI [INVESTIGATOR_512421] &  
Duke Regional Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_512422]  826 (23/mo)  80 
Univ. of Washington† Catherine Hough  590 (16/mo)  10 
OHSU† Catherine Hough  630 (18/mo)  70 
University of Colorado  Marc Moss  630 (18/mo)  80 
*Total for 36 months of screening  
†  University of Washington was an enrolling site from the inception of the study project to 07/31/2020, when [CONTACT_512461] moved to Oregon Health & Sciences University  (OHSU).  OHSU is anticipated to begin screening and 
enrollment in October, 2020.  
 
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 16 of 32 
 9. Statistical Design, Analyses Plan, and Sample Size and Power 
Statistical Design and Analyses Plan  
Analyses for Aim 1:   After inclusion of Table 7's features in the mMT  system, we will employ a user 
testing analytic approach guided by 
[CONTACT_512442].gov guidelines and our past 
studies. ,3,4,[ADDRESS_663038] usability (~25% ≥age 
65, ~25% <high school education, 
~25% with low technology confidence).  
27,29 Participants will complete: (1) a 
‘think aloud’ protocol in which 
coordinators record patient comments 
as they use mMT; 30 (2) Systems 
Usability Scale (SUS); 28 (3) all system 
tasks, and (4) a semi -structured interview.  In a parallel approach, staff will test the screening and 
randomization system using a series of 100 simulations, aiming for 100% success in correct and equal 
randomization to Aim 2's factor conditions.  We will  organize any identified problems with Nielsen 
usability heuristics to guide subsequent revisions.[ADDRESS_663039] work,  3-5,14,15 we anticipate 2- 5 
cycles of 2 -5 participants each will be sufficient to reach a target of 'excellent' usability (i.e., mean SUS 
score ≥85) 26,32 as well as to ensure confidence in the screening system's feasibility.  
 
Analyses for the trial (Aim 2):  The main goal of our intention- to-treat analyses is to estimate main 
effects and interactions of combined experimental conditions to be able to determine which LIFT use 
case is best.  That is, would LIFT impact be greater by [CONTACT_512443] “high” level of a factor instead of 
the simpler default “low” level of the factor.  Our overall analytic approach will be guided by [CONTACT_512444] & Kugler. 33,[ADDRESS_663040] of each factor (e.g. standard versus 
high- dose), collapsed over the other factors.  We will also examine these descriptive statistics by 
[CONTACT_512445]- way and three -way interactions of the factors.  
 
A constrained longitudinal general linear model with unstructured covariance to take into account 
repeated measures on individuals over time will be used to estimate changes in the primary and 
secondary outcomes from T1 to T2 and from T1 to T3. 35  Often for trial analyses, intervention group 
and time are dummy coded indicator variables (i.e., levels 0 and 1) in model specification.  Instead, 
given our factorial design, the main effects and interactions will be represented with effect coding (i.e.,  
levels -1 and 1).  In the scenario of balanced sample sizes across the factors, effect coding results in a 
model with independent coefficients.  
 

  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: [ADDRESS_663041] 2 points on the PHQ -9 at T2.  Candidate components not reaching these 
benchmarks will be set to the “low” level of the component.  We will then carefully examine the interactions, starting with those that include the largest main effect factor.  Estimated means and plots 
will be used to explore the impact of the interactions and whether they are “synergistic” or 
“antagonistic.”  The final “screened in” set of combinations (i.e., main effects and synergistic interactions indicating improvement of at least 2 points on the PHQ -9) will provide evidence of possible 
optimized intervention components.   
 
As a next step in the decision- making process, we will examine the secondary outcomes and the 
sustained intervention effects at T3, potentially reconsidering decisions made in the previous step.  As 
an additional part of this step of the decision- making process, we will examine feasibility and adherence 
metrics for all components, as well as open- ended study participant study staff feedback.   
 
Analyses for Aim 3:  We will use modified grounded theory methods 
24,26 to inductively and iteratively 
develop frameworks to describe patients’ experiences with the mMT app. 37-[ADDRESS_663042] 5 interviews (1) to identify themes and concepts relating to perceived barriers and facilitat ors to 
mMT use and application of content, (2) to assign codes to each, and (3) to group similar concepts into 
categories.  Categories will be developed further by [CONTACT_512446] (axial coding).  In 
a series of meetings, all investigators will review these preliminary coding frameworks and arrive at 
consensus on the coding framework. 24,[ADDRESS_663043] data that will further enhance an understanding of barriers and 
facilitators.  We will ensure validity by (1) maintaining an audit trial that captures the research design, 
decisions made about data collection, and analyses;40 (2) minimizing bias by [CONTACT_2329] a multidisciplinary 
team to develop the coding framework; and (b) using member checking to present results to 15 study 
patients for confirmation or modification. 22,41 
 
Analyses for Aim 4:  After reviewing transcribed interviews, investigators will organize any usability 
concerns with Nielsen heuristics and then perform revisions. 31  We anticipate 1 -2 cycles of iterative 
revisions involving 5- 10 participants per cycle to reach a target of 'excellent' usability (defined by a 
Systems Usability Scale [SUS] mean score ≥85). 26,[ADDRESS_663044] centers around Aim 2 (RCT), we calculated power for the test of a main effect or factor 
interaction in a constrained longitudinal general linear model with unstructured covariance matrix via 
simulation.  Based on LIFT pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299], the baseline standard deviation of PHQ -9 was assumed to be 5.3 
and the covariance between time points ranged from 3.9 to 11.5. We examined a range of sample sizes at T2, from 120 to 200 participants.   500 simulated datasets were simulated under the alternative 
model,  with power calculated as the proportion of times the estimated coefficient was found to be 
statistically significant at p<0.05.   Results indicated that with 192 total patients at T2 (24 per 
experimental condition; 240 total at T1 [randomization] assuming 20% dropout by T2), we will have 
>90% power to detect a factor main effect or factor interaction effect of 2 units on the PHQ -9 scale.    
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: [ADDRESS_663045] factor main and 
interaction effects even with deviations from our assumptions (e.g., higher dropout rate, misspecified 
covariance matrix, etc.). For Aims [ADDRESS_663046] Participation Duration  
Participating subjects  in aim s 1, 3 and 4  will be asked to participate in a singular study visit lasting 30- 60 
minutes. Participating subjects in aim 2  will be asked to participate for up to a total of 3 months. 
Participating in the factorial trial (aim 2)  will require 1 month of daily, active participation in whic h the patient 
is practicing mMT daily and completing weekly check -ins. At the end of the 1 month (post T1 completion), 
the patient will be asked to complete T2 survey. Once the patient has complet ed the T2 survey, he/she is 
finished with active study participation for an additional 2 months at which time they will be asked to 
complete T3 survey.  
 
11. Study Duration 
We estimate that from the time the factorial experiment trial opens to enrollment during Month 9 of Year 1, it will require approximately 41 months to complete data collection (approximately 36 months for cumulative 
enrollment with 4 -5 months to complete all long -term follow up; this time does not include start up and 
analyses) and 4- [ADDRESS_663047] risks:  
Recruitment and informed consent procedures.   
First, the Duke Institutional Review Board (IRB) will review and approve the study protocol before study 
initiation. Informed consent (e- consent or written) will be required from all participants, including content 
experts.  Second, we will use a standardized screening and enrollment protocol that respects participant privacy and rights.  The study team will only approach those patients that are deemed appropriate for the 
study, which will be determined by [CONTACT_512447], other data, and/or conversations with the clinical team and/or 
PI. The approach of patients  may be aided by a short IRB -approved recruitment video. The study team will 
then ask the patient to read and sign the study consent form at the time of enrollment.  Potential subjects will 
be given as much time as they need to consider study participation.  For Aim 2, we will take great care to 
present the treatment group assignment possibilities (“like drawing a number out of a hat”) tactfully and with 
clearly stated equipoise, as we have done successfully in past clinical trials.  A copy of the consent form will be 
given to participant and the original maintained in a secure location at.   
the study site  
 
Protections against risk   
General oversight    
There are several ongoing mechanisms for monitoring the occurrence of adverse events.  The PI  [INVESTIGATOR_104305] -to-day monitoring of the study activities . Careful monitoring of all persons 
entering the study will minimize attrition and will ensure the clinical safety of these patients.  A telephone 
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 19 of 32 
 number for the study team facilitates this monitoring and an email address ( [EMAIL_9736]) provided to 
participants upon entry into the study to report concerns related to study participation.  
 
Plans to prevent coercion of patients and to ensure voluntary participation 
We will strive to create an environment free of any coercive practices for patients. We will stress that study 
involvement is voluntary  and that choosing to participate or not participate will not affect their care in anyway. 
In addition, we will utilize the standardized [ADDRESS_663048] trials  describe treatment groups and ensure a similar approach across sites.   
 
Specific longitudinal participant oversight plans for severe psychological distress (including suicidal ideation)  
Given the difficult situations faced by [CONTACT_1962], we recognize that there is a slight risk that some participants 
may become distressed completing questionnaires or viewing study materials, as mentioned above.   
 We will take the following measures to prevent any negative reactions as well as effectively manage any 
serious distress that occurs:  
 
(1)  All of the in -person and telephone- based data collection sessions will be conducted by [CONTACT_104345].  
 
(2) Study team members  will emphasize to participants that any interviews or other study interactions are 
participant -controlled.  Thus, participants will be instructed that they are in control over what they share and 
generally how long they discuss any topic that is addressed.   
 
(3)  Participants will be told that they can discontinue an interview or telephone session at any time and that 
they are free to reschedule an interview or treatment session at any time within the week.   
 
(4)  Overall, we are very sensitive to the common and pervasive nature of psychological distress among ICU 
survivors and are experienced in discussing these issues with them.  There is also a potential risk for identifying underlying mental health issues through the m MT sessions, telephone calls, and survey responses.  
For issues such as passive suicidal ideation or symptoms of depression, anxiety, or PTSD, an informational sheet will be provided with contact [CONTACT_116986].  Additionally, at the 
beginning of the program, all subjects will be informed that the training program may uncover unresolved and 
distressing thoughts or feelings; and a list of resources will be provided at that time.  
 
Suicidality Response Plan  
 
First, delegated study team members may have in- person or telephone interactions that concern them. 
Second, the study app system will automatically detect any endorsement of active suicidal intent in a 2 -step 
process that is contingent on the PHQ -9’s item # 9 which evaluates suicidal thoughts and the C -SSRS item #4 
which evaluates intent by [CONTACT_7939] “have you had these thoughts and had some intention of acting on them? (as 
shown below:  
 
PHQ -9 item 9 
response  Suicidal intent 
item response  Action by [CONTACT_512448]  
0 n/a n/a n/a 
1, 2, or 3 (i.e., ≠ 0)   NO n/a n/a 
1, 2, or 3 (i.e., ≠ 0)   YES Alert to study manager, 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541], and PIs  Immediately contact [CONTACT_512449] a patient indicate to a study team member  or via the app , thoughts of suicidality or ideation of 
suicidality, the Suicidality Response Plan could  be activated. 
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: [ADDRESS_663049] of local mental health resources as 
follows:  
 
• Duke University:  Call Emergency Psychiatry at (919) 681 -4410 or (919) 681- 1316, available 24 hours a 
day, 7 days a week.  
• Oregon Health & Sciences University:  National Suicide Prevention Lifeline - 1- 800-273-TALK (8255)  
• University of Colorado:  Call Psychiatric Emergency services at (303) -602-7221, a 24 -hour resource 
line  
All sites, may use, as a backup: The National Suicide Prevention Lifeline - 1- 800-273-TALK (8255) is a free, 
24-hour hotline available to anyone in suicidal crisis or emotional distress.  
 
If the participant is considered actively  suicidal then at least one of the following plans will be followed 
depending on the location of the participant for each of the following situations:  
 
• Situation [ADDRESS_663050] to the emergency department, or call 
a Psychiatric Emergency services number relevant to the site as described above.  
 
• Situation 2  
o If the participant is on the telephone:  
 The study personnel will notify the site PI [INVESTIGATOR_104307]  
 The study personnel will stay on the telephone with the subject participant.  
 The study personnel will immediately contact [ADDRESS_663051] contact[CONTACT_104346].  
 
If the participant i s determined to be actively suicidal and require immediate medical therapy, they will be 
withdrawn from the study.  
 As described above, all concerns about participant safety will be discussed immediately with the PI  - including 
concerning severe distress that does not involve suicidality.   
 
For these situations, once an “alert situation” is known, the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_104308] (based on a 
PI-led phone call) to local psychological resources. The study team will also make urgent and emergency 
referrals as needed based on information learned.  
 
To date based on some  studies that have included over [ADDRESS_663052] found that <5% of 
participants will require a call from the PI [INVESTIGATOR_104309].  Of those, none has  required 
referral to acute psychiatric care after a detailed interview from the PI.  After a disposition / solution has been made, both the resolution (and follow up) will be documented in the ‘contact [CONTACT_26500]’ section of the data system for 
reporting to the DSMB.   
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 21 of 32 
  
Patient Death While in Study  
Finally , we recognize that we are working with a critically ill population that is at risk for death during follow up 
due to their underlying illness.  Before T2 and T3 data collection, the study team will review the EMR to look for 
records of death, halting all study procedures if death has  occurred and noting the date. On phoning any 
participant, the study team will  initiate a conversation to tactfully ascertain the patient’s vital status should a 
family member answer first.  If the patient has died, the study team will provide brief support  and their 
condolences .   
 
Withdraw While in Study  
If an individual  states that they wish to drop out, the study team will respect that as well. A follow- up question 
may be asked to ascertain the reason for withdraw; however, this is for documentation purposes only. 
Additionally, the study and/or site PI [INVESTIGATOR_512423]’s best interest and/or the participant is non -compliant despi[INVESTIGATOR_512424] t by [CONTACT_3476].  
 
Vulnerable P opulations  
This project will not enroll individuals  from vulnerable populations (e.g., imprisoned persons, minors).  
 
Adverse events  (AEs) , serious adverse events,  (SAEs)  and unanticipated problems  (UPs).   
It is recognized that there is a slight risk that some participants may become distressed when completing self -
report measures or participating in interviews.  When necessary, participants who experience psychological distress related to completing questionnaires  will be referred for appropriate psychiatric or psychological care.  
All participants will have access to the PI’s contact [CONTACT_3031] 24 hours a day (shown in the consent form).  If a telephone interview is required, a trained study team member who has been trained to be sensitive to the nature of these issues will conduct it .   
 It is anticipated, in this study, for AEs  to be extremely  rare as it is a behavioral study. However, it is possible 
that participants could become distressed in a  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_512425] -discharge due to increased illness and/or 
limitations. As such, participants could exhibit signs of and/or experience suicidal ideations  or be admitted for 
mental health symptoms. Therefore, for this study, only increased levels of distress related to completing the 
questionnaires or completing the copi[INVESTIGATOR_104311]/or suicidal ideations will be considered AEs.  
 Like, AEs, it is not anticipated that SAEs will occur. However, for this study, an SAE would be defined as a 
suicide attempt, a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (post hospi[INVESTIGATOR_104312]’s eligibility for study 
participation) , or death.  All serious adverse events will be reported within the standard timelines required to the 
IRB, study sponsor, and/or DSMB, as appropriate and when applicable.  
 Given the nature of this study, it is anticipated that most enrolled patients will not complete their study 
visits within the assigned protocol window. Additionally, it is expected that visits and/or mMT practices 
will be missed. As such, these will not be considered protocol deviations. Should other protocol 
deviations or unanticipated problems occur, they will be  discussed with the PI, documented, and 
reported to the IRB, study sponsor, and/or DSMB, as appropriate and when applicable.  
 
Period and Frequency for Event Assessment and Follow -Up 
Protocol deviations and other unanticipated problems , as well as AEs and SAEs,  will be recorded in the 
data collection system throughout the study  and reported, as appropriate, to the IRB, study sponsor, 
and/or DSMB, when applicable.  
 
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: [ADDRESS_663053] all reportable events with start dates occurring any time after informed 
consent is obtained until 7 (for non- serious AEs) or 30 days (for SAEs) after the last day of study 
participation.  At each study visit, the study team will  inquire by [CONTACT_104347]/or 
EMR review, of the occurrence of AE/SAEs since the last visit.  Events will be followed for outcome 
information until resolution or stabilization.  
 
Characteristics of an Adverse or Serious Adverse Event  
 
Relationship to Study Intervention  
To assess relationship of an event to study intervention, the following guidelines are used:  
1. Related (Possible, Probable, Definite)  
a. The event is known to occur with the study intervention.  
b. There is a temporal relationship between the intervention and event onset.  
c. The event abates when the intervention is discontinued.  
d. The event reappears upon a re- challenge with the intervention.  
2. Not Related (Unlikely, Not Related)  
a. There is no temporal relationship between the intervention and event onset.  
b. An alternate etiology has been established. 
 
Expectedness  
The Study PI [INVESTIGATOR_512426].  An 
event will be considered unexpected if the nature, severity, or frequency of the event is not consistent 
with the risk information previously described for the intervention.   
 Severity  
The following scale will be used to grade adverse events:  
1. Mild: no intervention required; no impact on activities of daily living (ADL)  
2. Moderate: minimal, local, or non- invasive intervention indicated; moderate impact on ADL  
3. Severe: significant symptoms requiring invasive intervention; subject seeks medical attention, needs major assistance with ADL 
 
Reporting Procedures  
 
Adverse and Serious Adverse Events  
For symptoms that are either great in total burden (i.e., total score is high), a delegated study team member (e.g., therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]) will call the participant to check in.  For specific symptoms such as the suicidal  
ideation, a delegated study team member will also call the participant and assess the severity of the 
situation, triaging them as appropriate to psychiatric support.   
 For other matters, the st udy team will maintain frequent telephone contact [CONTACT_104348], and 
can refer those with concerning symptoms.   
 
All deaths will be reported to N IH Program Officer  and to the DSMB Chair within 72 hours of study’s 
knowledge of death. For each patient who dies, a brief report containing the following variables will be 
provided:  
• Age 
• Principal diagnosis  
• Number of comorbidities  
• Admission APACHE II score  
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 23 of 32 
 • Days since enrollment  
• Brief description of circumstances surrounding death including expected or unexpected.  
 Serious (fatal or life -threatening) SAEs that are unanticipated and that are related to the intervention will 
be reported to the NHLBI Program Officer and to the DSMB Chair within 7 days of study staff’s 
knowledge of the SAE.   
 
The summary of all other SAEs will be reported to N IH Program Officer and to the DSMB quarterly, 
unless otherwise requested by [CONTACT_4318].   
 
Protocol Deviations and Other Unanticipated Problem Reporting  
Incidents or events that meet the reporting criteria, as outlined by [CONTACT_47482], will be repo rted to the 
Duke IRB as needed.  
 The following will be included, at a minimum:  
• A detailed description of the event, incident, experience, or outcome;  
• A description of any changes to the protocol or other corrective actions that have been taken or are proposed in response to the unanticipated problem.  
 
Reporting for Multi -Center Trials  
The study site  must immediately report to the coordinating center  and study manager any serious 
adverse event, whether or not considered study related, including those listed in the protocol and must include an assessment of whether there is a reasonable possibility that the study caused the event within [ADDRESS_663054] participant privacy regarding protected health and personal information.  A study ID number will be generated at the time of consent and will be maintained in a secure file (e.g., linker file) which will contain the pa tient name [CONTACT_39650].  Further, names, birthdates, telephone 
numbers, addresses, and medical record numbers will be stored securely as described in the RDSP and only accessible by [CONTACT_104349]. The RedCAP system  will store all data on a secure Duke 
University server with a sophisticated dual backup system.  Study participants cannot view data via the ePRO system , supported by [CONTACT_512450] (EDC) system, supported by [CONTACT_512451] . Patients  will only have access to the ePRO system and will access the one-way view 
ePRO system via secure, PHI -free email or text links sent from the app .  
 
Digital security  
The study digital infrastructure consists of a mobile (i.e., native) app with a built -in electronic patient reported 
outcomes (ePRO) function and an electronic data capture (EDC) system,  RedCAP digital study database.  
• mMT  app:   The mMT  app will be a native app. The  programming service providers, Pattern Health, 
endeavor to build technological solutions that preserve the privacy, confidentiality, and security of 
protected health information that may be part of health records or research datasets. Protected Health 
Information (PHI) is handled according to appropriate Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) Privacy and Security Regulations.  All staff who work with sensitive data are 
required to complete appropriate HIPAA training with periodic updates, complete human subjects and 
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: [ADDRESS_663055] builds guided by [CONTACT_104350], HIPAA, and OMB Circular A -130, Appendix III. Pattern Health has 
implemented and maintains several security protocols and controls for apps as well.  Pattern Health has developed a formal information security program, with a named individual responsible for its overall 
execution.  Pattern Health also periodically conducts an information technology (IT) security risk assessment on its projects, maintains formal documented protocols for reporting security breaches, 
assesses and manages security risks associated with vendors and subcontractors, maintains employee 
on-boarding and off -boarding policies that protect study data and integrity, and ensures continuing 
employee awareness of and education on security policies, standards, and procedures.  In terms of development approaches to security, Pattern Health evaluates and installs security patches in a timely fashion, protects systems against self -propagating malware, maintains secure coding policies and 
practices, and utilizes standardized secure build processes to protect  Pattern Health hardware that 
accesses customer networks, protecting confidential data against attack.  All storage of confidential 
participant data on Pattern Health hardware is strictly prohibited, and the use of off -shore service 
providers and/or data center facilities is prohibited unless approved by [CONTACT_89745].  For our study, the native app application and supporting backend system that Pattern Health develops will be hosted securely 
per DHTS regulations.  
• ePRO:  This password protected, HIPAA -compliant, IRB -approved ePRO system is similar to those we 
have successfully used among hundreds of ICU survivors and family members.  Strong passwords 
randomly generated by [CONTACT_512452].    
• REDCap:   The project will utilize a REDCap database system customized for our data needs  and EDC .  
For data validation, a series of project -defined data checks and conditional constraints can be required 
to ensure the highest quality data collection.  All system login procedures and data submissions will be transported and encrypted via the Transport  Layer Security (TLS) protocol to the secure central 
database at Duke University.  The study team will use login/password (reset every 6 months) credentialing for authentication of all study staff.  User -level permissions will be based on user roles 
and defined within the project system to limit a user’s access to only those records an individual is authorized to see. Duke Health Technology Solutions staff to verify that security measures are 
operational will review audit logs routinely.  The servers are scanned twice weekly for vulnerabilities 
and are currently maintained at the highest level of vendor and CERT security recommendations.  Data 
will never be shared outside the project unless authorized by [CONTACT_104352].  
User authentication is based on user passwords as described earlier.  Password creation requirements are in place to guarantee “strong passwords” as defined by [CONTACT_104353].  The 
lead systems administrator is GIAC Security Essentials certified through May 2018.  
 
13. Data management  
Most data entry will be self -completed by [CONTACT_512453]. The study team  will complete electronic case report forms (eCRFs) securely integrated within 
the EDC by [CONTACT_512454]’s EMR .  RedCap will be utilized to maintain 
study screening and enrollment logs  and house the eCRFs . The mMT  app dashboard, developed by 
[CONTACT_512455], will be accessed and used by [CONTACT_512456]’ conduct (e.g., study mil estones) to  enhance the study's quality.  
Through this dashboard,  quality and consistency of data, will be monitored. The Project  Manager will do 
routine data cleaning and statistical team using customized group -blinded reports that will identify missing, 
outlier, or nonsensical data at time points when remedying them is feasible.  
 
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 25 of 32 
 14. Data & Safety Monitoring Plan 
Plans for Assurance of Compliance regarding Adverse Event R eporting.    
The study team will be required to document and report adverse events (including serious adverse events) to 
the Institutional Review Board (IRB), as appropriate and in line with institutional reporting criteria. In addition, 
all adverse events are reported as part of NIH Progress Reports in the non -competitive and competitive 
renewals.   
 
Plans for A ssuring Data Accuracy and Protocol C ompliance . 
The PI [INVESTIGATOR_104314], including data management, data accuracy, and protocol compliance.  The study biostatistician and Project  Manager will be the chief data managers and will adhere to established federal 
and institutional patient safety and protection guidelines.  To assure data accuracy, the Project  Manager will 
review data system reports on a routine basis.  These reports will show enrollment, missing data, and other values that are neither study ID - nor outcome -based.  The Project  Manager will process detailed reports to 
search for errors and generate basic reports for dissemination for regular staff meetings.   
 
Data Safety Monitoring B oard (DSMB).  
Aim 2's factorial  trial will be supervised by a single independent DSMB composed of professionals with 
significant experience in clinical trials, mind and body interventions, epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], and biostatistics who are not 
directly involved in the study, its interpretation, or  any study institution and have no active research relationship 
with a study team member.   
 
The main responsibilities of the DSMB will be to (a) assess for the presence of potential harms and unintended 
consequences of the m MT intervention, (b) ensure the validity and integrity of the data, and (c) make 
recommendations to the investigators and to the NIH about whether the study should be continued without modification, continued with modification, or terminated.  
 
The initial DSMB meeting will occur before the initiation of subject enrollment for the purpose of updating members on the study, ensuring agreement on the review process, establishing the review methodology and 
procedures, ensuring all conflicts of interest are disclosed (to be reviewed by N HLBI  staff), reviewing the 
protocol, and codifying a written charter.  The N HLBI 's Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) Template will be 
used to guide the drafting of the charter.  This document will specify procedures for protocol amendments, ensuring participant confidentiality and privacy, ensuring database protection, coordinating c enter 
responsibilities, creating adverse outcome definitions (adverse events, unanticipated problems, and serious adverse events), protocol for reporting and responding to adverse events while also maintaining subject 
confidentiality, justifying sample size, assessing accrual and compliance, halting and stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_004] (drafted with the assistance of  the DSMB chair and the DSMB lead statistician), approving informed consent 
documents, and guidelines for quality control and quality assurance.  Before enrollment begins, the DSMB charter will be approved by [CONTACT_104358] ; additionally, Clin icalTrials.gov registration will be 
finalized as per the Milestone Plan shown in the Research Strategy document.  
 
The first DSMB data review will occur either after the first [ADDRESS_663056].  Thereafter, the DSMB will review cleaned data reports 
(provided by [CONTACT_512457] 2 weeks before the DSMB meeting) every 3 months during enrollment and 
follow up, and will prepare a report with any recommendations within 2 weeks following their review.  The specific study metrics that the DSMB will review at each meeting include enrollment rate, dropout rate, HADS  
scores, PTSS scores, and Adverse Events.  The primary safety measures will be Adverse Events reports and 
HADS  scores.   
 Other items reviewed by [CONTACT_104359]: (a) data quality, completeness, and 
timeliness; (b) performance of the individual sites; (c) adequacy of compliance with goals for recruitment and 
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 26 of 32 
 retention, including women and minorities; (d) protocol adherence; and (e) presence of factors that could 
adversely affect study outcome or compromise data confidentiality.  Study participants will be recovering from 
life-threatening illnesses managed in intensive care units, which  increase the likelihood of death overtime  in 
comparison to healthy individuals.  As such, any patient deaths and their cause during the follow up period will be recorded, discussed, and highly scrutinized.   
 
The study biost atistician  will oversee any DSMB statistical requests and interpretations.  During the review 
process, formal statistical tests may be performed under DSMB supervision if requested (e.g., examining the 
differences in Adverse Event or outcome rates between factor -based groups).  Additionally, the DSMB may 
request a formal statistical assessment if a suspi[INVESTIGATOR_104315] -based 
group.  If a specific factor group is found to have a statistically significant increase in HADS score, the DSMB 
scope of action may include recommendation for stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_21356].  For differences in study dropout rates, 
appropriate changes to the protocol will be made by [CONTACT_976] [INVESTIGATOR_104316].  Any protocol 
changes, as well as any adverse events, will also be immediately reported to the relevant site IRB, the Central Institutional Review Board (located at Duke University), as well as to the NHLBI  Program Officer.  
 
Quality Assurance and C onfidentiality  
First, the electronic data entry system “forces” responses to key questionnaire items (e.g., primary outcomes surveys) before allowing progression through the particular interview’s template, thereby [CONTACT_512458].  For less critical items, delayed data entry is possible (though these data elements are non-esse ntial to 
primary aims analyses). However, each time the study team logs into the secure data entry system, prompts 
appear on the welcome screen that show what data elements remain incomplete (as well as the time frame 
within which they must be entered) for  all site participants.   
 The study PI [INVESTIGATOR_512427] [ADDRESS_663057] the security of the electronic data entry system, which will be housed on a highly secure 
university server.  All personal computers are located in lockable offices and are accessible only by [CONTACT_512459].  The server room is accessible only to designated University Systems Administrators.   
 
15. Privacy, Data Storage & Confidentiality – see Research Data Security Plan.   
 
16. IRB of Record  
Duke University Health System (DUHS) IRB will be utilized as the  central IRB of record.  
 A copy of the most recent DUHS IRB Federal Wide Assurance (FWA) statement may be found at: https://irb.duhs.duke.edu/about -us/federal -wide-assurance  
 DUHS IRB current and historical rosters may be found at: https://irb.duhs.duke.edu/irb -r
 eview -
process/rosters  
 DUHS IRB meeting dates may be found at: https://irb.duhs.duke.edu/irb -review -process/irb- meetings  
  
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: [ADDRESS_663058] practices for mixed methods research in the health sciences. 2013. https://obssr.od.nih.gov/training/mixed- m
 ethods -
research/ . 
2. Cox CE, Hough CL, Reagan W, Greeson J, Porter L. Mobile Mindfulness to Improve 
Psychological Distress After Critical Illness. [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]. 2016. 
https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] . 
3. Cox CE, Wysham NG, Kamal AH, et al. Usability Testing of an Electronic Patient -Reported 
Outcome System for Survivors of Critical Illness. Am J Crit Care. 2016;25(4):340 -349. 
4. Cox CE, Wysham NG, Walton B, et al. Development and usability testing of a Web- based 
decision aid for families of patients receiving prolonged mechanical ventilation. Annals of 
intensive care. 2015;5(6):6.  
5. Cox CE, Jones DM, Reagan W, et al. Palliative care planner (PCplanner):  a pi[INVESTIGATOR_512428] -integrated, needs -
targeted app platform. Annals of the American Thoracic Society. 2017;in press. 
6. (W3C) WWWC. Accessible Rich Internet Applications (WAI -ARIA) 1.0. 
https://www.w3.org/TR/wai -aria/. Published 2014. Accessed.  
7. Cox CE, Hough CL, Carson SS, et al. Effects of a telephone- and web -based copi[INVESTIGATOR_512429]:  a randomized clinical trial. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2017;in press.  
8. Collins LM, Murphy SA, Strecher V. The multiphase optimization strategy (MOST) and the sequential multiple assignment randomized trial (SMART): new methods for more potent 
eHealth interventions. Am J Prev Med. 2007;32([ADDRESS_663059]):S112- 118. 
9. Collins LM, Kugler KC, Gwadz MV. Optimization of Multicomponent Behavioral and 
Biobehavioral Interventions for the Prevention and Treatment of HIV/AIDS. AIDS Behav. 
2016;[ADDRESS_663060] 1:S197- 214. 
10. Cook JW, Collins LM, Fiore MC, et al. Comparative effectiveness of motivation phase intervention components for use with smokers unwilling to quit: a factorial screening experiment. 
Addiction. 2016;111(1):117- 128. 
11. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_46746], Fiore MC, Smith SS, et al. Identifying effective intervention components for smoking 
cessation: a factorial screening experiment. Addiction. 2016;111(1):129- 141. 
12. Collins LM, Dziak JJ, Kugler KC, Trail JB. Factorial experiments: efficient tools for evaluation of intervention components. Am J Prev Med. 2014;47(4):498- 504. 
13. Collins LM, Dziak JJ, Li R. Design of experiments with multiple independent variables: a 
resource management perspective on complete and reduced factorial designs. Psychol 
Methods. 2009;14(3):202- 224. 
14. Cox CE, Hough CL, Jones DM, et al. Effects of mindfulness training programs delivered by a self-directed mobile app and by [CONTACT_117024]:  a pi[INVESTIGATOR_83021]. under review. 2017.  
15. Cox CE, Jones D, Reagan W, et al. Lift: a novel, scalable digital mindfulness app intervention for ICU survivors. American Thoracic Society International Conference; 2016; San Francisco, 
CA. 
16. Sandelowski M. Unmixing mixed- methods research. Res Nurs Health. 2014;37(1):[ADDRESS_663061]. 2012;56:814 -828. 
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 28 of 32 
 18. Guetterman TC, Fetters MD, Creswell JW. Integrating Quantitative and Qualitative Results in 
Health Science Mixed Methods Research Through Joint Displays. Annals of family medicine. 
2015;13(6):554 -561. 
19. Corbin JM, Strauss AL. Basics of qualitative research : techniques and procedures for 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_48545].  Fourth edition. ed. Los Angeles: SAGE; 2015.  
20. Patton MQ. Qualitative research and evaluation methods.  3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications; 2002.  
21. Sandelowski M. Combining qualitative and quantitative sampling, data collection, and analysis 
techniques in mixed- method studies. Res Nurs Health. 2000;23(3):246 -255. 
22. Giacomini MK, Cook DJ. Users' guides to the medical literature: XXIII. Qualitative research in health care A. Are the results of the study valid? Evidence- Based Medicine Working Group. 
JAMA. 2000;284(3):357- 362. 
23. Giacomini MK, Cook DJ. Users' guides to the medical literature: XXIII. Qualitative research in health care B. What are the results and how do they help me care for my patients? Evidence -
Based Medicine Working Group. JAMA. 2000;284(4):478- 482. 
24. Strauss AL, Corbin JM. Basics of qualitative research : techniques and procedures for 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_48545].  2nd ed. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications; 1998.  
25. Charmaz K. Constructing grounded theory: a practical guide through qualitative analysis.  
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications; 2006.  
26. Usability.gov. Research- Based Web Design & Usability Guidelines. In:2013. 
27. Greysen SR, Chin Garcia C, Sudore RL, Cenzer IS, Covinsky KE. Functional impairment and Internet use among older adults: implications for meaningful use of patient portals. JAMA Intern 
Med. 2014;174(7):1188- 1190.  
28. Brooke J. A quick and dirty usability scale. In: Jordan PW, Thomas B, Weerdmeester BA, McClelland AL, eds. Usability evaluation in industry.  London: Taylor and Francis; 1986. 
29. Andersson G. Age may moderate response to different unguided Internet -delivered 
interventions for depression. Evid Based Ment Health. 2014;17(1):29.  
30. Virzi RA, Sorce JF, Herbert LB. A comparison of three usability evaluation methods: heuristic, 
think -aloud, and performance testing. Proc Hum Fact Ergon Soc. 1993;37:309- 313. 
31. Nielsen J. Heuristic evaluation. In: Nielsen J, Mack RL, eds. Usability Inspection Methods.  New 
York: John Wiley & Sons; 1994.  
32. Bangor A, Kotum P, Miller J. Determing what individual SUS scores mean: adding an adjective rating scale. Journal of usability studies. 2009;4:114- 123. 
33. Collins LM. Optimization of Behavioral, Biobehavioral, and Biomedical Interventions: The 
Multiphase Optimization Strategy (MOST). Stat Soc Behav Sc. 2018:1- +. 
34. Collins LM, Kugler KC. Optimization of Behavioral, Biobehavioral, and Biomedical Interventions: The Multiphase Optimization Strategy (MOST). Optimization of Behavioral, Biobehavioral, and 
Biomedical Interventions: Advanced Topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]. 2018:1- +. 
35. Fitzmaurice GM, Laird NM, Ware JH. Applied longitudinal analysis.  Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley & 
Sons; 2012.  
36. Glaser BG, Strauss AL. The discovery of grounded theory : strategies for qualitative research.  
[LOCATION_001], N.Y.: Aldine de Gruyter; 1967.  
37. O'Cathain A, Thomas KJ, Drabble SJ, Rudolph A, Hewison J. What can qualitative research do 
for randomised controlled trials? A systematic mappi[INVESTIGATOR_17971]. BMJ open. 2013;3(6).  
38. Hesse- Biber S. Weaving a multimethodology and mixed methods praxis into randomized control 
trials to enhance credibility. Qual Inq. 2012;18:876- 889. 
39. Bonell C, Fletcher A, Morton M, Lorenc T, Moore L. Realist randomised controlled trials: a new approach to evaluating complex public health interventions. Soc Sci Med. 2012;75(12):2299 -
2306.  
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 29 of 32 
 40. Malterud K. Qualitative research: standards, challenges, and guidelines. Lancet. 
2001;358(9280):483 -488. 
41. Patton MQ. Enhancing the quality and credibility of qualitative analysis. Health Serv Res. 1999;34(5 Pt 2):1189- 1208.  
42. Cox CE. Improving psychological distress among critical illness survivors and their caregivers ([STUDY_ID_REMOVED]). https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/[STUDY_ID_REMOVED] . Published 2013. Accessed.  
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 30 of 32 
 Appendix 1: Schedule of Events   
 
 Day 0 (In -Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], 
Baseline)  Day 1 , T1 
(Discharge) (+30 
days) Week 1  Week 2  Week 3  Week 4  
Day 30, T2 (+60 
days) 
 Day 90 (+30 days) , 
T3 
Screening * X       
Consent  (a)* X       
App Registration * X       
Baseline Survey (b)* X       
Usability Survey*         
T1 Survey (c)  X      
T2 Survey  (c)      X  
T3 Survey  (c)       X 
Weekly Check -In (d)   X X X   
Data Entry (e)  X X    X X 
AE/SAE assessment  (f) X X    X X 
Survival Status  (f)  X    X X 
End of Study  (g)       X 
 
a) Patients may be approached and consented during their  admission, if well enough; their hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (e.g., while in step-down),  or within 7 days of returning to their home for 
participation in the study . 
b) Completion of the baseline survey includes the patient providing self -reported information such as social and demographic information and general health status.  
c) Surveys 1, 2 and 3 will be completed via the app by [CONTACT_512460], regardless of intervention combination assignments.  
d) For those participants  randomiz ed to 1 of the 8 intervention combinations, they will complete a weekly check -in to ascertain overall safety of the patient and usefulness of copi[INVESTIGATOR_512430].  
e) AE/SAE assessment and survival status will be completed via EMR review and/or telephone interview.  
f) Study completion for patients enrolled in the study is considered to occur at the completion of T3. However, participants may  undergo EOS if they are withdrawn from the study by 
[CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_104320]. Should withdraw of a patient occur, the reason for withdraw and date of withdraw will be documented. AE/SAEs 
and survival status will be noted, as applicable.   
*For aim 1 only.  
 
 
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 31 of 32 
 Appendix 2: Study Workflow  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 Daily Screening of EMR for 
Eligible Patients  
Ineligible 
(document 
on screening 
log) Note: approach may occur 
while patient is still hospi[INVESTIGATOR_104321] 1 -3 days of discharge.  Eligible  
(document on 
screening log and 
approach for 
consent)  
Consent   
(document on 
enrollment log)  Declined  
(document 
on screening 
log) 
App Registration & 
Baseline Survey 
Completion  Note: Complete data entry in 
RedCap and EDC, as well as 
CTMS (OnCore)  
T1 Survey Completion 
(+30 days from discharge)  Note: T1 is completed once the 
patient is discharged from the 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307]. Patients will be randomized to 1 of 8 arms or 
screen failed.  
Screen Failed 
(PHQ -9 < 5), EOS  
Randomized (1 of 8 
arms)  
4 weeks of mMT w/ 
weekly check- ins 
T2 Completion (Day 
30, + 60 days)  
T3 Completion (Day  
90, + 30 days)  Note: Complete 
data entry in 
RedCap and EDC, as well as CTMS (OnCore)  
  
 
 
Protocol version: 7.0  Dated: 22 Dec 2020  Page 32 of 32 
 Appendix 3: Randomization Arms  
 
 
 
 
