Official title: Inflammation and coronary endothelial function  in patients with coronary artery disease  
 
NCT number:   [STUDY_ID_REMOVED] 
 
Document date: August 28, 2017  
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 1 of 19 
 JHM IRB - eForm A – Protocol  
  
• Use the section headings to write the JHM IRB eForm A, inserting the appropriate material in each. If a section is not applicable, leave heading in and insert N/A.  
• When submitting JHM IRB eForm A (new or revised), enter the d ate submitted to the 
field at the top of JHM IRB eForm A.  
 *********************************************************************************************  
1. Abstract  
a. Provide no more than a one page research abstract briefly stating the problem, the research hypothesis, and the importance of the research.  
Advances directed at treating systemic risk factors for coronary atherosclerotic disease 
(CAD), such as hyperlipi[INVESTIGATOR_035], hypertension, and tobacco abuse reduce cardiovascular events 
and are associated with a 50% reduction in cardiovascular mortality over the last 25 years. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_793834], cardiovascular disease remains the number one cause of death in the 
world (1), afflict s close to a million Americans  annually , and incur s estimated annual costs of  over 
$300 billion in the US (2).  It has been postulated that CAD patients remain at increased risk of 
cardiovascular events in spi[INVESTIGATOR_793835], possibly because 
conventional treatments do not adequately address some of the inflammatory pathways implicated 
in the disease.  
Coronary atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease (3). Endothelial cell injury occurs at 
the earliest stages with expression of endothelial surface molecules (e.g. vascular cell adhesion molecule- 1, (VCAM -1)), that attract leukocytes, mostly monocytes, which in turn invade the vessel 
wall and contribute to the development of fatty streaks  (3, 4). In fact, inflammatory cells, cytokines 
and mediators are involved in all stages of CAD (3, 5). Despi[INVESTIGATOR_793836], this important concept is still not applied in the management of patients with, or at risk for, the disease.  
Inflammation undoubtedly enhances the development and progression of coronary 
atherosclerosis via several mechanisms, but endothelial dysfunction is believed to be one common result of these mechanisms.  Endot helial release of nitric oxide (NO) is a defining characteristic of 
non-diseased vascular tissue; it inhibits platelet aggregation, attenuates inflammation, decreases 
cellular proliferation, and induces local vascular smooth muscle vasodilation (6). Most classic and 
novel cardiovascular risk factors converge to impair endothelial function, including dyslipi[INVESTIGATOR_035],  
insulin resistance, inflammation, tobacco abuse, oxidative stress, as well as hemodynamic and genetic factors (6, 7). Thus, abnormal coronary endothelial function (CEF) represents both a cause 
and consequence of atherosclerosis. Critically, endothelial dysfunction is a marker for sub -clinical 
disease, an independent predictor of adverse cardiovascular events, and a potential target for medical interventions (8-15).  We recently developed the first noninvasive measures of coronary 
endothelial function (CEF). These use magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and isometric handgrip exercise to measure CEF in people noninvas ively.  
The hypothesis being tested in this application is that anti -inflammatory approaches, 
namely very low dose methotrexate (VLDM), low dose colchicine (LDC) and/or their combination, improve impaired local CEF in CAD patients with elevated markers of inflammation.  
The proposed trial will offer critical new information on the impact of two clinically available 
anti-inflammatory medications, and their combination, for the first time, on local coronary artery 
biology in CAD patients. The impact of anti -inflammatory therapy on serum inflammatory markers 
in stable CAD patients and their relationship to coronary endothelial function, the early assessment 
(8 weeks) of the effect and of the combination (VLDM+LDC) are additional novel aspects not being 
studied in ongoing outcomes trials with VLDM or LDC. Importantly, these mechanistic findings 
using clinically available therapi[INVESTIGATOR_793837].  
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 2 of 19 
 2. Objectives (include all primary and secondary objectives)  
To determine whether anti -inflammatory strategies improve coronary endothelial 
function and/or peripheral vascular endothelial function at 8 and 24 weeks in patients with coronary artery disease, as compared to those receiving placebo.  
 Primary Endpoint : Coronary segment endothelial function at 8 weeks; specifically, change in 
coronary cross sectional area (CSA) from rest to that during isometric handgrip exercise (IHE) (as 
% rest and as mm
2). 
 Secondary Endpoints:  
1. Change in coronary artery CSA from rest to IHE stress (as mm
2 and as % rest) at 24 weeks  
2. Change in coronary blood velocity (CBV) from rest to IHE stress (as cm/s and as % rest) at 8 
and 24 weeks  
3. Change in coronary blood flow (CBF) from rest to IHE stress (as cm/s and as % rest) at 8 and 
24 weeks  
4. Difference between baseline and 8 and 24 weeks in IHE -induced changes in coronary CSA  
5. Difference between baseline and 8 and 24 weeks in IHE -induced changes in coronary CBF 
6. Difference between baseline and 8 and 24 weeks in IHE- induced changes in coronary CBV.  
7. Serum hs -CRP at 8 and 24 weeks and change in hs -CRP between baseline and 8 and 24 
weeks.  
8. Serum IL -6 at 8 and 24 weeks and change in IL- 6 between baseline and 8 and 24 weeks. 
9. Serum TNFα at 8 and 24 and change in TNFα between baseline and 8 and 24 weeks.  
10. Brachial flow mediated dilation (FMD) at 8 and 24 weeks and change in brachial FMD 
between baseline and 8 and 24 weeks.  
11. The relationship between change in inflammatory markers (hs CRP, IL -6, TNFα, and others) 
between baseline and 8 and 24 weeks and change in CEF (IHE -induced change in CSA, CBV, 
CBF) between baseline and 8 and 24 weeks. 
12. Safety endpoints (withdrawal due to side- effects, complete metabolic panel, including liver 
function tests, and complete blood count.) 
 
3. Background (briefly describe pre -clinical and clinical data, current experience with 
procedures, drug or device, and any other relevant information to justify the research)  
 
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_793838], coronary 
atherosclerosis is prevalent and its manifestations have a high personal and societal toll. There is renewed interest in the role of inflammation in coronary atherosclerosis, inflammatory biomarkers 
and inflammation  as a treatment target. Coronary atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease (3). 
Endothelial cell injury occurs at the earliest stages with expression of endothelial surface 
molecules (e.g. vascular cell adhesion molecule- 1, (VCAM -1)), that attract leukocytes, most ly 
monocytes, which in turn invade the vessel wall and contribute to the development of fatty streaks (3, 4). Thus inf lammation and endothelial cell injury/dysfunction occur during the initiation of 
atherosclerosis and the release of cytokines, like interleukin- 6 (IL -6), interleukin- 1β (IL -1β) and 
tumor necrosis factor -α (TNFα) formed in endothelial cells, smooth muscle c ells or adipocytes, 
contribute to the inflammatory cascade. In fact, inflammatory cells, cytokines and mediators are involved in all stages of CAD (3, 5).  
Despi[INVESTIGATOR_793839], this important concept is still not applied in the management of patients with, or at risk for, the disease. Two important reasons to date are the lack of an established and 
easily obtained measure of the effect of inflammation on the processes which result in coronary 
atherosclerosis and that no clinical trial has established whether an anti -inflammatory strat egy, per 
se, alters these processes. hsCRP and interleukins are markers, though not necessarily mediators, 
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 3 of 19 
 of inflammation and although individuals with inflammatory autoimmune diseases receiving anti -
inflammatory therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] (like colchicine or methotrexate) experience fewer cardiovascular events 
(16, 17), the impact of anti -inflammatory therapi[INVESTIGATOR_793840], but not yet defined.  
Coronary endothelial dysfunction is a critical step in coronary atherosclerosis, an 
independent predictor of events, and as such, offers an important window into the impact of inflammation on coronary artery biology. Inflammation undoubtedly enhances the development and 
progression of coronary atherosclerosis via several mechanisms, but endothelial dysfunction is 
believed to be one common result of these mechanisms  (6, 7). Thus, abnormal coronary 
endothelial function (CEF) represents both a cause and consequence of atherosclerosis. Critically, 
endothelial dysfunction is a marker for sub- clinical disease, an independent predictor of adverse 
cardiovascular events, and a potential target for medical interventions (6, 12, 13 ).  
Endothelial- dependent function is assessed by [CONTACT_793856] -dependent vasomotor interventions (8). The 
invasive nature of coronary angiography with Doppler flow measures used in traditional measures 
of CEF limited clinical and research investigations, particularly those benefiting from repeated 
studies and/or studies in clinically st able participants. We developed a novel, reproducible, 
validated approach using 3T magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to assess endothelial- dependent 
coronary vasomotor function noninvasively which we will use in this trial  (18, 19). 
There is renewed interest in anti -inflammatory strategies because patients with elevated 
inflammatory biomarkers (e .g. hsCRP) are at increased risk of primary and secondary 
cardiovascular events (20-23) and because statins have anti -inflammatory properties (24) (25) (26) 
and lower cardiovascular mortality (21, 27-29). Nevertheless cardiovascular event rates remain 
high in statin treated CAD patients (25, 30) and statins alone do not fully suppress inflammation in 
many patients (25, 31). In addition, the prevalence of subclinical vascular inflammation, as 
determined by [CONTACT_793857], including IL-6( 32)(33) is also high 
in patients with type [ADDRESS_1094620] hypothesized that alterations in innate immunity underlie insulin resistance and diabetes (34)
. 
What is needed are well -tolerated anti -inflammatory agents that do not have profound 
effects on  lipi[INVESTIGATOR_793841], a driver of atherosclerosis. Thus it is not known which anti -
inflammatory  agents are effective in improving CEF (if any), which systemic inf lammatory 
biomarkers best  predict the local coronary response (if any), and whether the local CEF response 
is heterogeneous and related to the extent of underlying atherosclerosis in a given CAD patient. 
Low dose colchicine, methotrexate and their combinat ion represent three appealing choices 
to suppress inflammation in CAD patients. These agents have been used in clinical practice for decades to treat inflammatory diseases and, in those populations, have reduced inflammatory biomarkers and been associated with fewer cardiac events, albeit with limited data.  
 Colchicine  and cardiac disease:   Colchicine is an anti- inflammatory agent used for over [ADDRESS_1094621] -pericardiotomy syndrome. Low dose colchicine (LDC) 
(1-2mg/day) is used chronically, sometimes life -long, to treat Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF), 
where it is well tolerated ( 35-37). It is also used to treat Bechet’s disease (38). Colchicine is 
believed to act through inhibition of microtubule assembly in immune cells, including neutrophils and monocytes, which leads to reduced cytokine production, modulation of chemokine and 
prostanoid production and inhibition and down- regulation of lymphocyte and endothelial cell 
adhesion molecules surface expression( 39, 40). Colchicine is concentrated in leukocytes because 
of a prolonged half -life in those cells (~60 hours) as compared to plasma (~20 min) resulting in 
peak concentrations 10x higher than those in plasma( 41-43).  
LDC has been evaluated in a number of inflammatory heart diseases (44). Following cardiac 
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 4 of 19 
 surgery, the incidence of atrial fibrillation was reduced in patients randomized to LDC (12.0% 
versus 22.0%, P<0.021; relative risk reduction, 45%; number needed to treat, 11) with shorter in-
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_793842]( 43). The rates of 
withdrawal and side effects were similar in the placebo and LDC groups. In another trial, LDC 
(0.5mg twice dai ly) reduced recurrent atrial fibrillation by [CONTACT_2902] 60% at 3 months in patients 
undergoing ablation for paroxysmal atrial fibrillation as compared to placebo (odds ratio 0.38, 
p=0.01; number needed to treat 5.6) (45). Notably, the inflammatory biomarkers, hsCRP and IL -6, 
were reduced by 35% and 19%, respectively (both p<0.01) after only 3 days of LDC in these cardiac patients . In a recent randomized placebo- controlled acute pericarditis trial, LDC reduced 
symptoms, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4355] 3 month relapse rates, yet with adverse event and discontinuation rates similar to those  taking placebo (46).  
       Several observational studies in the last [ADDRESS_1094622] of LDC on 
cardiovascular disease. Gout patients taking colchicine had a lower incidence of MI (1.2% vs 2.6%, p<0.03) and lower CRP levels versus those who did not take colchicine, despi[INVESTIGATOR_793843]( 47). In stable CAD patients with hsCRP>2mg L
-1, LDC (0.5mg twice daily) reduced 
hsCRP levels in four weeks by [CONTACT_2902] 60% (48). Importantly, last year the Low Dose Colchicine for 
Secondary Prevention of Coronary Artery Disease (LoDoCo) was reported( 49). 532 stable CAD 
patients  on aggressive background cardiovascular therapy were randomized to placebo or 
colchicine (0.5mg/day) in addition to usual care and followed for a median of [ADDRESS_1094623], and stroke by 67% (hazard ratio: 0.33; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.18 to 0.59; p<0.001; number needed to treat: 11). The LDC benefit was observed early, continued to accrue 
over time, and was largely driven by a reduction in coronary events (49). 11% of colchicine patients 
withdrew during the first 30 days and another 11% over the ensuing 3 years, mostly due to the 
well-known gastrointestinal side effects. An accompanying editorial commented that the 67% 
reduction in coronary events is about twice that seen with statins (5
). Taken together, these studies 
demonstrate that LDC reduces inflammatory biomarkers rapi[INVESTIGATOR_793844] 
(possibly as early as 3 days), is safely tolerated in the vast majority of CAD patients for several years, and appears to reduce cardiac events (pending confirmation) by [CONTACT_731007]. 
This trial proposes to mechanistically probe the effect of anti -inflammatory  agents on coronary and 
systemic endothelial funct ion in CAD patients and determine which biomarker, if any, best predicts 
the vascular response.  
 
Methotrexate and cardiac disease:  Methotrexate is an anti- inflammatory agent that has been 
used in low doses (15- 20mg/week) for over 20 years to treat rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, and 
psoriatic arthritis. In addition, well -established guidelines are available regarding very low dose 
methotrexate (VLDM) monitoring and safety precautions (50). Methotrexate has minimal interaction 
with most concomitant medications, including statins, aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248], beta- blockers, and inhibitors of the 
renin- angiotensin system that are commonly used in CAD patients. The use of VLDM in clinical 
practice further reduces the potent ial for unanticipated off -target toxicity (51). VLDM reduces 
hsCRP and IL- [ADDRESS_1094624] on blood pressure or lipi[INVESTIGATOR_793845] 
(51). In several observational and prospective studies in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, VLDM 
use was associated with lower rates of myocardial infarction and death than in those not receiving 
VLDM, in spi[INVESTIGATOR_793846]  (52, 53). In such studies 
VLDM was associated with 20% -80% reductions in cardiovascular events (51). At low doses, with a 
favorable safety profile, methotrexate reduces hsCRP rapi[INVESTIGATOR_375] (<1 week) (54) with clinical effects on 
rheumatologic disease activity in as little as 4 weeks (55). Therefore, VLDM is an anti- inflammatory 
agent with considerable appeal for evaluating the rol e of inflammation, per se, in CAD. 
Unfortunately, there are almost no reports of the effect of VLDM on inflammatory biomarkers in 
CAD patients and none on CEF.  Of note, the NIH -sponsored trial, Cardiovascular Inflammation 
Reduction Trial (CIRT), is an ongoing randomized, double- blind, placebo- controlled trial of VLDM 
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 5 of 19 
 (15-20 mg per week) over the course of 4 years in the secondary prevention of myocardial 
infarction, stroke, and cardiovascular death among 7000 patients with known prior cardiovascular 
diseas e and an elevated CRP (>2 mg L-1) despi[INVESTIGATOR_793847]  (56). All study participants 
additionally receive folic acid (1 mg daily). It is important to again note that it is not known whether or not VLDM reduces low level inflammation in CAD patients and/or whether it impacts the 
mechanisms affecting coronary atherosclerosis, like CEF, in CAD patients. This trial will use the 
same VLDM dosing scheme as the CIRT trial . 
 Combination of colchicine and methotrexate to reduce inflammation  
The combination of low dose colchicine and methotrexate has not been studied in CAD 
patients. Because multiple innate and acquired inflammatory responses contribute to atherosclerosis, it  seems likely that one anti -inflammatory agent alone may not adequately 
suppress all of the inflammatory processes adversely affecting atherosclerotic coronary arteries. Because colchicine and methotrexate do not operate through the same mechanism and because 
both are associated with reduced cardiac events in observational studies, there is considerable 
appeal to evaluating their combined effects on biomarkers and CEF.  
Chronic LDC and VLDM treatments are sometimes used together in patients with primary 
biliary cirrhosis (PBC). In a study of PBC patients who failed to respond to conventional therapy, colchicine (0.6mg BID) and methotrexate (0.25mg/kg lean body weight/week) were added and 
patients were followed for improvement in liver function tests and liver biopsy as well as for safety 
over a median 3.[ADDRESS_1094625] results 
and reduced hepatic fibrosis at biopsy with LDC+VLDM with approximately 80% of the 93 patients 
responding to therapy (57). The authors reported four cases of methotrexate toxicity (4% of 
population) with 1 case of interstitial fibrosis (reversed with VLDM withdrawal) and 3 cases of oral 
apthous ulcers (that responded to treatment with leucovorin). Note that these rates were over 3.[ADDRESS_1094626] also been used in combination and found to 
chronically reduce inflammatory complications of PBC while being reasonably well tolerated( 57, 
58). Thus we propose below to also study the effects of the combination of LDC and VLDM on 
inflammatory biomarkers, systemic and CEF over [ADDRESS_1094627] biomarker and coronary biology data on a combination of anti -inflammatory agents 
as well as safety data in CAD patients who will undergo frequent clinical and biochemical surveillance for side effects.  
 
4. Study Procedures a. Study design, including the sequence and timing of study procedures   
(distinguish research procedures from those that are part of routine care).  
 
 The following are research procedures: 
Randomized, double- blind, 2x2 factorial design trial of (1.) LDC, (2.) VLDM (3.) LDC+VLDM 
and (4.) placebo to determine their effects on coronary endothelial function (CEF), peripheral vascular endothelial function (brachial FMD) and inflammatory biomarkers in 170 patients with 
stable CAD.  
More specifically, stable CAD patients on conventional therapy (statin, ACE/ARB, BB, ASA) will undergo baseline assessment of  inflammatory markers, lipi[INVESTIGATOR_805], MRI quantification of CEF and 
brachial ultrasound measurement of FMD. Those with hsCRP >2mg L
-1 or those with metabolic 
syndrome or diabetes will undergo screening MRI and those with abnormal CEF (change in coronary CSA  during IHE ≤0% of the resting value)  will be randomized, to 24 weeks of either:  
 
1) methotrexate (15mg wk -1) +placebo for colchicine (daily) + folate (1mg daily);  
2) colchicine (0.6mg daily) + placebo for methotrexate (weekly) + folate (1mg daily);  
3) methotrexate (15mg wk -1) + colchicine (0.6mg daily) + folate (1mg daily); or  
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 6 of 19 
 4) placebo for methotrexate (weekly) + placebo for colchicine (daily) + folate (1mg daily).  
 
Please note that we will now recruit CAD patients with a clinical diagnosis of diabet es or with 
metabolic syndrome.  Metabolic syndrome will be defined, as three or more of the following:  
1. Abdominal obesity (waist circumference:  Men>102 cm (>40 in), Women >88 cm (>35 in)),  
2. Serum t riglycerides ≥150 mg/dL (or taking medication to treat high triglycerides),  
3. HDL cholesterol: Men<40 mg/dL, Women<50 mg/dL (or taking medication to treat low HDL cholesterol),  
4. High Blood pressure:  ≥130/≥85 mm Hg (or taking medication to treat high blood pressure), and 
5. Fasting glucose:  ≥100 mg/dL (or taking medication to treat high fasting glucose).  
The rationale and these criteria are based on the NIH -sponsored CIRT trial where 
diabetes/metabolic syndrome are used as entry criteria for that trial studying whether the anti -
inflammatory methotrexate reduces cardiovascular events  (56). 
 
Note also that to assess for tolerance, during week 1, the methotrexate dose will be 5mg weekly; 
during weeks 2 -3, the methotrexate dose will be 10mg weekly; and thereafter the methotrexate 
dose will be [ADDRESS_1094628] blood samples obtained 
at week 2 and the dose would not be increased further for 4000>WBC >3000, 
75,000>platelets >50,000, 40>GFR >30, or LFT>2x upper limit of normal.  Note that for those taking 
placebo instead of methotrexate, their dosages will also be incremented on the same initial 
schedule.   
 
The Johns Hopkins Investigational Drug Service will conduct the randomization procedure, 
prepare medications (colchicine, methotrexate and respective placebos) in similar appearing 
formulations, and maintain group assignment documentation, keepi[INVESTIGATOR_730984].  
 
Initial evaluation : A careful history including whether angina is present and its severity by [CONTACT_793858], and a physical examination performed in a private examination room.  Blood samples will be acquired for 
complete blood cell count, routine chemistry panel including hepatic transaminases and serum 
creatinine, LDL and HDL cholesterol and triglycerides, as well as serum hs -CRP, and certain 
biomarkers (IL -6, IL -1β, TNFα, IFN -γ, ICAM -1, sEselectin, sPselectin, Thrombo, modulin,  vWF,  
PAI, endothel in- 1, and adiponectin).  Patients will also be tested for hepatitis B and C. 
 
Systemic Endothelial Function: Brachial Flow Mediated Dilatation (FMD) and Velocity: These 
studies will be conducted at the JHU ICTR on participants in the fasting state (>10 hours) asked to refrain from drinking alcohol or beverages containing caffeine in the prior 24 h using a stan dardized 
protocol (59, 60). Supi[INVESTIGATOR_793848] a high -resoluti on 
ultrasound probe proximal to the antecubital fossa. After baseline images and flow measurements, a pressure cuff on the upper arm will be inflated to 200– 250 mmHg for 5 min. Blood flow will be 
measured during the 15 s following cuff release and vessel diameter between 60 and 90 s after cuff deflation. Flow -mediated dilation (FMD) and velocity time interval (VTI) will be calculated (59, 
60). Images will be coded and analyzed in blinded fashion. 
 MRI methods for Coronary Vasoreactivity: an index of CEF: Participants will undergo a 
detailed baseline MRI study of CEF in the fasting state using MRI methodology at rest and during continuous IHE as previously described (18). The MRI will be used to measure cross -sectional 
area (CSA), coronary flow velocity (CFV), and coronary blood flow (CBF) changes in response to IHE stress (continuous isometric handgrip for ~5 min at 30% of each subject’s maximum, determined prior to entering the MRI), as previously reported (18, 61, 62).  Patients who qualify, 
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/[ADDRESS_1094629] during IHE to obtain multiple CEF measures, ideally of segments with different amounts of atherosclerosis, as 
measured by  [CONTACT_793859]  (CWT ). Coronary black blood imaging will also be performed 
in the same coronary slices for vessel wall measurements: CWT, vessel wall area and normalized 
wall index (NWI), an index of arterial remodeling calculated as: vessel wall area divided by [CONTACT_793860]. In the event of technical or other difficulties in obtaining adequate images, the MRI 
may be repeated with the participant’s permission.  
 
 Fasting:   Subjects will be asked to fast after midnight and delay eating breakfast and taking 
morning cardiovascular medicines until after the study procedure, which will be completed by [CONTACT_18828].  
In insulin -dependent diabetics, we will ask the subjects to delay their morning insulin dose until 
after the study procedure and will complete their studies  by 10am.  In addition, we will have a 
snack available and access to a finger -stick glucometer for any insulin- dependent diabetics who 
become symptomatic.  
 MRI analysis: Coronary MR images will be analyzed in blinded fashion without operator 
knowledge of time or treatment group for CEF (eg change in CBF, CBV, and CSA) as previously 
validated and described  (18). For determining the effects of anti -inflammatory interventions, as 
described below, in participants in whom adequate image quality permits the acquisition of CEF in 
multiple coronary segments, the results will be averaged for all segments meeting entry criteria (e.g. CSA change during IHE ≤ 0% of resting values) for a given participant so that the results for 
participants with multiple acquisitions are not more heavily weighted than those with fewer acquisitions. If the participant withdraws from the study before week 24, we will request participant 
permission to perform an MRI and FMD at termination of study.  
  
Blood Draw and Biomarker Analysis: Blood samples will be obtained from a peripheral vein 
using standard venipuncture techniques. Blood specimens will be collected in collection tubes 
without anticoagulant and centrifuged 30 min after collection (time allowed for clotting) using a 
centrifuge with an integrated refrigeration system (at 4°C/1000 g for 15 min) and kept at -80°C  (63). 
Analysis will be performed with ELISA or multiplexed ELISA for the biomarkers of inflammation, activation, and clotting listed above.   
Safety surveillance: Participants will undergo surveillance safety monitoring every [ADDRESS_1094630] dose of study drug 
(i.e. 28 weeks after randomization and initial dosing) for a safety evaluation.  
 If any of the following criteria are met (CBC<3000, platelets<50,000, HCt<27%, GFR <30ml/min or 
a >50% reduction in GFR compared to baseline values, and LFTs >3x upper limit of normal), the 
test would be repeated. If confirmed on repeat, there would be a temporary stop of study drugs. If the abnormality resolves, study drugs would be resumed at the same or lower dose. If the 
abnormality does not resolve or the temporary stop occurs on three consecutive measures, then the case will be reviewed for discontinuation from the study.  
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 8 of 19 
  Follow up End -point Evaluation: After [ADDRESS_1094631](19) and to replicate the identical MRI IHE protocol. Study drug compliance will be assessed 
by [CONTACT_731013][INVESTIGATOR_793849] 8, 16 and 24 week follow -up visits.  
 b. Study duration and number of study visits required of research participants.  
Each participant will be followed for a 7 -8 month period with the possibility of 8 – 9 study 
visits.  
 
c. Blinding, including justification for blinding or not blinding the trial, if applicable.  
Participants will be randomly assigned to one of four study groups (placebo, LDC, VLDM, 
LDC+VLDM) after providing informed consent and meeting all entry criteria. To keep the investigators blinded, the Johns Hopkins research pharmacy will conduct the randomization procedure, prepare medications (colchicine, methotrexate and respective placebos) in similar 
appearing formulations, and maintain group assignment documentation. The Johns Hopkins Investigational Drug Service has many decades of experience in this process including 
randomiz ation for study group assignment, blinding of medications, and maintenance of 
appropriate records for group assignment. Blinding is important to avoid potential bias of 
participants and/or investigators.  
 
d. Justification of why participants will not receive routine care or will have current therapy stopped.   
All participants will receive routine care and will not have current therapy stopped because 
of participating in the study.  
 
e. Justification for inclusion of a placebo or non -treatment group.  
The placebo g roup is included as a separate control group and will be used as a 
comparator group. Anti -inflammatory strategies like colchicine and methotrexate are not a standard 
part of contemporary therapy for patients with coronary artery disease thus there is no et hical 
problem with withholding them in a placebo group. Because it is not known whether these anti -
inflammatory agents improve coronary endothelial function and/or limit atherosclerosis in CAD 
patients it is critical to have a plac ebo group to determine the efficacy of the anti -inflammatory 
drugs and to evaluate their safety.  
 
f. Definition of treatment failure or participant removal criteria.  
  Participants who experience significant symptoms will be evaluated and those or others 
who develop laboratory abnormalities will have the study drug withheld. Based on the clinical 
status, severity of the problem, and reversal of symptoms/laboratory findings, a decision will be 
made as to whether the study drug can be restarted under close observation (weekly surveillance) 
or the participant withdrawn from the study. Participants who wish to end participation in the trial at any time may do so upon request without penalty.  
 
g. Description of what happens to participants receiving therapy when study ends or if a 
participant’ s participation in the study ends prematurely.  
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/[ADDRESS_1094632] for the full study period as per the schedule of study visits.  
  
 
5. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion Criteria:   
A. Participants of either gender who are ≥ 21 years of age (no upper age limit),  
B. History of prior MI, coronary revascularization, or coronary angiography or MDCT demonstrating 
at least one coronary artery with >50% luminal  stenosis and no plans for revascularization,  
C. Clinically stable for 3 months,  
D. Vascular  inflammation based on elevated hsCRP (>2mg L-1), or a clinical diagnosis of diabetes 
mellitus or metabolic syndrome.   Metabolic syndrome is defined by [CONTACT_793861]:  1. Abdominal obesity (waist circumference :  Men>102 cm (>40 in), Women >88 cm (>35 in) ),  
2. Serum t riglycerides ≥150 mg/dL (or taking medication to treat high triglycerides) ,  
3. HDL cholesterol: Men<40 mg/dL, Women<50 mg/dL (or taking medication to treat low HDL 
cholesterol) ,  
4. High blood pressure:  ≥130/≥85 mm Hg (or taking medication to treat high blood pressure) , or  
5. Fasting glucose:  ≥100 mg/dL (or taking medication to treat high fasting glucose) .  
 
E. Abnormal CEF (change in CSA during IHE of <0% of the resting value: by [CONTACT_793862] (0%) from baseline during I HE), 
F. Permission of patient’s clinical attending physician,  
G. Patients being treated with a statin.  
 
Exclusion criteria:   
A. Patients unable to understand the risks, benefits, and alternatives of participation and give meaningful consent,  
B. Patients with contraindications to MRI such as implanted metallic objects (pre- existing cardiac 
pacemakers, cerebral clips) or indwelling metallic projectiles ,  
C. Acute coronary syndrome within the prior three months,  
D. Pregnant women,  
E. Contraindications to methotrexate or colchicine as outlined by [CONTACT_53160]; including active bacterial infection, tuberculosis, or herpes zoster infection, leukopenia (< 4000/mm
3), thrombocytopenia (<135 ,000/mm3), elevation in hepatic transaminases 
(>2x upper limit of normal), hepatitis B or C, moderate renal disease (estimated creatine clearance 
<45ml/min), or planned surgery,  
F. Chronic inflammatory condition such as lupus or rheumatoid arthritis, ulcerative colitis or Crohn's disease,  
G. Interstitial  lung disease or pulmonary fibrosis,  
H. HIV positive,  
I. Requirement for, or intolerance to, methotrexate or colchicine ,  
J. Intolerance to methotrexate, colchicine  or folate,  
K. History of non -basal cell malignancy or treatment for lymphoproliferative disease in the past 5 
years,  
L. Requirement for use of drugs that alter folate metabolism,  
M. History of alcohol abuse or unwillingness to limit consumption to < 4 drinks per week,  
N. Women of childbearing potential or intention to breastfeed.  
O. Men who plan to father children during the study period; men who have sexual intercourse with 
women of childbear ing potential must agree to use a condom,   
P. Chronic use of oral or IV steroid therapy or other immunosuppressive or biologic response 
modifiers,  
Q. History of chronic pericardial effusion, pleural effusion or ascites,  
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 10 of 19 
 R. [LOCATION_001] Heart Association Class IV heart failure.  
 
6. Drugs/ Substances/ Devices 
a. The rationale for choosing the drug and dose or for choosing the device to be used.  
Some of the background for choosing these drugs is articulated above on pages 3- 5. 
Briefly, the chosen low doses of colchicine and methotrexate are based on those used in clinical 
practice and recent studies showing that those doses reduce inflammation and improve endothelial function in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and other conditions. Colchicine is an anti -
inflammatory agent used for over [ADDRESS_1094633] -
pericardiotomy syndrome. Low dose colchicine (LDC) (1- 2mg/day) is used chronically, sometimes 
life-long, to treat Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF), where it is well tolerated ( 35-37). It is also 
used to treat Bechet’s disease( 38).  We have chosen the colchicine dose of 0.6mg QD not only 
because it is the dose used in practice, but also because it is similar to the dose (0.5mg QD) that 
reduced inflammatory biomarkers and the incidence of atrial fibrillation in patients with heart  
disease (43) ( 45) and reduced recurrent cardiac events in CAD patients in the Low Dose 
Colchicine for Secondary Prevention of Coronary Artery Disease (LoDoCo) trial (49). In these 
studies the drug was reasonably well tolerated. We have been told by [CONTACT_793863] 0.5mg colchicine dose is not available in the US, only the 0.6mg dose that we will 
use here is available. Methotrexate is an anti -inflammatory agent that has been used in low doses 
(15-20mg /day) for over 20 years to treat rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis, and psoriatic arthritis. In 
addition, well- established guidelines are available regarding very low dose methotrexate (VLDM) 
monitoring and safety precautions (50). Methotrexate has minimal interaction with most concomitant 
medications, including statins, aspi[INVESTIGATOR_248], beta- blockers, and inhibitors of the renin- angiotensin system 
that are commonly used in CAD patients. In several observational  and prospective studies in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis, VLDM use was associated with lower rates of myocardial 
infarction and death than in those not receiving VLDM, in spi[INVESTIGATOR_793850] (52, 53). The proposed dose of methotrexate (15mg per week), and 
the ramped dosing to enhance tolerance (5mg per week for first week, 10mg per week for weeks 2-3, and then 15mg per week for weeks 4 -24) are consistent with clinical use and precisely in line 
with those  of the ongoing NIH- sponsored Cardiovascular Inflammation Reduction Trial (CIRT) in 
7000 individuals  (56).  
b. Justification and safety information if FDA approved drugs will be administered for non-
FDA approved indications or if doses or routes of administration or participant 
populations are changed.  
These drugs (low dose colchicine and methotrexate) are FDA approved medications that 
are, however, not approved for this indication. We received an exemption from the FDA that an 
IND is not needed.  Safety information on the use of these drugs is detailed on pages 3- 5 above.  
 
c. Justification and safety information if non -FDA approved drugs without an IND will be 
administered.  NA 
 
7. Study Statistics  
 Primary Endpoint : Coronary segment endothelial function at  8 weeks; specifically, change in 
coronary cross sectional area (CSA) from rest to that during isometric handgrip exercise (IHE) (as % rest and as mm
2). 
 
Secondary Endpoints:  
1. Change in coronary artery CSA from rest to IHE stress (as mm2 and as % rest) at 24 weeks  
2. Change in coronary blood velocity (CBV) from rest to IHE stress (as cm/s and as % rest) at 8 
and 24 weeks  
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 11 of 19 
 3. Change in coronary blood flow (CBF) from rest to IHE stress (as cm/s and as % rest) at 8 and 
24 weeks  
4. Difference between baseline and 8 and 24 weeks in IHE -induced changes in coronary CSA  
5. Difference between baseline and 8 and 24 weeks in IHE -induced changes in coronary CBF 
6. Difference between baseline and 8 and 24 weeks in IHE -induced changes in coronary CBV.  
7. Serum hs -CRP at 8 and 24 weeks and change in hs -CRP between baseline and 8 and 24 
weeks.  
8. Serum IL -6 at 8 and 24 weeks and change in IL- 6 between baseline and 8 and 24 weeks. 
9. Ser um TNFα at 8 and 24 and change in TNFα between baseline and 8 and 24 weeks.  
10. Brachial flow mediated dilation (FMD) at 8 and 24 weeks and change in brachial FMD 
between baseline and 8 and 24 weeks.  
11. The relationship between change in inflammatory mark ers (hsCRP, IL -6, TNFα, and others) 
between baseline and 8 and 24 weeks and change in CEF (IHE -induced change in CSA, CBV, 
CBF) between baseline and 8 and 24 weeks. 
12. Safety endpoints (withdrawal due to side- effects, complete metabolic panel, including l iver 
function tests, and complete blood count.)  
 
Additional variables for evaluation: local coronary plaque burden (CWT, NWI, and percent 
luminal stenosis) and LGE (measured as CNR) at site of CEF measurement.  
 
a. Statistical plan including sample size justification and interim data analysis.  
Power/sample size justification:   To answer the question of whether any of the anti -inflammatory 
strategies (i.e. LDC, VLDM, and/or their combination) improves CEF in stable CAD patients with increased inflammation and abnormal CEF as compared to that of patients receiving placebo, this 
2x2 factorial trial was designed with the primary endpoint of change in [coronary cross -sectional 
area (CSA) from rest to that during IHE at [ADDRESS_1094634] 8 weeks. CSA increases during IHE by 
18%±13% (mean±SD) in healthy participants and declines by -6%±11% (mean±SD) in patients 
with coronary atherosclerosis (18). We believe that a mean IHE -induced increase in CSA to +6% 
with IHE in the LDC or VLDM groups would be physiologically significant. As the normal mean CSA 
response with IHE in healthy individuals is +18% and that in those with coronary atherosclerosis is 
-6%, then a mean change from -6% in placebo to +6% in the LDC or VLDM groups represents an 
improvement of  one-half of the difference between CAD and normal (i.e. 12 is one- half of the 
difference between normal and CAD or -6 to +18= 24 units). Such a difference is in line with 
methotrexate- induced changes in FMD in RA patients (64, 65). We will also measure CBF and 
CFV which have microvascular components and an endothelial dependent component (66). 
 Therefore, we assume that at 8 weeks:  
(1) Mean CSA will decrease by 6% from rest to IHE in CAD patients on placebo ( Δ = -6%) 
(2) Mean CSA will increase by +6% from rest t o IHE in CAD patients on LDC ( Δ = +6%)  
(3) Mean CSA will increase by +6%from rest to IHE in CAD patients on VLDM ( Δ = +6%)  
(4) Mean CSA will increase by +12% from rest to IHE in CAD patients on LDC+VLDM ( Δ = +12%)  
(5) The pooled standard deviation for all four groups will be 11%.  
 
With a sample of 88 (22 in each cell), the power will be 0.83 (alpha=0.05, two- sided test) to 
detect a difference between the response in the placebo group and the response in each of the three groups receiving the anti -inflammation intervention (LDC, VLDM, LDC+VLDM) (17). We 
believe this is a conservative estimate as it does not assume that a medication will improve CEF to normal values but instead will increase it by [CONTACT_2902] 50% of the difference between healthy and CAD, a physiologically relevant difference in line with changes observed in other settings (64, 65, 
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 12 of 19 
 67). We will assume a 10% -15% dropout rate over 8 weeks due to withdrawal and/or side effects 
from LDC, VLDM, LDC+VLDM (68), and unwillingness to repeat MRI. Thus we plan to randomize 
[ADDRESS_1094635] that ~20% of CAD patients undergoing the initial screening MRI will not 
meet the CEF inclusion criterion of an IHE -induced change in CSA of ≤0% of baseline. Thus we 
anticipate enrolling 170 stable CAD patients on statins with hsCRP>2mg L-1, in order for [ADDRESS_1094636] 22 in each of the 4 groups complete 
the eight week follow -up MRI exami nations. We plan to follow patients and to re -evaluate CEF and 
systemic endothelial function at 24 weeks (and should have 20 in each group then based on a 10% dropout in the LoDoCo trial), giving us a second, longer -term time point, as suggested in initial  
review. This 24 week time will provide longer -term safety data for LDC+VLDM and be in line with 
some prior studies of endothelial function and inflammatory markers (69-71). 
 
Statistical Analysis:  
Demographic and baseline characteristics (e.g. age, race, gender, height, weight, etc) will 
be summarized using descriptive statistics for all participants. Unless otherwise specified, descriptive statistics on continuous  variables will consist of the number of participants, mean, 
standard deviation, median, minimum and maximum.  
The primary analysis will use an intent- to-treat approach. To answer the question of 
whether CEF is different at [ADDRESS_1094637] to IHE stress at 8 weeks, will be made (placebo vs LDC , placebo vs VLDM, placebo vs LDC+VLDM) using ANOVA. 
Comparisons will also be made among those groups for the change between baseline and 8 
weeks in IHE CSA using a generalized estimating equation (GEE) analysis to examine whether 
CEF changes between baseline and 8 weeks are associated with treatment type (group 
assignment). Three dummy variables will be created as the independent variables of interest: LDC  
vs. otherwise; VLDM vs. otherwise and LDC+VLDM vs. otherwise. The analysis will be repeated for 24 week data with correction for multiple comparisons. To answer the questions of whether changes between baseline and 8 and 24 weeks in other indices of CEF (such as CBV or CBF) or 
in inflammatory biomarkers (hsCRP, IL- 6, TNFα, etc.) differ among the groups (placebo vs LDC , 
placebo vs VLDM, placebo vs LDC+VLDM) a GEE approach will be used. The p -value, least 
square (LS) treatment means, difference between the LS treatment means, and 95% confidence 
intervals for the treatment differences will be determined. A similar approach will be used to 
compare brachial ultrasound FMD among groups. Multiple regression analysis will be used to 
examine whether there is a relationship between inflammatory biomarkers and CEF at 8 and 24 
weeks, as well as between changes in inflammatory biomarkers and changes in CEF between 
baseline and 8 and 24 weeks. To determine whether there is a relationship between coronary 
atherosclerosis (CWT) and CEF at baseline and at 8 and 24 weeks we will use multiple regression 
analysis combining all 4 groups and also for the placebo and the LDC, VLDM, LDC+VLDM groups 
separately. To determine whether there is a difference among groups in the proportion of participants who experience abnormal laboratory values or withdrawal from the study a Chi -square 
analysis will be performed. As an exploratory analysis, to determine whether there are differences in CEF or inflammatory biomarkers among the [ADDRESS_1094638] the study drug withheld. Based on the clinical status, severity of the problem, and reversal of symptoms/laboratory findings, a decision will be made as to whether the study drug can be restarted under close observation (weekly surveillance) 
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/[ADDRESS_1094639] without penalty.  
 
8. Risks 
 
a. Medical risks, listing all procedures, their major and minor risks and expected frequency.  
  The MR I procedures do not expose patients to ionizing radiation and are not considered a 
significant risk (72).  No long term side effects have been noted at these magnetic field strengths. 
The potential risks of the MRI study are few and primarily relate to injury from metallic objects attracted to the MR scanner or the isometric handgrip exercise (see below).   A blood pressure cuff is inflated and maintained for a few minutes during brachial endothelial function testing and this is 
associated with transient discomfort but no known major risks or long term problems. The 
likelihood of MRI -related risks is minimized by [CONTACT_793864], and limiting access to the scanner area. A minority of individuals develop a claustrophobic sensation inside the magnet, which ceases when the subject exits the scanner.   
Isometric handgrip exercise performed in the MRI scanner results in modest increases 
blood pressure and heart rate and can result in paradoxical vasoconstriction in atherosclerotic coronary vessels, and is relatively safe (73). The cited side effect in patients with coronary disease 
of handgrip exercise is non- sustained ventricular ectopy, which occurred in one percent of patients 
and which spontaneously resolved after termination of the exercise (74). The IRB -approved 
consent form states that myocardial infarction and cardiac arrhythmias may occur, and although the risks can be serious, the likelihood of developi[INVESTIGATOR_793851] (74). Voice contact [CONTACT_793865], during both coronary endothelial 
function studies (isometric handgrip exercise) and brachial endothelial function studies, as well as 
direct observation via a video camera in the scan room.  In addition, a cardiolog ist or cardiology 
fellow  will be present  during the isometric handgrip exercise.  Isometric handgrip exercise is 
terminated prematurely if participants develop symptoms that would typi[INVESTIGATOR_730988]. We have performed isometric hand- grip 
exercise testing in conjunction with cardiac spectroscopy studies since 1988 (75) and have not had 
any significant complications.   
Low dose colchicine is fairly well tolerated but has a relatively narrow therapeutic window.  
There were no serious adverse events reported in the LoDoCo trial (using a similar colchicine dose 0.5 mg QD to the dose proposed here 0.6mg QD) over three years although 11% of individuals 
within 30 days and another 11% over the next [ADDRESS_1094640] common 
reasons for withdrawal were unrelated intercurrent illnesses (3.9%), patient choice (1.8%), 
intestinal upset (2.5%), myalgia (0.9%), myositis (<0.5%), rash (<0.5%), alopecia (<0.5%), itch 
(<0.5%) and peripheral neuritis (<0.5%)( 49). In a study of cardiac patients with atrial fib rillation, no 
serious adverse events were noted but diarrhea was reported in 8.6% (vs 1.3% on placebo) and nausea in 4.9% (vs 3.8% in placebo) and one case of elevated LFTs which reversed after stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_793852](67).  In a study of very low dose methotrexate over 2 years in elderly patients with rheumatoid 
arthritis there were no serious adverse events (76).  At high doses methotrexate has been 
associated with bone marrow suppression and stomatitis but these are less problematic at lower 
doses and are attenuated with the concomitant administration of folic acid (which is proposed here 
at 1mg QD). Use of chronic low dose methotrexate in rheumatoid arthritis has been reported to be 
well tolerated in many reports but also associated with gastrointestinal toxicity, stomatitis, alopecia, 
marrow suppression, and liver function abnormalities (77). Toxicity was closely associated with 
impaired renal function (an exclusion criterion in our study) and not with age( 78). Interstitial  
pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis occur in as many as 1% of the patients studied and 
necessitates termination of the drug but national guidelines by [CONTACT_793866] x -rays. The combination of low dose colchicine and 
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 14 of 19 
 very low dose methotrexate has been used in practice to treat primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC).  In a study of 93 PBC patients followed for 3.4 years, there were four cases of significant methotrexate 
side effects (4% of population) with 1 case of interstitial fibrosis (reversed with VLDM withdrawal) 
and 3 cases of oral aph thous ulcers (that responded to treatment with leucovorin) (57). Because 
patient s with PBC and autoimmune inflammatory diseases are probably more likely to develop side 
effects related to these conditions and their treatments, than are stable CAD patients, we do not anticipate that the side- effect profile would be more unfavorable in our stable CAD study patient 
population.  
 
b. Steps taken to minimize the risks.  
MRI will be performed with exposure to static and time -dependent magnetic fields within 
FDA guidelines (72). Special precautions will be taken to exclude patients with implanted metallic 
objects, including pacemakers, cerebral clips, or prior occupational exposure to small metallic projectiles (eg, lathe operators).  All participants will be carefully screened by [CONTACT_793867].  A cardiologist  or cardiology fellow  will be present  for isometric 
handgrip exercise.  Heart rate will be monitored continuously during MR studies via EKG, and 
blood pressure monitored with a remotely activated sphygmomanometer during isometric handgrip 
stress.  Participants will be in direct verbal contact [CONTACT_731018].  Participants who experience a worsening condition or who wish to end the exam at any time may 
do so upon request without penalty. The scanner area is equipped with standard medical 
emergency equipment (including a crash cart) for a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] -based clinical MR center  with 
appropriately trained personnel in attendance.  
 To protect against and minimize the potential risks of very low dose methotrexate and low 
dose colchicine, patients with pre- existing liver or renal disease, blood dyscrasia, hepatitis B or C, 
and other conditions that might increase risk will be excluded from participation (please see Exclusion criteria above).  In addition, participants will undergo a careful history and physical (in a 
private examination room) and screening laboratory examination at baseline to identify the presence of any  condition which might increase their risk from the medications but not have been 
known to the patients or documented in their medical records. In addition, patients will be 
evaluated closely at 4 week intervals while on study drug for side -effects and surveillance 
metabolic and hematologic screening studies. The participants will also return 4 weeks after completing the study (28 weeks after randomization and initial dosing) for a follow -up safety 
surveillance. That evaluation will not affect the study drug dosing of that participant but if safety 
concerns are identified, it could be used to minimize risk in future participants. Additionally, 
methotrexate is a folate inhibitor and so to reduce the risk of side effects folate 1mg will be 
administered daily to all participants. This is commonly done in practice and does not reduce the 
clinical efficacy of methotrexate. As mentioned earlier, the dose of methotrexate will also be escalated during the first few weeks (5mg weekly for week 1, 10mg weekly for weeks 2- 3, 15mg 
weekly thereafter) to improve tolerance and observe for side effects during initial dosing. This 
dosing schedule is identical that used in the current CIRT trial  (56). 
  Women of childbearing potential will be excluded and men who have sexual intercourse 
with women of childbearing potential must agree to use a condom, as the study drug may cause 
damage to sperm.  
 
c. Plan for reporting unanticipated problems or study deviations.  
All unanticipated problems or study deviations will be reported to the Data Safety and 
Monitoring Committee and according to The Johns Hopkins Medicine Institutional Review Boards published guidelines.  
 
d. Legal risks such as the risks that would be associated with breach of confidentiality.  
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/[ADDRESS_1094641] with identification 
secured and accessible only to the PI, senior investigators, and the research nurse ([CONTACT_793869]). Patient clinical information such as copi[INVESTIGATOR_793853] a locked filing cabinet with access under control of [CONTACT_174983] and [CONTACT_793870]. Patient information summarized and/or converted into electronic form (tables, images, etc) shall be 
identified by [CONTACT_731019]. It is a Johns Hopkins Institutional policy that all identifiers in images and data acquired under IRB -approved research protocols must be removed if they leave 
the institution, for example in presentations.   
 
e. Financial risks to the participants.  
All study related costs  will be paid from research sources, as stated in the consent form. 
 
9. Benefits  
a. Description of the probable benefits for the participant and for society.  
Results from this study may benefit patients with coronary heart disease in the future by 
[CONTACT_793868] -inflammatory medications and inflammatory biomarkers in 
coronary atherosclerosis of CAD patients. This would support the use of anti -inflammatory 
medications like these to complement existing cardiovascular prevention strategies. However, we do not currently know whether participants will have an immediate benefit. It could be that these 
agents (methotrexate and/or colchicine) reduce inflammation and improve coronary endothelial 
function and this would, at least in the short term, benefit the patients receiving those drugs. If the 
patients’ physicians felt the participants benefited, they could make the decision, apart from this 
study, to continue the medications since they are clinically available. In addition, low dose methotrex ate and low dose colchicine are associated with reduced heart disease risk in patients 
with arthritis. Thus in the CAD patients that we are studying here, the benefit in terms of reduced risk of heart disease may be even greater.  
Contraindications to MRI studies as listed above will be strictly observed and should not 
constitute added risks for patients enrolled in this study. The research primarily involves non-invasive imaging and thus involves minimal risk, therefore the low risk is reasonable in relati on to 
the potential knowledge gained that may guide future therapeutic studies.  
 
10. Payment and Remuneration  
a. Detail compensation for participants including possible total compensation, proposed bonus, and any proposed reductions or penalties for not completin g the protocol.  
Participants will receive parking, a meal voucher and compensation of $75 for each 
completed MRI for a possible total compensation of $225. 
 
11. Costs a. Detail costs of study procedure(s) or drug (s) or substance(s) to participants and identify 
who will pay for them.  
There is no cost to the participants r elated to the study procedures or drugs.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 16 of 19 
  
References  
 
1. Cardiovascular diseases: key facts. Http://wwwWhoInt/mediacentre/factsheets/fs317/en/indexHtml . 
2. Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, Benjamin EJ, Berry JD, Borden WB, et al. Executive Summary: Heart 
Disease and Stroke Statistics —2013 Update A Report From the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2013;127(1):143- 52. 
3. Ross R. Atherosclerosis-- an inflammatory disease. The New England journal of medicine. 1999;340(2):115-
26. 
4. Libby P, Ridker PM, Maseri A. Inflammation and atherosclerosis. Circulation. 2002;105(9):1135- 43. 
5. Vogel RA, Fo rrester JS. Cooling off hot hearts: a specific therapy for vulnerable plaque? Journal of the 
American College of Cardiology. 2013;61(4):411- 2. 
6. Deanfield JE, Halcox JP, Rabelink TJ. Endothelial function and dysfunction: testing and clinical relevance. 
Circulation. 2007;115(10):1285- 95. 
7. Widlansky ME, Gokce N, Keaney JF, Jr., Vita JA. The clinical implications of endothelial dysfunction. Journal 
of the American College of Cardiology. 2003;42(7):1149- 60. 
8. Ludmer PL, Selwyn AP, Shook TL, Wayne RR, Mudge GH, Alexander RW, et al. Paradoxical 
vasoconstriction induced by [CONTACT_731022]. The New England journal of medicine. 
1986;315(17):1046- 51. 
9. Anderson TJ, Meredith IT, Yeung AC, Frei B, Selwyn AP, Ganz P. The effect of cholesterol- lowering and 
antioxidant therapy on endothelium -dependent coronary vasomotion. The New England journal of medicine. 
1995;332(8):488- 93. 
10. Halcox JP, Schenke WH, Zalos G, Mincemoyer R, Prasad A, Waclawiw MA, et al. Prognostic value of 
coronary  vascular endothelial dysfunction. Circulation. 2002;106(6):653- 8. 
11. Hambrecht R, Wolf A, Gielen S, Linke A, Hofer J, Erbs S, et al. Effect of exercise on coronary endothelial 
function in patients with coronary artery disease. The New England journal of medicine. 2000;342(7):454- 60. 
12. Nitenberg A, Chemla D, Antony I. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_793854]. Atherosclerosis. 2004;173(1):115- 23. 
13. Schachinger V, Britten MB, Zeiher AM. Prognostic impact of coronary vasodilator dysfunction on adverse 
long-term outcome of coronary heart disease. Circulation. 2000;101(16):1899- 906. 
14. Suwaidi JA, Hamasaki S, Higano ST, Nishimura RA, Holmes DR, Jr., Lerman A. Long -term follow -up of 
patients with mild coronary artery disease and endothelial dysfunction. Circulation. 2000;101(9):948 -54. 
15. Treasure CB, Klein JL, Weintraub WS, Talley JD,  Stillabower ME, Kosinski AS, et al. Beneficial effects of 
cholesterol -lowering therapy on the coronary endothelium in patients with coronary artery disease. The New England 
journal of medicine. 1995;332(8):481- 7. 
16. Choi HK, Hernan MA, Seeger JD, Robins JM, Wolfe F. Methotrexate and mortality in patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis: a prospective study. Lancet. 2002;359(9313):1173- 7. 
17. Crittenden DB, Lehmann RA, Schneck L, Keenan RT, Shah B, Greenberg JD, et al. Colchicine use is 
associated with decreased  prevalence of myocardial infarction in patients with gout. J Rheumatol. 2012;39(7):1458- 64. 
18. Hays AG, Hirsch GA, Kelle S, Gerstenblith G, Weiss RG, Stuber M. Noninvasive visualization of coronary 
artery endothelial function in healthy subjects and in p atients with coronary artery disease. Journal of the American 
College of Cardiology. 2010;56(20):1657- 65. 
19. Hays AG, Stuber M, Hirsch GA, Yu J, Schar M, Weiss RG, et al. Non -invasive detection of coronary 
endothelial response to sequential handgrip exerc ise in coronary artery disease patients and healthy adults. PloS one. 
2013;8(3):e58047.  
20. Ridker PM, Cannon CP, Morrow D, Rifai N, Rose LM, McCabe CH, et al. C -reactive protein levels and 
outcomes after statin therapy. The New England journal of medicine. 2005;352(1):20- 8. 
21. Ridker PM, Danielson E, Fonseca FA, Genest J, Gotto AM, Jr., Kastelein JJ, et al. Rosuvastatin to prevent 
vascular events in men and women with elevated C -reactive protein. The New England journal of medicine. 
2008;359(21):2195- 207. 
22. Ginsberg HN, Elam MB, Lovato LC, Crouse JR, 3rd, Leiter LA, Linz P, et al. Effects of combination lipid 
therapy in type 2 diabetes mellitus. The New England journal of medicine. 2010;362(17):1563- 74. 
23. Ford I, Murray H, Packard CJ, Shepherd J, Macfarlane PW, Cobbe SM. Long -term follow -up of the West of 
Scotland Coronary Prevention Study. The New England journal of medicine. 2007;357(15):1477- 86. 
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/2007  
Page 17 of 19 
 24. Topol EJ. Intensive statin therapy-- a sea change in cardiovascular prevention. The New England journal  of 
medicine. 2004;350(15):1562- 4. 
25. Cannon CP, Braunwald E, McCabe CH, Rader DJ, Rouleau JL, Belder R, et al. Intensive versus moderate lipid 
lowering with statins after acute coronary syndromes. The New England journal of medicine. 2004;350(15):1495 -504. 
26. Baigent C, Keech A, Kearney PM, Blackwell L, Buck G, Pollicino C, et al. Efficacy and safety of cholesterol -
lowering treatment: prospective meta -analysis of data from 90,056 participants in 14 randomised trials of statins. 
Lancet. 2005;366(9493):126 7-78. 
27. Ridker PM, Morrow DA, Rose LM, Rifai N, Cannon CP, Braunwald E. Relative efficacy of atorvastatin 80 mg 
and pravastatin 40 mg in achieving the dual goals of low -density lipoprotein cholesterol <70 mg/dl and C -reactive 
protein <2 mg/l: an analysis  of the PROVE -IT TIMI- 22 trial. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 
2005;45(10):1644- 8. 
28. Cerquaglia C, Diaco M, Nucera G, La Regina M, Montalto M, Manna R. Pharmacological and clinical basis of 
treatment of Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) with colchicine or analogues: an update. Current drug targets 
Inflammation and allergy. 2005;4(1):117- 24. 
29. Kiraz S, Ertenli I, Arici M, Calguneri M, Haznedaroglu I, Celik I, et al. Effects of colchicine on inflammatory 
cytokines and selectins in familia l Mediterranean fever. Clinical and experimental rheumatology. 1998;16(6):721 -4. 
30. Zemer D, Pras M, Sohar E, Modan M, Cabili S, Gafni J. Colchicine in the prevention and treatment of the 
amyloidosis of familial Mediterranean fever. The New England journa l of medicine. 1986;314(16):1001- 5. 
31. Yazici H. Behcet's syndrome: an update. Current rheumatology reports. 2003;5(3):195- 9. 
32. Pradhan AD, Manson JE, Rifai N, Buring JE, Ridker PM. C -reactive protein, interleukin 6, and risk of 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_36746] 2 diabetes mellitus. JAMA. 2001;286(3):327- 34. 
33. Ridker PM, Buring JE, Cook NR, Rifai N. C -reactive protein, the metabolic syndrome, and risk of incident 
cardiovascular events: an 8 -year follow -up of 14 719 initially healthy American women. Circulation. 2003;107(3):391-
7. 
34. Donath MY, Shoelson SE. Type 2 diabetes as an inflammatory disease. Nat Rev Immunol. 2011;11(2):98- 107. 
35. Cerquaglia C, Diaco M, Nucera G, Regina M, Montalto M, Manna R. Pharmacological and clinical basis of 
treatment of familial Mediterra nean fever (FMF) with colchicine or analogues: an update. Current Drug Targets -
Inflammation and Allergy. 2005;4(1):117- 24. 
36. Kiraz S, Ertenli I, Arici M, Calgüneri M, Haznedaroglu I, Celik I, et al. Effects of colchicine on inflammatory 
cytokines and sel ectins in familial Mediterranean fever. Clinical and Experimental Rheumatology. 1998;16(6):721 -4. 
37. Zemer D, Pras M, Sohar E, Modan M, Cabili S, Gafni J. Colchicine in the Prevention and Treatment of the 
Amyloidosis of Familial Mediterranean Fever. New E ngland Journal of Medicine. 1986;314(16):1001- 5. 
38. Yazici H. Behçet’s syndrome: An update. Current rheumatology reports. 2003;5(3):195- 9. 
39. Molad Y. Update on colchicine and its mechanism of action. Current rheumatology reports. 2002;4(3):252- 6. 
40. Perico N, Ostermann D, Bontempeill M, Morigi M, Amuchastegui CS, Zoja C, et al. Colchicine interferes with 
L-selectin and leukocyte function -associated antigen -1 expression on human T lymphocytes and inhibits T cell 
activation. Journal of the American Societ y of Nephrology. 1996;7(4):594- 601. 
41. Adler Y, Finkelstein Y, Guindo J, Rodriguez de la Serna A, Shoenfeld Y, Bayes -Genis A, et al. Colchicine 
treatment for recurrent pericarditis: a decade of experience. Circulation. 1998;97(21):2183 -5. 
42. Imazio M, Brucato A, Trinchero R, Spodick D, Adler Y. Colchicine for pericarditis: hype or hope? European 
Heart Journal. 2009;30(5):532 -9. 
43. Imazio M, Brucato A, Ferrazzi P, Rovere ME, Gandino A, Cemin R, et al. Colchicine Reduces Postoperative 
Atrial Fibrillation R esults of the Colchicine for the Prevention of the Postpericardiotomy Syndrome (COPPS) Atrial 
Fibrillation Substudy. Circulation. 2011;124(21):2290- 5. 
44. Alabed S, Cabello JB, Irving GJ, Qintar M, Burls A. Colchicine for pericarditis. The Cochrane databas e of 
systematic reviews. 2014;8:CD010652.  
45. Deftereos S, Giannopoulos G, Kossyvakis C, Efremidis M, Panagopoulou V, Kaoukis A, et al. Colchicine for 
Prevention of Early Atrial Fibrillation Recurrence After Pulmonary Vein IsolationA Randomized Controlled Study. 
Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 2012;60(18):1790- 6. 
46. Imazio M, Brucato A, Cemin R, Ferrua S, Maggiolini S, Beqaraj F, et al. A randomized trial of colchicine for 
acute pericarditis. New England Journal of Medicine. 2013;369(16):1522- 8. 
47. Crittenden DB, Lehmann RA, Schneck L, Keenan RT, Shah B, Greenberg JD, et al. Colchicine Use Is 
Associated with Decreased Prevalence of Myocardial Infarction in Patients with Gout. The Journal of Rheumatology. 2012;39(7):1458- 64. 
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/[ADDRESS_1094642] of colchicine (0.5 mg twice daily) on high -sensitivity C -reactive protein 
independent of aspi[INVESTIGATOR_730994]. The American Journal of 
Cardiology. 2007;99(6):805.  
49. Nidorf SM, Eikelboom  JW, Budgeon CA, Thompson PL. Low -dose colchicine for secondary prevention of 
cardiovascular disease. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 2013;61(4):404- 10. 
50. Saag KG, Teng GG, Patkar NM, Anuntiyo J, Finney C, Curtis JR, et al. American College of Rheumatology 
2008 recommendations for the use of nonbiologic and biologic disease -modifying antirheumatic drugs in rheumatoid 
arthritis. Arthritis Care & Research. 2008;59(6):762 -84. 
51. Ridker PM. Testing the inflammatory hypothesis of atherothrombos is: scientific rationale for the 
cardiovascular inflammation reduction trial (CIRT). Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis. 2009;7:332 -9. 
52. Ridker PM. Moving Beyond JUPI[INVESTIGATOR_247470]: Will Inhibiting Inflammation Reduce Vascular Event Rates? Current 
Atherosclerosi s Reports. 2013;15(1):295.  
53. Choi HK, Hernán MA, Seeger JD, Robins JM, Wolfe F. Methotrexate and mortality in patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis: a prospective study. The Lancet. 2002;359(9313):1173- 7. 
54. Segal R, Caspi D, Tishler M, Wigler I, Yaron M. Short term effects of low dose methotrexate on the acute 
phase reaction in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol. 1989;16(7):914- 7. 
55. Cutolo M, Sulli A, Pi[INVESTIGATOR_793855] C, Seriolo B, Straub RH. Anti- inflammatory mechanisms of methotrexate in 
rheumatoi d arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2001;60(8):729- 35. 
56. Everett BM, Pradhan AD, Solomon DH, Paynter N, Macfadyen J, Zaharris E, et al. Rationale and design of the 
Cardiovascular Inflammation Reduction Trial: a test of the inflammatory hypothesis of atherothromb osis. American 
heart journal. 2013;166(2):199- [ADDRESS_1094643]. Methotrexate in Patients with Primary Biliary Cirrhosis Who 
Respond Incompletely to Treatment With Ursodeoxycholic Acid. Dig Dis Sci. 2010;55(11):3207- 17. 
58. Bonis PAL, Kaplan M. Methotrexate improves biochemical tests in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis who 
respond incompletely to ursodiol. Gastroenterology. 1999;117(2):395- 9. 
59. Takase B, Uehata A, Akima T, Nagai T, Nishioka T, Hamabe A, et al. En dothelium -dependent flow -mediated 
vasodilation in coronary and brachial arteries in suspected coronary artery disease. Am J Cardiol. 1998;82(12):1535- 9. 
60. Bergholm R, Leirisalo -Repo M, Vehkavaara S, Makimattila S, Taskinen MR, Yki -Jarvinen H. Impaired 
responsiveness to NO in newly diagnosed patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 
2002;22(10):1637- 41. 
61. Hays AG, Kelle S, Hirsch GA, Soleimanifard S, Yu J, Agarwal HK, et al. Regional coronary endothelial 
function is closely related to local early coronary atherosclerosis in patients with mild coronary artery disease: pi[INVESTIGATOR_11480]. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2012;5(3):341- 8. 
62. Ibrahim T DJ, Schachoff S, Schwaiger M, Botnar RM. Darstellung der koronargefäßwand mittels 
kontrastunterst ützter magnet -resonanz -tomographie bei patienten mit koronarer herzerkrankung. . Clinical Research in 
Cardiology. 2006;116:e78- e80. 
63. Nidorf SM, Eikelboom JW, Budgeon CA, Thompson PL. Low -dose colchicine for secondary prevention of 
cardiovascular disease. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 2013;61(4):404- 10. 
64. Mukerjee R WC. A modern theory of factorial design. Springer. 2006.  
65. Hamilton SJ, Chew GT, Watts GF. Coenzyme Q10 improves endothelial dysfunction in statin -treated type 2 
diabetic patients. Diabetes care. 2009;32(5):810- 2. 
66. Phinikaridou A, Andia ME, Protti A, Indermuehle A, Shah A, Smith A, et al. Noninvasive magnetic resonance 
imaging evaluation of endothelial permeability in murine atherosclerosis using an albumin -binding contr ast agent. 
Circulation. 2012;126(6):707- 19. 
67. Deftereos S, Giannopoulos G, Kossyvakis C, Efremidis M, Panagopoulou V, Kaoukis A, et al. Colchicine for 
prevention of early atrial fibrillation recurrence after pulmonary vein isolation: a randomized control led study. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2012;60(18):1790- 6. 
68. Ridker PM. Moving beyond JUPI[INVESTIGATOR_247470]: will inhibiting inflammation reduce vascular event rates? Current 
atherosclerosis reports. 2013;15(1):295.  
69. Mancini GB, Henry GC, Macaya C, O'Neill BJ, Pucillo AL, Carere RG, et al. Angiotensin -converting enzyme 
inhibition with quinapril improves endothelial vasomotor dysfunction in patients with coronary artery disease. The TREND (Trial on Reversing ENdothelial Dysfunction) Study. Circulation. 1996;94(3):[ADDRESS_1094644], Balaban RS, Arai AE. Carotid artery 
atherosclerosis: in vivo morphologic characterization with gadolinium -enhanced double -oblique MR imaging initial 
results. Radiology. 2002;223(2):566- 73. 
Date:  August 28, 2017 
Principal Inv estigator: Robert G. Weiss, MD  
Application Number: IRB00047206 
 
JHMIRB eF ormA   01 
Version 3 Dated:   06/[ADDRESS_1094645] -enhanced high resolution MRI 
for atherosclerotic carotid artery tissue characterization. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2002;15(1):62- 7. 
72. Young F, FDA. Magnetic Resonance Diagnostic Device; Panel Recommendation and Report on Petitions for 
MR Reclassification. . Federal Register. 1988;53:7575 -9. . 
73. Brown BG, Lee AB, Bolson EL, Dodge HT. Reflex constriction of significant coronary stenosis as a 
mechanism contributing to ischemic left ventricular  dysfunction during isometric exercise. Circulation. 1984;70(1):[ADDRESS_1094646]. Circulation. 1971;44(6):994- 1002.  
75. Weiss RG, Bot tomley PA, Hardy CJ, Gerstenblith G. Regional myocardial metabolism of high -energy 
phosphates during isometric exercise in patients with coronary artery disease. The New England journal of medicine. 
1990;323(23):1593- 600. 
76. Hirshberg B, Muszkat M, Schles inger O, Rubinow A. Safety of low dose methotrexate in elderly patients with 
rheumatoid arthritis. Postgraduate Medical Journal. 2000;76(902):787- 9. 
77. Cronstein BN. Low -dose methotrexate: a mainstay in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Pharmacologic al 
reviews. 2005;57(2):163- 72. 
78. Felson DT, Chernoff M, Anderson JJ. The effect of age and renal function on the efficacy and toxicity of 
methotrexate in rheumatoid arthritis. J Rheumatol. 1995;22:218- 23. 
 