Non-Invasive Diagnosis of Pulmonary 
Vascular Disease Using Inhaled 129Xe 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging  
 
 [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
  
Protocol Version: 07Jul2020  
Pro00079617  
 
Version 07Jul2020    Page 1 of 8 Research Summary  
 
 
1.  Protocol Title: Non-Invasive Diagnosis of Pulmonary Vascular Disease Using Inhaled 129Xe Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging 
 
2.  Purpose of the S tudy:  To develop a novel, non- invasive means of comprehensively diagnosing and 
monitoring response to therapy in PVD using MR imaging (MRI). Our approach uses hyperpolarized 
129Xenon (129Xe)-MRI, a novel technology that images lung ventilation, microstructure, and gas exchange.  
 
3.  Background & S ignificance :  
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) carries a significant economic burden, with average annual 
health care costs of ~ $100,000/yr. The diagnosis of PAH can be challenging, as it requires fulfillment 
of specific clinical and hemodynamic criteria.  However, these are limited because they do not allow the 
diagnosis of PAH in the setting of concomitant left heart disease or lung disease. For example, patients with mild to moderate left heart disease or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, which are common 
in older patients, technically cannot be diagnosed with PAH because severe left heart and lung disease 
can cause PH. Similarly, hemodynamic criteria are limited by [CONTACT_47475] (mPAP), pulmonary capi[INVESTIGATOR_47469] (PCWP), and pulmonary vascular re-
sistance (PVR) obtained at right heart catheterization (RHC) (PH is defined as mPAP ≥ 25 mmHg; PAH 
is defined as mPAP ≥ 25- mmHg and a PCWP ≤  15 mmHg, with some criteria recommending an addi-
tional cutoff of PVR ≥ 3 Woods units. Moreover, it is currently unclear what constitutes abnormal he-
modynamics in the setting of concomitant heart disease, which can increase the filling pressures of the 
heart (the PCWP), or in lung disease, which can increase the PVR. These hemodynamic criteria also 
frequently exclude patients who may have a borderline elevation in mPAP or abnormalities primarily 
associated with exercise that are not captured with a resting heart catheterization. As the majority of 
patients who are now evaluated for PAH are older with common cardiac and pulmonary comorbidities, 
the clinical and hemodynamic criteria are frequently inadequate for diagnosing patients who actually 
have PVD.  
 
This work seeks to apply and test  a novel non- invasive methodology, hyperpolarized (HP) 
129Xenon 
(Xe) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), for the diagnosis of PVD. Hyperpolarized 129Xe MRI has been 
under active development and used in clinical research at Duke for over [ADDRESS_50121] scan, and 
RHC. In both patients, the 129Xe study demonstrated spectroscopic and imaging indices consistent with a 
barrier to diffusion of 129Xe to red blood cells (RBCs). These patients subsequently had lung tissue ob-
tained (one at time of lung transplant, the other with a surgi cal lung biopsy). Strikingly, both biopsies 
demonstrated PVD. We believe that the abnormalities seen on 129Xe MRI scans in these patients repre-
sent areas of PVD that are associated with a barrier to gas diffusion. Moreover, these changes appear to 
be different to those seen in other lung diseases associated with barriers to gas diffusion, such as idio-
pathic fibrosis. Among the objectives of this proposal is to clarify and strengthen these distinguishing fea-
tures.  
 
If successful, 129Xe MRI could overcome the current limitations of PVD diagnosis  while conferring  
a number of potential benefits. First, imaging the abnormalities in the lungs allows the diagnosis of 
PVD in the setting of concomitant heart or lung disease.  With HP 129Xe MRI, abnormalities in gas 
exchange secondary to PVD can be directly visualized. Second, non- invasive diagnosis of PVD could 
remove the need for an invasive RHC. While RHC is a relatively safe procedure, there are a number 
Pro00079617  
 
Version 07Jul2020    Page [ADDRESS_50122], 
the abnormalities on HP 129Xe MRI could be used to non- invasively monitor response to therapy. If we 
are successful in demonstrating the applicability of HP 129Xe MRI, this technology holds the promise of 
greatly improving the diagnosis and management of PVD.  
 
4.  Design & P rocedures:   
  This study seeks to deploy several forms of 129Xe MRI contrast as well as emerging conventional 
proton MRI techniq ues for imaging lung structure and perfusion. Specifically, the 129Xe MRI scans will 
provide 3D images of ventilation and gas exchange, and spectroscopic indices will be evaluated to test 
gas exchange dynamics with high temporal resolution. The conventional 1H MRI scans will include a free-
breathing ultra -short ech o time (UTE) scan that provides images similar to that of a CT scan. The overall 
aims of the study are as follows:  
 
Aim 1. Perform 129Xe MRI scans in cohorts of patients with PVD, isolated left sided heart failure 
and isolated lung disease:  
1.[ADDRESS_50123] comprehensive MRI in 5 patients with Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension 
(CTEPH)  pre and post PTE surgery.  
 
Aim 2. Develop diagnostic criteria for optimizing the sensitivity and specificity of 129Xe MRI for the 
diagnosis of PVD:  
2.1 Develop quantification/scoring methods based on PAH, left heart disease, and lung disease MRI  
2.[ADDRESS_50124] xenon dose.  
 
Aim 3. Perform a larger, single -blind study testing the diagnostic accuracy of 129Xe MRI for 
diagnosis of PVD:  
3.[ADDRESS_50125]’s disease state and will determine 
the presence and severity of PVD  
3.[ADDRESS_50126] absence/presence of 
pre/post -capi[INVESTIGATOR_47470]  
a. For this PFTs are not necessary, so they are ancillary  
b. However, they are a standard way to characterize patients for publications, etc, so we would like 
to get them if we can. Getting them from the medical record is perfectly adequate for this pur-
pose.  
                                               i.      If PFTs are not available from the medical record, they are not so critical as to prevent 
us from enrolling the subject. In publications we will simply acknowledge the realities of 
COVID for this missing data.  
 
This will be a single -blinded,  open -label study enrolling volunteers and patients with pure PAH (10 sub-
jects), pure left heart disea se (10 subjects) , pure lung disease (10 subjects)  and CTEPH (5 subjects)  [Aim 
1] followed by a larger cohort of 92 subjects who are undergoing right heart cathe terization for evaluation 
of PAH or other cardiac or pulmonary disease.  [Aim 2] . We plan to consent [ADDRESS_50127] begins any study intervention. Subjects will undergo 
an approximately hour long comprehensive MRI protocol  
Patients with PAH,  CTEPH,  left heart disease and lung disease  will be recruited using minimally restrictive 
inclusion/exclusion criteria. The Duke Center for Pulmonary Vascular Disease sees  approximately [ADDRESS_50128] PAH and receiving 
approved therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014], patients who are being evaluated for PVD  or other cardiac or pulmonary disease will 
be included in the study.  
 
Each study session will begin with a collection of relevant patient history and symptoms, measurement 
of hemoglobin levels, and urine pregnancy testing (if applicable) and finally pulmonary function testing. 
Pulmonary function testing will include one or more of spi[INVESTIGATOR_038], lung volumes  and DLCO. Study team 
will us e the PFTs  that are available from the medical record.  The subject will b e escorted to the MRI suite 
where they will be fitted with a 129Xe transmit -receive vest coil. They will then be positioned supi[INVESTIGATOR_47471]. They will be coached about how to inhale HP 129Xe from the dose delivery bags. Then the 
subject and bed w ill be moved into the scanner and they will undergo basic 1H localizer and anatomical 
scans. Once localization is complete, subjects will undergo several MRI scans after inhalation of HP 129Xe. 
Each dose will be limited to a volume less than 25% of subject  lung capacity (TLC) as is the case for all 
protocols currently carried out under IND 109,490. After each 129Xe dose, the table will be moved out of 
the magnet bore and the subject queried for any symptoms. The next 129Xe dose and scan will be admin-
istered  when the subject and study personnel are ready. Subjects will undergo a 129Xe MR spectroscopy 
calibration scan, 129Xe ventilation MRI, and 129Xe gas exchange MRI. Any given 129Xe MRI scan may be 
repeated, if necessary. There is no limit to the number of 129Xe scans allowed during the session, although 
current 129Xe production capabilities generally limit this to [ADDRESS_50129] clinical care.  Altogether, 
the procedures will take approximately 3- 4 hours.  
 
5.  Selection of Subjects:  
We propose to recruit and consent 10 subjects with known PAH, 10 subjects with isolated left heart 
disease, 10 subjects with isolated lung disease (either chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or interstitial 
lung disease)  and [ADDRESS_50130] begins any study.  
 
Definition of PAH:  Mean PA pressure ≥ 25 mmHg with PCWP ≤ 15 mmHg and PVR ≥ 3 WU in the 
absence of significant left heart disease, lung disease, chronic pulmonary embolism, hemolytic anemia, 
sarcoidosis and cancer.  
 
Definition of isolated left heart disease:  Any of the following:  
1) A mean PA pressure >= 25 mmHg with PCWP > 15 mmHg and PVR < 3 Woods units at right heart 
catheterization.  
2) LVEF =< 40% with mild or less RV enlargement and dysfunction on echocardiogram . 
Evidence of diastolic dysfunction (as assessed by [CONTACT_47476]) with mild or less RV enlargement and 
dysfunction on echocardiogram . 
Definition of isolated lung disease:  A mean PA pressure < 25 mmHg at right heart Cath AND/OR an 
estimated right ventricular systolic pressure of < 40 on echocardiography  AND/OR no diagnosis of heart 
Pro00079617  
 
Version 07Jul2020    Page 4 of 8 failure or pulmonary hypertension IN THE SETTING OF  obstruction (FEV1/FVC < 0.7)) on pulmonary 
function testing AND/OR radiographic evidence of lung disease . 
 
Definition of CTEPH:  Subjects with a history of a mean PA pressure >= 25 with evidence of chronic 
thromboembolic disease on imaging studies. Images may be obtained before and/or after pulmonary 
thrombendarterectomy (PTE) surgery for removal of blood clots form  the lungs.  
 
 Inclusion criteria  
1. Outpatients of either gender, age > 18  
2. Willing and able to give informed consent and adhere to visit/protocol schedules. (Consent must 
be given before any study procedures are performed)  
3. Women of childbearing potential must have a negative urine pregnancy test.  This will be confirmed 
before participation in this investigational protocol . 
4. Either have a diagnosis of PAH, isolated left heart disease or lung disease (chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease or interstitial lung disease) or CTEPH  using established clinical criteria.  
5. Patients undergoing right heart catheterization for evaluation of PAH or other cardiac or pulmonary 
disease for MRI scans  
 Exclusion criteria   
1. Medical or psychological conditions which, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_871], might create undue 
risk to the subject or interfere with the subject’s ability to comply with the protocol requirements  
2. Conditions that will prohibit MRI scanning (metal in eye, claustrophobia, inability to lie supi[INVESTIGATOR_050])   
 
      6.  Subject Recruitment  & Compensation : 
Patients will be recruited based on predetermined inclusion/exclusion criteria. They will be recruited in 
the pulmonary and cardiology clinics and inpatient services at Duke by [CONTACT_47477]. The patient’s pro-
vider  will initiate conversation with the subject about the research trial and assess their interest in partici-
pation.  The screening of subjects will be conducted by [CONTACT_47478].   
Before entry into the pr otocol, the nature and risks of the study will be reviewed with each subject. 
Each subject will be given the opportunity to read the consent form and ask questions. After all questions 
by [CONTACT_47479], and before any protocol specified pr ocedures are initiated, each sub-
ject will sign and date the consent form. A copy of the signed consent will be provided to the subject.  
After informed consent is obtained, potential subjects will be screened to determine if they satisfy all 
inclusion and exclusion criteria. If subjects agree to participate, they will be consented into the study by 
[CONTACT_47480] a private room. All potential subjects will be given a description of the procedures, 
have the opportunity to read the consent form, and to ask any questions. All subjects are free to decide 
whether or not to participate. It will be made clear to all subjects that their decision to participate or decline, 
will in no way affect their medical care. For all subjects, informed consent will be documented by [CONTACT_47481] a standard research consent form approved by [CONTACT_47482].  
[CONTACT_47489] is founder and chief technology officer of Polarean, Inc. a start -up company that seeks 
to commercialize hyperpolarized 
129Xe gas MRI technolog y. He is a shareholder in the company and pro-
vides it with technical consulting. In addition, Polarean has licensed from Duke, a patent on which [CONTACT_47489] is an inventor, and is currently evaluating several others. For these reasons he has had a conflic t 
management plan, administered by [CONTACT_47483]. The study proposed here uses 
Polarean technology, but is not sponsored by [CONTACT_47484]. However, if the findings are positive,  Polarean may have an interest in commercializing these 
aspects of the technology as well. Therefore, consistent with his management plan, [CONTACT_47489] will not serve as principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_47472], nor will he obtain consent from subjects. He wil l oversee the 
technical aspects of hyperpolarized gas production and MR image acquisition. However, data analysis will 
be overseen by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Rajagopal,  who also serves as overall principal investigator [INVESTIGATOR_47473].  
 
7.  Consent Process:  see Section [ADDRESS_50131]’s Capacity to Give Legally Effective Consent : Subjects without capacity to give consent 
will not be recruited into this study.  
 
9.  Study Interventions:   
Hyperpolarized xenon will be administered in multiple doses in volumes up to 25% of subject TLC 
followed by a breath hold of up to [ADDRESS_50132] is ready to proceed. Hyperpolarized 129Xe MRI w ill be used to acquire one or all of the following 
data:  
 
1. 129Xe calibration dose to test coil tuning and loading in each subject to permit optimal setting of imaging 
parameters.  
2. 129Xe distribution after inhalation and breath -hold as an indicator of regional pulmonary ventilation.  
3. 129Xe signal dissolved in the pulmonary interstitial spaces and capi[INVESTIGATOR_47474]-
monary gas exchange.  
4. 129Xe spectroscopy to follow the dynamics of gaseous and dissolved- phase 129Xe. 
5. Any of these 129Xe exams may be repeated if deemed necessary by [CONTACT_3476].  
6. Conventional 1H MRI will be used to provide anatomical reference scans, as well as pulmonary perfu-
sion. These will include some or all of the following:  
7. 3-Plane Localizer  
8. A varie ty of breath -hold 3D 1H MRI scans to delineate the thoracic cavity  
9. Free- breathing UTE 1H MRI to image tissue density and edema  
 
 
Study Visit Schedule  
 
 
[ADDRESS_50133] completed competency training from the  Duke Office of Clinical Research 
(DOCR).   
[ADDRESS_50134] will need 
to complete a new MRI screen form.  Protocol Activities  Screening  
(V0) Study 
Visit 
(V1) Study Visit 
(6V2) only 
for CTEPH 
subjects)  Follow Up/Release  
(after last dose)  Follow -up     
contact w/in 
24 hr  
Informed Consent  X     
History re: Disease  X     
Medical History  X     
Pregnancy Test1 (X) (X)     (X)   
MRI Screening2 Form  X    (X) X   
Imaging Session3.      X X   
Pulmonary Function 
Testing4 (X)    (X)    
Adverse Events5      X          X     X 
Vital Signs Assess-
ment with optional 
non-invasive, optical  
Hemoglobin  
measurement  X     X X         X  
Pro00079617  
 
Version 07Jul2020    Page [ADDRESS_50135] agents are available at the scanner.  
.During the 1 -hr MRI session, a qualified medical professional (MD, D O, PA, LNP, RN, RT or MT) will be 
on hand to monitor subjects during MRI and note any symptoms related to xenon MRI or contrast admin-
istration.  
 [ADDRESS_50136] -surgically.  
  
10. Risk/B enefit Assessment : 
Potential Risks  
The risks of participating in this study are considered greater than minimal risk . MRI is a non -invasive 
imaging modality that involves no ionizing radiation. All subjects will have already completed a standard 
questionnaire to screen for contraindications to MRI imaging since the parent trial also employs MR im-
aging.  
 Risks of Xenon Inhalation 
Inhalation of hyperpolarized 
129Xe may carry some minor risks. Xenon is a general anesthetic when 
breathed continuously at concentrations greater than 70% for extended periods of time. In the proposed 
study, xenon will be delivered in a single breath, with alveolar concentrations below 25%. At these con-
centrations, subjects may experience transient effects including dizziness, slight tingling or numbness of 
the extremities, nausea, smelling of flowers, or a feeling of well -being and euphoria. These effects will 
wane within 1- [ADDRESS_50137]’s lungs is sufficient to maintain blood O [ADDRESS_50138] now been published demonstrating the safety and tolerability of hy-
perpolarized 129Xe MRI.  
Hyperpolarized 129Xe is treated as a drug by [CONTACT_47485] (IND# 109,490), which has been active for [ADDRESS_50139] Risk:  Study visits and i nformed consent will be performed in private rooms, to pre-
vent potential loss of confidentiality. All MRI will be conducted in the presence of a qualified healthcare 
professional trained and certified in the American Heart Association’s Advanced Cardiac Li fe Support 
(ACLS) training. This individual will be present in the MRI suite during 129Xe administration and will mon-
itor a ll aspects of the subjects well -being and record any transient CNS effects and adverse events should 
they occur. The subject will be monitored continuously by [CONTACT_47486] -compatible pulse oximeter, recording 
both heart rate and oxygen saturation.  Subjects may discontinue the study at any time. The MRI suite is 
Pro00079617  
 
Version 07Jul2020    Page [ADDRESS_50140] completed their institu-
tion’s mandatory training in human subjects research and protecting PHI.  
 
 
Potential Benefits to Subjects 
We anticipate no direct benefit to subjects as a result of participating in the study, since our primary 
emphasis is to collect a range of MR images and develop interpretation of these results over time. How-ever, it is conceivable that either the anatomical 
1H scans or 129Xe MR scans may reveal an incidental 
pathology that requires medical attention. Such a finding could benefit the subject because it will be found 
earlier than would likely be the case during the subject’s normal medical care. Any such findings will be 
immediately communicated to the subject and his/her physician and all associated records of the study 
will be made available to them for any further work -ups. The potential benefit of this research is in the 
noninvasive diagnosis of PAH, which would obviate the need for invasive RHC in these patients.  
 11. Costs to the S ubject : 
There are no additional costs to the subject for the MRI examination. Subjects will be compensated 
$100.00 for travel/parking and time for each study visit  via a ClinCar d. This does not include the screening 
visit. 
 
12. Data Analysis & Statistical Considerations:  
Sample size  
Our sample size calculation is based on testing whether the proposed diagnostic test based on Xe 
MRI has accuracy comparable to imaging diagnostic procedures in clinical practice, such as mammog-
raphy. To this end, we propose to test the hypotheses H0: AUC = 0.72 vs. H1: AUC > 0.85, where AUC 
is a summary measure of diagnostic accuracy obtained as the the area under the receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) curve which displays the tradeoff between sensitivity and specificity for our proposed 
Xe MRI based diagnostic test. Here AUC = 0.[ADDRESS_50141] while AUC = 0.[ADDRESS_50142] the above hypotheses at a significance level of 5% with 80% 
power.  
 
Correlation  
Our preliminary Xe MRI studies on patients with PAH, in combination with our previous experience 
with normals as well as those with other diseases, have helped us formulate quantitative metrics based 
on Xe MRI studies with high diagnostic potential for PAH. These metrics include the proportion of voxels 
with low RBC/Gas transfer and the amplitude of the wave seen in Xe MRI based spectroscopy.  In Aim 
2, our goal is to identify a combination of these metrics which optimally correlates with the current diag-
nostic standard for PAH which is based on measurements obtained from right heart catheterization, in a 
training set of [ADDRESS_50143] predictive discriminant rules. The 
actual diagnostic accuracy will be evaluated on a separate validation set of 92 patients in Aim 3.   
 
Pro00079617  
 
Version 07Jul2020    Page 8 of 8  
13. Data & Safety M onitoring:   
All of the protocols in this proposal trial will be approved by [CONTACT_47487] (every 12 months). Furthermore, all protocols are submitted as part of our investigational new 
drug application (IND# 109,490). Any adverse event will be reported to the appropriate IRB, the NIH 
Office of Biotechnology Activities (OBA), and if deemed related to xenon, will also be reported t o FDA. 
Per Institutional and FDA policy, any serious adverse events (SAEs) will be reported within 24 hours. An 
annual progress report (or more frequently, if requested) will be submitted to the IRB, OBA and FDA.  
The clinical investigator(s) will terminate the study immediately if the occurrence of serious adverse 
events that suggests unacceptable risk to the health of the subjects. All observed or volunteered adverse 
events, regardless of suspected causal relationship to the study procedure(s), will be rec orded on the 
adverse events page(s) of the CRFs or worksheets. Events involving adverse experiences occurring 
during the study procedure(s) will be recorded.  
Subjects will be monitored before, during, and after each dose of xenon to assess for adverse events 
and changes in vital signs. The parameters monitored include the following: subject assessment of an-
esthetic/analgesic effects, heart rate, and SpO 2. The subjective sense of analgesia is assessed by [CONTACT_47488]. The subject will be asked to 
describe how they feel as well as about specific symptoms including: dizziness, light -headedness, numb-
ness, euphoria, sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_008], and tingling in extremities. SPO 2 is measured at baseline and after each 
Xenon dose. A decrease of SpO 2 by [CONTACT_7809] 5% is considered significant. If the subject is to receive 
another dose, the next dose will not be administered until the SpO 2 is within 5 % of its baseline value. If 
the subject has received their last dose, they will be observed until the SpO 2 is within 5% of its baseline 
value or until the end of the observation period, whichever is longer. The subject will be monitored for the 
duration of the Xenon dose and post -proce dural period, as well as the MRI with contrast by a qualified 
medical professional.  
 
14. Privacy, Data Storage & Confidentiality – All consent and case report forms will be stored in a 
locked filing cabinet in the office of the study coordinator or principal investigator. Any other digital data 
(images, image analysis) will be associated only with the subject identification number and the date and 
time of the MRI. Image data will be retrieved and analyzed only by [CONTACT_3462]. Data will be captured 
in a RedCap database. After all manuscripts have been published the key to the code will be destroyed.  
 