Study ID: [REMOVED]  
Official Title: Standardization of Indocyanine Green Lymphography Protocol With Exercise for  
Lymphedema Assessment  
Document date: December 24 , 2019  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exercise -Enhanced ICG Lymphography  
TRIAL STATISTICIAN Evelyn Qin  
Protocol Version (SAP  associated with)  
TRIAL PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR : [INVESTIGATOR_380413](s) Evelyn Qin, Wei Chen  
 
Abbreviations and definitions  
Indocyanine Green ICG  
SD Standard deviation  
SPSS Statistical package for the social sciences  
 
Background:  
Indocyanine green (ICG) lymphography is a non -radioactive, fluorophore -based imaging  
modality that provides functional imaging of the lymphatic system. With specificity comparab le 
to and sensitivity superior to technetium99 -based lymphoscintigraphy, the conventional  
diagnostic gold standard, ICG lymphography has been increasingly relied upon to  
diagnose extremity lymphedema. The diagnosis of lymphedema is confirmed when the  
pathologic dermal backflow patterns are seen. In addition to providing a definitive diagnosis, 
the 
types/distribution of the dermal backflow patterns presently allows the determination of 
disease  
severity. Since the dermal backflow patterns emerge in a delayed fashion  
and, after their initial emergence, they continually evolve until reaching a steady -state, or  
plateau, a delayed scan at the time of plateau is necessary to achieve an accurate 
representation  
of the disease. Exercise has been shown to accelerate lymphatic drainage.  
Study Objectives:  
To determine if controlled exercise could shorten the time it takes for ICG lymphography to  
reach a plateau, and to create a standardized protocol to increase the efficiency and reliability 
of 
ICG lymphography to diagnose extremity lymphedema.  
Study Methods:  
Design: non-randomized controlled trial  
Recruitment:  
All lymphedema patients presented to our lymphedema reconstruction center over a 6 -month.  
period and those who met inclusion criteria were recruited into the study.  
Inclusion criteria: [ADDRESS_476396] lymphedema or previously diagnosed with lymphedema.  
Exclusion criteria: allergy to iodine, women who were pregnant or nursing, having  
heart/lung/joint conditions that would prevent exercising.  
 
Exercise protocol:  
 
Patients presented for a one time visit. Following standard ICG injections, patients were  
exercised on a recumbent cross -trainer at five -minute intervals at specific, controlled intensity.  
Delayed scanning was performed following each exercise interval, and sequential changes of  
lymphographic patterns were recorded. The cycle of exercise/scan continued until achieving a  
plateau, or when no further lymphographic changes were obse rved for two consecutive cycles.  
Following the point of the plateau, further delayed scanning was performed every hour to  
identify the time point when the lymphographic patterns started to recede. Twenty -three limbs 
in 
9 patients (10 arms, 13 legs) with unilateral and bilateral lymphedema were studied. Campi[INVESTIGATOR_380414].  
 
Statistical analysis  (SAP version: 2.0)  
 
All patients who participated in the study were included in the analysis and the analysis  
compared the individuals’ affected limbs to the unaffected limbs. Video footage of indocyanine  
green lymphography was independently reviewed by [CONTACT_380415].  
SPSS was used to perform the data analysis using a significance level of 0.05 and a confidence  
interval of 95%. Descriptive analysis generated frequencies of the study variables,  
and comparisons of categorical variables were performed using the chi -square test.  