 
 
 
 
 
 
NCT [ADDRESS_544920]. Informed consent 
was obtained from all individuals before completion of the baseline assessment. Participants 
are recruited through various digital media outlets (e.g., Facebook, Grindr). Individuals between 
the age of [ADDRESS_544921] thirty -days  (defined 
in screening as 5 or more drinks on a single occasion) , one epi[INVESTIGATOR_430854] -
days, and no involvement in an exclusive, monogamous relationship a re recruited to participate 
in the study. Participants are screened by [CONTACT_430855] -
person screening. Following baseline assessments, participants engage in a brief in -person 
intervention session regarding their alcohol  use and sexual risk behaviors and are then enrolled 
in the mobile messaging component. Mobile messages are sent over the following four weeks 
to support intervention content. Five to six weeks after baseline, participants return to the lab 
to complete a f ollow up assessment and engage in a discussion regarding the acceptability of 
the mobile messages and satisfaction with the intervention approach. Measures of heavy 
drinking frequency, condom less anal intercourse (CAI) were collected as secondary outcomes at 
baseline and at follow -up. C ognitive - motivational processes related to condom use and 
reduction of drinking are also collected  at each time point for descriptive purposes. . 
 
NCT [ADDRESS_544922] inking days and condomless anal intercourse (CAI) are assessed at 
baseline and follow -up. For analyses, frequency of heavy drinking days was assessed with item 
#[ADDRESS_544923] (AUDIT) .  This item has 5 res ponse options 
ranging from “never” to “daily, almost daily”  The baseline measure of past ninety -day CAI 
frequency will be divided by [ADDRESS_544924] thirty -day CAI frequency to parallel the 
time -period measured at follow up  (past 30 -day CAI) . Secondary analyses consist of a series of 
paired sample t -tests which are used to measure differences in secondary outcomes between 
baseline and follow up. Given the small sample, ef fect size estimates are also provide d to 
provide  initial information about the potential impact of the intervention on outcomes.  A series 
of self -regulation processes related to heavy drinking reduction and condom use are also 
assessed at these two time -points with the Goal Systems Assessment Battery.  These ratings are 
used for descriptive purposes to identify potentially important mediators in subsequent work.  