 
 
 
 
 
EFFECTS OF A MINDFULNESS INTERVENTION DELIVERED WITHIN DIABETES EDUCATION ON 
DIABETES -RELATED OUTCOMES IN MILITARY VETERANS  
 
 
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
6/2/2015  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
 1. Healthy Eating  
2. Staying Active  
3. Monitoring  
4. Taking 
Medications  
5. Problem Solving  
6. Reducing Risks  
7. Healthy Copi[INVESTIGATOR_621103]  
 
1.0 Background   
Diabetes  affects  one million  Veterans  who  receive  care  through  the Veteran  Affairs  Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_621104]  
(VHA),  and is associated  with  higher  mortality  and morbidity.  [ADDRESS_826850]  documented  the association  between  diabetes  self-management  and improved  diabetes  outcomes .2, 4-7 
Diabetes  self-management   is largely  implemented  by [CONTACT_621159] , 8  and typi[INVESTIGATOR_621105],  demanding  daily  regimen  of (a) healthy  meal  
planning  with  regulati on of carbohydrate  and fat intake  and control  of body  weight , (b) planning  daily  physical  
activity,  (c) self-monitoring  blood  glucose  and avoiding  and treating  extreme  blood  glucose  fluctuations,  (d) 
managing  medications  (which  may  include  multiple  daily  injections ), (e) complying  with  periodic  diabetic  risk 
assessments , and (f) managing  stress.9 The key to successful  self-management  of diabetes  is the acquisition  of 
knowledge,  psychomotor  skills,  and effective  psychological  copi[INVESTIGATOR_621106]-care  tasks . 10 The amount  of time  required  to perform  diabetes  self-management  
varies  by [CONTACT_621160] , and requires  an average  commitment  of about  2 hours  per day. 11   
 
1.1 The  Demands  of Diabetes  Self -Management  Create  Diabetes –Related  Distress . 
The demands  of diabetes  self-management  often  result  in an independent  type  of psychologi cal anguish  known  
as diabetes -related  distress  (DRD) . DRD  arises  from  perceived  inability  to keep  up with  the requirements  and 
complexities  of diabetes  self-management12  and is associated  with  decreased  adherence , such  that 30%  of 
people  with  diabetes,  particularly  men,  neglect  to perform  important  elements  of self-care  11.  If prolonged,  a 
lapse  in diabetes  self-management  ultimately  predisposes  individuals  to poorer  metabolic  control , and higher  
rates  of diabetes -related  morbidity  and mortality.  6, [ADDRESS_826851]  are similar  to that of clinical  depression,  with  which  it may  co-occur,  it is 
important  for health  care  providers  to distinguish  between  the two conditions  in order  to provide  appropriate  
therapeutic  options.  The reported  prevalence  of depressive  symptoms  among  patients  with  diabetes  ranges  
from  20 to 40%.15, [ADDRESS_826852]  of these  people  are not clinically  depressed;  instead , they  
are distressed  about  their  diabetes , and feel a lack of self-efficacy  about  self-manag ing the disease .22 
 
 1.2 Diabetes  Self -Management  Education  (DSME)  is the Cornerst one of Diabetes  Self -
Management.  
DSME  is the primary  vehicle  through  which  diabetes  self-management  is 
promoted,  and focuses  on supporting  behaviors  that facilitate  achievement  of 
effective  diabetes  self-care  behaviors  and goals  as identified  by [CONTACT_621161]7™  (Figure  1). [ADDRESS_826853]  addressed , self-care  behavior  (see Figure  1). Traditionally,  DSME  
Figure 1.  AADE -7™ Self -Care 
Behaviors  
 
 
 
    
 programs  reference  the importance  of stress  management,  but stop  short  of providing  practical  support  for 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_621107] .26, 27 For example,  the VA’s  DSME  course  booklet , Self-Care  
Skills  for Patients  with  Diabetes  (VA,  Department  of Defense  clinical  practice  guideline,  2011) , encourages  
patients  to find ways  to manage  stress  management  by “limiting,  changing , or avoid ing stressful  situation s and 
making  time  to relax  and exercise ” in order  to achieve  and maintain  blood  glucose  control . Despi[INVESTIGATOR_621108] , useful  stress  management  support  tools  are not offered  as part  of the training.  
 
1.[ADDRESS_826854] mechanisms for how 
the practice of mindful medi tation may enhance  emotio nal regulation and mental focus  that are very important  
for effective diabetes self -management . These cognitive processes control present -moment orientation, 
attention control, attention switching, how one views one’s own thoughts  (metacognition) , insight about one’s 
attitudes and bel iefs (metacognit ive awareness) , changing one’s  perspective on events/thoughts (cognitive 
restructuring) , exposure and desensitization (as opposed to avoidance behaviors),  and acceptance . 30, 38 39   
 
1.4 Mindfulness can be used  to Support  Chronic Disease Self -Management.  
Mindfulness -Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) is the standard -bearer  for mindfulness i nterventions  that are 
specific to chronic disease m anagement.  MBSR is a complementary mind -body medical therapy developed by 
[INVESTIGATOR_124]. Jon Kabat -Zinn and his team at the University of  [LOCATION_005] School of Medicine . Similar to the Chronic 
Disease Self -Management Program (CDSMP ), MBSR  typi[INVESTIGATOR_621109] 2 -hour sessions and also a 
half-day meditation retreat. Weekly classes include group discussion, breath -focused meditation, gentle yoga, 
and didactic  presentations on stress theory , mindful communications, and awareness trai ning. One of the 
program’s objective s is to help participant s become more aware of  in-the-moment  emotions, and physical 
sensations. Meditation instruction and practice  provide the foundation for MBSR, which  has been scientifically 
studied in many chronic health conditions since the early 1970’s including chronic pain ,40 cancer  41, rheumatoid 
arthritis ,42 fibromyalgia ,43 human immunodeficiency virus  (HIV ),[ADDRESS_826855] -traumatic stress disorder ( PTSD )47, [ADDRESS_826856] been inconsistent and warrant further study. More specifically, a  seminal 
2007  obser vational pi[INVESTIGATOR_621110] 2 diabetes ( T2D M) demonstrated significant 
pre- to post  improvements in HbA1c , mean arterial blood pressure , and psychological distress , independent of 
weight loss, medication cha nges or lifestyle modification50. In partial contrast, two subsequent longitudinal , 
multisite trials  of MBSR conducted in people with type 1 diabetes ( T1DM) and T2D M, the Heidelberger 
Diabetes and Stress study  49 and the Diabetes and Mindfulness Study (DiaMind)  [ADDRESS_826857]  significant reductions in emotional distress. Furthermore, i n our own pi[INVESTIGATOR_621111] (as opposed to intensive MBSR)  
for Veterans with diabetes , we found significant improvements in DRD  and diabetes self -management  that 
 
 
    
 
Figure 2. Study Conceptual Model of Allostatic Load, Personal Resources, 
and Diabetes Control  correlated with improved diabetes self -efficacy , as well as  a 1% reduction  in HbA 1c. These findin gs raise  
questions about the role of mindfulness as it applies to variables in  the diabetes self-care paradigm  (i.e. DRD , 
diabetes self -efficacy, and diabetes se lf-management behaviors)  and impact on diabetes outcomes such as 
glycemic control.  
 
1.5 Our  Conceptual  Framework  Includes  Previously  Unexamined  Variables  Related  to 
Mindfulness  and  Diabetes  Outcomes.   
The conceptual framework for this 
study (Figure 2) is underpi[INVESTIGATOR_621112]-psycho -social stress theory 14, 53 -57 
that posits a psychosocial intervention 
such as Mi nd-STRIDE can influence 
psychological (i.e., mindfulness, 
diabetes  self-efficacy, and DRD ), 
behavioral ( diabetes self -
management ), and biological 
(glycemic control) outcomes in the 
setting of an individual’s accumulated 
life stresses  (“allostatic load”)   and 
personal resources (i.e., genetic pre-
disposition and social support) . In our 
conceptual model, mindfulness , 
diabetes self -efficacy and DRD  (the 
primary outcome) are independent ly 
and synergistically affected by [CONTACT_621162] -
STRIDE, the in dependent variable , as 
is diabetes self -management . Glycemic control , the distal secondary outcome , is affected by [CONTACT_621163] -management  and through down -regulation of Hypothalami c-Pi[INVESTIGATOR_2117] -Adrenal Axis (HPA) 
feedback activity resulting in decreased insulin resistance and increased  blood glucose disposal.[ADDRESS_826858] of mindfulness on  multiple aspects of diabetes 
self-care and outcomes, particularly in special populations such as Veterans, where Complementary and 
Alternative Medicine ( CAM ) initiatives are  increasingly being utilized as a group of  cost-effective, non -
pharmacologic  interventions . First, w hile the  effects of mindfulness interventions  on glycemic control remain 
unclear  based on results of the aforementioned limited number of studies , these studies do suggest , though  not 
definitively , that mindfulness may be specifical ly efficacious  for reducing DRD, which directly reflects diabetes 
quality of life and reduced disease burden. Additional research is therefore needed to  expand upon previous 
studies and  elucidate the relationship between mindfulness and reduction of DRD , and to examine additional 
relationships  involved in the complex landscape of diabetes self -care, and ultimately, glycemic control. More 
specifically , the large -scale trials did not examine the effects o f mindfulness on other related variables 
commonly understood to impact diabetes self -care, such as diabetes self -efficacy and individual diabetes self -
management behaviors .  
 
Furthermore, these questions particularly warrant closer  examination in the Veteran population for several 
reasons. Vetera ns are a unique population that  may have even greater clinical responsiveness to  a mindfulness 
intervention due to the ir higher prevalence of diabetes and diabetes -related burden than in the  general US 
population (11% vs. 8%), and greater physical and psychological vulnerability to stress -related conditions. For 
example, there is progressively more depression and post -traumatic stress in modern era Veterans compared 
to previous generations of  Veterans and to the US population at large.[ADDRESS_826859] in the military as a form of escape.60, 61  
 

 
 
    
 In order to support the testing of patient -centered, feasible, and sustainable interventions, we assert that the 
next phase of mindfulness research in diabetes n eeds to assess the efficacy of brief mindfulness training 
embedded in the context of routine DSME and care, where it has a natural, conceptual fit with the promotion of 
Healthy Copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], one of the 7 core pi[INVESTIGATOR_621113] (Figure 1).  While successful programs such as the 
aforementioned CDSMP have been applied to patients with diabetes to facilitate self -care and stress 
reduction,62 program s such as this that entail  a series of lengthy  community -based  or online sessions that 
occur outsid e of routine healthcare visits may not be practical or appealing  to many of the Veterans who receive 
care through VHA.   
 
To address  this issue,  we developed  and pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] -tested  single  session  mindfulness  training  with  one booster  called  
Mindful  Stress  Reduction  in Diabetes  Education  (Mind -STRIDE) , which  is incorporated  into routine  DSME.   
At the VA Pi[INVESTIGATOR_621114]  (VAPHS),  a certified  nurse  diabetes  educator  and a dietitian  teach  
DSME  in one comprehensive  3-hour  participatory  group  class . The Mind -STRIDE  program  was adapted  from  
core  MBSR  tenets  and activities  presented  in Kabat -Zinn’s  book,  Full Catastrophe  Living : Using  Wisdom  of 
Your  Body  and Mind  to Face  Stress,  Pain,  and Illness ,29  and also  The Mindfulness  Based  Stress  Reduction  
Workbook  63  (Table  1). 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Mind -STRIDE  curriculum  was adapted  with  expert  guidance  of [CONTACT_621185],  Co-Investigator,  who  is a 
highly  trained  and experienced  MBSR  teacher.  Mind -STRIDE  includes  meditation  training  and practice,  
mindful  movement  (seated  yoga  postures)  and discussions  similar  to those  presented  in the traditional  MBSR  
progra m that are aimed  at increasing  body  and sensory  awareness,  disentangling  thoughts,  and decreasing  
emotional  reactivity.  (See  Appendix  2 for additional  class  materials) .   
 
Our goal  is to build  upon  the preliminary  and pi[INVESTIGATOR_621115] -STRIDE  in a full-scale  RCT  examining  its impact  on mindfulness,  diabetes  self-efficacy,  diabetes  self-
management , and glycemic  control  among  Veterans  with  diabetes.  
 
1.7 Releva nt Research —Preliminary  Studies  
 
We have  conducted  two surveys  and two pi[INVESTIGATOR_621116],  as well as Mind -STRIDE’s  
feasible  and outcome -driven  approach  that warrants  efficacy  testing.  
 
1.7.1  MBSR  for United  States  (US)  Military  Veterans  with  Diabetes:  A Survey  of Interest  
among  Veterans  (PI:   [INVESTIGATOR_621117],  PhD,  RN)  
Table 1. Summary of Mind -STRIDE: MBSR Topi[INVESTIGATOR_621118] -
Zinn  

 
 
    
  
The purpose  of this descriptive  study  was to determine  Veteran  interest  in learning  more  about  stress  
management  and participating  in an 8-week  MBSR  program  at VAPHS.  We conducted  a survey  of 51 US 
Veterans  with  T2D M from  December  2008  to March  2009  at the VAPHS  Diabetes  Clinic.  Respondents  were  
mainly  white  (84%),  men (98%),  55 years  of age or older  (78%).  Of those  polled,  31 Veterans  (61%)  reported  
having  an interest  in attending  the MBSR  program.  Sixty -one percent  requested  printed  information  on stress  
management;  78%  identified  the MBSR  program’s  location  as being  a decisive  factor  to their  willingness  to 
participate  in a multiple -session  study . These  61%  of interested  respondents  identified  wanting  to attend  the 
program  for the following  reasons:  for general  stress  reduction  (48%);  to improve  diabetes  control  (23% ), to 
manage  weight  and overall  health  (20%),  to improve  self-esteem  (3%);  and/or  to learn  something  new (6%).  
Twenty  respondents  (39%)  had no interest  in attending  the proposed  MBSR  program;  reasons  for no interest  
included:  lack of transportation/unable  to commit  to eight  weekly  sessions  (40% ); having  no stress  or stress  
under  control  (45%)  or no interest  in this type  of program  (15%).  These  findings  were  presented  in a poster  
presentation  at the 2009  Eastern  Nursing  Research  Society  (ENRS)  conference  in Providence,  RI. 
 
Implications  for the proposed  study.  From  this survey  we gained  a sense  of the demographic  characteristics  
and interests  of patients  who  receive  care  at VAPHS  Diabetes  Specialty  clinic.  Although  their  degree  of interest  
in attending  a stress management  program  at VAPHS  was high,  we concluded  that recruitment  for a multi -
session  face to face program  at VAPHS  would  be difficult,  since  the travel  and time  commitment  was a barrier  
for many  of the Veterans  who  were  surveyed.  
 
1.7.[ADDRESS_826860] ion in Diabetes  Education:  A Survey  of Interest  among  Diabetes  Educators   
(PI:   [INVESTIGATOR_621117],  PhD,  RN)  
 
The purpose  of this descriptive  survey  was to assess  Diabetes  Educators’  a) perceptions  of stress  among  their  
patients,  and b) willingness  to include  mindfulness  stress  management  training  as part  of DSME.  We 
conducted  a survey  of Diabetes  Educators  who  attended  a meeting  of the Western  Pennsylvania  Association  of 
Diabetes  Educators  in November  2014.  Of the 28 diabetes  educators  who  completed  the survey,  18 (64%) were  
Registered  Nurses,  11 of whom  were  Certified  Diabetes  Educators , five were  Advanced  Practice  Nurses , and two 
were  Bachelor  prepared  nurses ; and 10 (36%) were  Registered  Dietitian/Certified  Diabetes  Educators.  The 
average  number  of years  as a Diabetes  Educator  was 15 years  (range  6 months  -32 years).  Thirteen  of 28 (46%)  
respondents  personally  practice  yoga,  meditation,  or another  mind -body  approach  to manage  their  own  stress.  
Of the 28 respondents,  22 (79%)  reported  that their  patien ts often  or very  often  complain  that their  stress  is a 
barrier  to diabetes  self-management  and blood  glucose  control . Thirteen  of 28 (46%)  of the diabetes  educators  
surveyed  teach  group  DSME  classes,  and four  of them  consistently  provide  stress  management  education  as 
part  of their  group  classes.   Reasons  given  for not currently  providing  stress  management  training  within  
DSME  were  time  constraints,  lack of expertise,  limited  scientific  evidence,  and lack of inclusion  in the pre-
existing  DSME  curriculum.  Nineteen  of 28 diabetes  educators  (68%)  surveyed  would  consider  adding  brief  
mind -body  stress  management  training  as part  of group  DSME  as long  as it was evidence -based,  time  -
efficient,  and was written  into their  model  of care.  
 
Implications  for the propose d study.  We concluded  from  this survey  that patients  frequently  inform  diabetes  
educators  that stress  is a barrier  to diabetes  self-care  and blood  glucose  control.  In general,  there  was interest  
among  the diabetes  educators  surveyed  for adding  a brief  mind -body  stress  reduction  intervention  to DSME,  
and that brief,  evidence  based  mindfulness  programs  relevant  to DSME  are needed.  
 
1.7.3 Exploring Mindfulness Based Stress Reduction on Women with Type 2 Diabetes: A Mixed 
Methods Pi[INVESTIGATOR_16116]  (PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_621119], PhD, RN)  
 
 The aims of this 2010 prospective observational pi[INVESTIGATOR_621120] T2D M (n=6) was to a) explore the 
acceptability of MBSR in women with T2D M who attended a community health center MBSR program, and b) 
identify the b est strategies, outcome measures, an d the logistics for conducting a successful MBSR program. 
The [ADDRESS_826861]  data on HbA1c, blood pressure, body mass index 
(BMI), waist circumference, lipid profile, and C -reactive protein (CRP), a marker of non -specific inflammation.  
Mindfulness (Mindfulness Attention Awareness Scale , MAAS ), global perceived stress, (Perceived Stress 
Scale <PSS -10), diabetes stress (Problem Areas in Diabetes Scale , PAID ), quality of life ( SF-36), and metabolic 
 
 
    
 control (HbA1c)  were  measured at baseline, at completion of the [ADDRESS_826862] -
intervention follow -up at 16 weeks. At baseline , participants’  mean age was 55.7 years, mean HbA1c was 6.9%, 
and mean duration of diabetes was 4.9 years. Participants were primarily  white (86%), college educated 
(71.4%), and had multiple co -morbid conditions  (>4; 86%).  
 
Six of 14 -screened candidates were enrolled in the study; the remaining eight eligible candidates did not enroll  
due to time conflicts with the MBSR class schedule. All enrolled participants completed the [ADDRESS_826863] intervention changes in improved mindfulness, 
decreased perceived stress, decreased diabetes stress, and a 1% decrease in HbA1c. These c hanges were 
sustained at [ADDRESS_826864] -intervention to explore participants’ experience with the MBSR 
program and its perceived importance to their diabetes self -care. All of the participants reported very high 
satisfaction with the program and would recommend MBSR to other people with and without diabetes.  Five of 
the six participants intended to continue practicing mindfulness in their daily lives. The participants 
unanimously recommended adding diabetes -specific content to future MBSR programs. Concept analysis was 
performed usi ng grounded theory methodology ,64 and two qualitative themes were identified : 1) Improved 
copi[INVESTIGATOR_007] (e.g. “…more confident …” “easier to cope” ; “…lowered my reaction to things…”; “…it makes it easier to 
calm down and deal with aggravation and pain of diabetes…”), and  2) Connecting mind and body (e.g. 
“…able to visualize what is  going on internally…” ; “…motivated me to exercise and take better care of myself ; 
I can now ‘breathe through’ my pain”) . 
 
Implications for the proposed study.  MBSR was positively received and showed promise of benefit to women 
with T2D M. These findings support the feasibility of conducting an experimental study of MBSR in women 
with T2D M, and found positive changes in perceived stress, diabetes related distress , and HbA1c. Efforts to 
recruit community participants with T2D M who were available to participate in an [ADDRESS_826865]. Greco to design an accessible one -session intervention that incorporates 
fundamental tenets of MBSR and addresses diabetes -specific concerns, including mindful eating and using 
self-compassion to deal with interpersonal difficulties surrounding self -management issues.  
 
1.7.4 A Mindful Appr oach to Diabetes Self -Management Education with Stress Reduction and 
Healthy Copi[INVESTIGATOR_621121]  (PI:  [INVESTIGATOR_621119], PhD, RN)  
  
The purpose of this pi[INVESTIGATOR_621122] -STRIDE 
interve ntion in a prospective observational study in a sample of Veterans with T1D M and T2D M at VAPHS. 
Study participants were recruited from DSME classes at VAPHS. Participants who had diabetes for at least six 
months, took a stable regimen of diabetes medicatio ns for at least one month, and had a baseline HbA1c 
greater than 7% were eligible to participate.  Regarding feasibility and acceptability, we tracked  participant 
recruitment and retention, and measured Veteran and Diabetes Educator satisfaction with Mind -STRI DE by 
[CONTACT_6270]-report rating scales and interviews.  Secondarily, we assessed the effects of Mind - STRIDE on  perceived 
stress  (PSS -10), DRD  (PAID) , and self -efficacy  (Diabetes Empowerment Scale, DES -SF), diabetes self -
management (AADE-7™Self -care Behaviors), and HbA1c over time, from baseline to [ADDRESS_826866] 
intervention.  
 
In this study, 60% (28/47) of eligible Veterans agreed to participate, and 71% (20) of enrolled participants 
completed the three -month study.  At least half of th e participants who dropped out did so because of comorbid 
medical or behavioral conditions (Table 2). Our sample was unemployed or retired ( 82%) older males (mean 
age 63 years) who were overweight (mean BMI 33 kg/m2) and had T2D M; 54% were   college educated . Median  
diabetes duration was 18.2 years (range 6 months - 55 years), and mean baseline HbA1c was 8.8%.  
Table  2. Participant  Attrition  Summary  
Participant   Baseline  
HbA1c  (%) 
 Time  
point  Reason  for Attrition  
1 12.5 Baseline  Poor  vision;  unable  to complete  questionnaires  
2 9.8 1 mo Moved  to another  state  
3 8.3 1 mo Family  crisis  
 
 
    
  
There was a high level of 
acce ptance among clinicians and 
Veteran participants. Clinician 
acceptance of Mind -STRIDE was 
measured by a brief structured  
interview and 10 point rating scale (1= this program was not useful at all; 10 = this program was excellent and 
met the needs of the class). The course instructors rated the program 8. 5 out of 10, and thought the program 
was pertinent to “what’s missing” in DSME. Veteran participant satisfaction  with Mind -STRIDE was assessed 
with a 4 -item satisfaction questionnaire and free-text comment section; 96%  of participants  strongly agreed 
that they learned something new and planned to continue practicing mindfulness meditation in the future; 
92% would recommend Mind -STRIDE  to other people with diabetes.  Daily paper and pencil diary entries 
assessed participant acceptance, experience, and freque ncy of home practice.  Eleven (39%) of the participants 
completed home practice diaries indicating an average home practice frequency and duration of 12 minutes 
three times per week.  
 
Qualitative data were gathered from the free -text comment section of  participant satisfaction questionnaires 
and the home practice diaries to provide insight into Veteran satisfaction and acceptance  of their experience 
with  Mind -STRIDE. Qualitative data was coded by [CONTACT_621164] ,  and was 
organized by [CONTACT_621165] 100% agreement. Participant quotes and themes appear in Table 3.  
 
 
 4 12.7 1 mo Admitted  to skilled  nursing  facility  
5 10.2  3 mo Bipolar  disorder  difficulty  with  home  practice  
6 10.1 3 mo Unknown  
7 8.6 3 mo Unknown  
8 8.8 3 mo Admitted  to skilled  nursing  facility  
Table 3. Summary of Mind -STRIDE Participant Feedback : Themes and Supporting Veteran Quotes from 
Satisfaction Questionnaires and Home Practice Journals  
 
 
Mindfulness  as a personal  resource  
• “Provides  another  tool to help  keep  you on track.”  
• “Helps  make  things  easier.”  
• “It definitely  helps  me feel better,  a great  tool.”     
• “It got me through  a really  tough  day when  my wife  was sick and my car broke  down.   
Extension of principles from anger management to practical use in diabetes program for control.”  
• “This presentation/study is very useful and I would strongly suggest this type of study to  
 Veterans that I counsel (unemployed Veterans).”  
• “I find it very helpful as it helps you to concentrate on things that will help you to feel better about yourself.”  
• “This should help some people if they are willing to commit to doing this.”  
• “Good way to help people understand their bodies.”  
• “More classes. Very helpful - interesting. Need more involvement.”  
Awareness  
• “This helped become more aware.”  
• “This class is showing me a different approach in dealing with my thinking!  
• “I was surprised how much I did not hear until I took this class. Just never paid attenti on to surroundings… 
took most things for granted…”  
• “This program has given me the thought about what is meaningful in life! Stress relief is certainly important and 
attainable! Thinking about everyday thoughts and feelings are important!”  
• “Good way to help  people understand their bodies.”  
• “Class was good and made me consider my thought processes.”  
Home Practice  
• “Interruptions during my home study disrupted the thoughts I was having.”  
• “I have problems with attention deficit at home. My mind wanders even though I try to stay focused.”  
• “It helps when you do it on a continuing daily basis; I found different times of day work best.”            
• “Mindfulness recordings are very helpful.”  
Social  suppor t 
• “I was skeptical  but my wife  said ‘Give  it a try.  I’m glad I did.”  
• “My  wife  and I have  been  doing  it together.”  
• “I think it was good talking with other diabetics about what they think and feel, that I am not the only one with 
these feelings.  
Behavior  change  
• “My wife asked me why this motivates me… after all this time.”  
• “Curious to continue this process and see my personal experiences and results!”  
• “I’m  sticking  with  it, because  I want  to help  myself  do better.  
 
 
    
 Nonparametric repeated measures analysis and post -hoc pairwise comparisons were applied to the 
quantitative data using the Friedman’s Test and Wilcoxon Signed Rank Test respectively and demonstrated a 
statistically significant reduction in DRD  from baselin e to [ADDRESS_826867] intervention (p< .01; d= .7) . 
Significant improvements in  diabetes self -management  (p< .05; d= .5), and a 1% reduction in HbA1 c (p<. 05; 
d= .7) were also observed. After 3 -months of mindfulness practice, significant correlations were found between 
psychological outcomes and specific elements of Mindfulness that were not present at baseline (Table 4).  
 
 
Table 4. Post -intervention Correlations between Mindfulness Facets and Psychological Outcomes  
 
Impl ications for the proposed study.  We pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] -tested the feasibility of operationalizing Mind -STRIDE within 
existing DSME classes. Rates of recruitment and retention were generally good, Veteran satisfaction and 
engagement and staff satisf action and enthusiasm were high . However,  only 39% of participants completed 
diaries, therefore we concluded that the use of paper home pra ctice diaries was inefficient for tracking home 
practice. We believe hand -held digital devices will be easier and more appealing to the participants and 
therefore will increase participation in this exercise. These  devices can be used for more portable and  
convenient access to the au dio-recorded guided meditations and for real -time documentation of home 
meditation practice; and  they  can also serve as a  home practice  journal .  This pi[INVESTIGATOR_621123], testing the effects of t he intervention on glycemic control and intermediary psycho -
behavioral outcomes in the proposed RCT.  
 
2.[ADDRESS_826868] a higher rate of diabetes (11% vs. 8%) compared to the general  US population. 
Advanced macro -vascular complications such as myocardial infarction and stroke contribute to higher 
mortality rates in VA patients with diabetes, which average 5% compared to 2.6% among patients without 
diabetes, and is a major cause of deaths and inpatient admissions outside of VHA1. Diabetes is one of the top 
medical conditions requiring hospi[INVESTIGATOR_2144] [ADDRESS_826869]  and offer  mindfulness  therapy  primarily  to Veterans  Mindfulness  
(FFMQ)  Perceived Stress  
(PSS -10) Diabetes Distress  
(PAID)  Diabetes Self -Efficacy  
 (DES -SF) 
Observing  -.05 -.04 .11 
Describing  -.18 -.12 .50*  
Acting with awareness  -.59**  -.54**  .42*  
Non -judgment  -.59**  -.53**  .43*  
Non -reactivity  -.30 -.52* * -.04 
*p<.05; **p< 0.1    

 
 
    
 receiving  outpatient  care.  Howeve r, mindfulness  meditation  has not been  studied  or applied  to the care  of 
patients  with  diabetes  within  VHA.  
 
The proposed study supports VHA National Nursing Strategic Plan (2013 -18) goal 1a(4) by [CONTACT_621166] a new nurse -led initiative into a patient -centered program of specialty care. This proposal also 
corresponds with VHA Blueprint for Excellence (9 -2014) transformational action 7.[ADDRESS_826870]. Greco in meditation and mindfulness, the likelihood of uptake of findings and 
recommendations from the proposed research is high. Mind -STRIDE has minimal potential for harm, and 
holds promise for enhanci ng the physical and psychological health of Veterans to better equip them to 
“manage their own lives and achieve their own goals .”[ADDRESS_826871] applicability for supporting Veterans’ self -management goals in prevention and 
maintenance of other chronic conditions.  In fact, this study is  closely aligned with currently  and previously 
NRI - funded mindfulness and meditation trials for PTSD67 and cardiovascular risk in women (The Mindful 
Hearts Trial). Together these nurse -led studies  will build upon one another to make substantial contributions 
to the emerging literature and science of mindfulness and meditation in Veterans who are at risk for and suffer 
from chronic diseases.  
 
2.1 Innovation  
 
Our intervention  is noteworthy  and novel  in four  ways:   
 
a) Content:  Mind -STRIDE  is an original  VA pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] -tested  intervention  adapted  from  an evidence -
based  Mindfulness  training  model,  MBSR  
b) Accessibility:  Our program  incorporates  a brief,  accessible  mindfulness -based  intervention  
provided  at the point  of diabetes  care,  and tests  the efficacy  of a potentially  new diabetes  care  
process  geared  toward  uptake  and sustainability   
c) Design:  Our study  is the first to apply  a qualitative  analysis  of mindfulness  in people  who  have  
diabetes,  which  actively  supports  the design  and implementation  of  a new patient – centered  
diabetes  paradigm  
d) Measurement:  Our study  is the first to utilize  common  technology  (digital  tablets ) to capture  
adherence  to home  mindfulness  practice  in real time,  as well as utilize  existing  VA Tele -Health  
technology  for verification  of home  blood  glucose  data  
 
3.[ADDRESS_826872]  among Veterans with diabetes.  Participants will be randomized to one of two 
study conditions:  the experimental group (DSME+ Mind -STRIDE)  and the usual care group (DSME -Alone) . 
Research  assessments will occur at baseline  (T1), 12- weeks  (T2) , and at 24 weeks  (T3)  for both study arms. 
Satisfaction assessments  will be conducted in the experimental group following the Week [ADDRESS_826873]  (UD)  campus  of VA Pi[INVESTIGATOR_621114]  
(VAPHS ), an integrated  healthcare  system  affiliated  with  the University  of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_621124]-state  area  of Pennsyl vania,  Ohio,  and West  Virginia.  VAPHS  is a major  tertiary  
care  institution  comprised  of two facilities  and is the hub to five smaller  “spoke”  facilities  in the region ; it 
provides  specialty  diabetes  care  to five regional  Community -Based  Outpatient  Clinics  (CBOC s), for which  it 
provides  diabetes  specialty  care  services.  VAPHS  provides  outpatient  health  care  to approximately  17,000  US 
Veterans  with  diabetes  annually,  28%  of the total  number  of patients  served.  The UD location  is the only  VA 
location  in the tri-state  area  of Southwestern  Pennsylvania,  Southeastern  Ohio  and Northern  West  Virginia  
that has a Diabetes  Specialty  clini c and offers  group  DSME  classes  (Additional  information  about  VAPHS  is 
found  in the Facilities  and Resources  section .) The Diabetes  Clinic  is housed  within  the multi -disciplinary  
Medical  clinic  in the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_621125], and is staffed  by [CONTACT_621167] d certified  endocrinologists,  two nurse  
practitioners  (one  is the PI), three  certified  diabetes  nurse  educators,  and a dietitian.  The staff  diabetes  
educators  and dietitian  provide  individual  diabetes  education  in the outpatient  clinic  by [CONTACT_621168].  Group  classes  are held  twice  monthly  throughout  
the year  in a conference  room  at UD and are offered  twice  monthly  via direct  video -conferencing  from  UD to 
Veterans  gathered  at spoke  facilities.  The coordinating  diabetes  nurse  educator  co-teaches  the DSME  class  with  
the dietitian  and received  over  300 DSME  referrals  from primary  care  and specialty  clinic  providers  at UD and 
160 referrals  from  spoke  facility  providers  in 2014 .  The VA DSME  program  meets  national  standards  and 
maintains  recognition  by [CONTACT_621169]  (ADA)  Education  Recognition  Program  (ERP) .[ADDRESS_826874]  a diagnosis  of T1DM or T2D M. We 
will use the following  inclusion  and exclusion  criteria  for our study  sample:  
 
Criteria  for inclusion:   
a) DSME  class  enrollment * 
b) Fluency  in reading  and writing  English **  
c) Diagnosis  of diabetes  for at least  6 months  * 
d) HbA1c  >7.5%  within  past  3 months  * 
e) Stable  diabetes  medications  for at least  60 days * 
f) Problem  Areas  in Diabetes  Scale  (PAID)  score  > 10 (described  below,  Section  3.8)** 
g) Telephone  access  with  voice  mail  to receive  research  related  messages ** 
h) Willingness  to utilize  VA Home  Tele -Health  for documentation  of home  blood  glucose  readings**   
i) Willing ness  to be randomized  to the experimental  or usual  care  group ** 
j) Willing ness  to have  the qualitative  interview  audio -recorded  (if randomized  to experimental  
group) ** 
Criteria  for exclusion:  
a) Active  meditation  practice  ** 
b) Documented  cognitive  impairment  including  active  psychosis,  dementia  or other  organic  mental  
disorders,  that may  interfere  with  the ability  to comprehend  the informed  consent  and/or  actively  
participate  in the study*  
c) Previous  attend ance  of VA DSME  class  within  the past  12 months  * 
d) Planned  relocation  from  the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_621126]  6 months **  
 
*Determined by [CONTACT_094] -screening of VA computerized Patient Record System (CPRS)  
**Determined by [CONTACT_621170]  
 
3.[ADDRESS_826875]  assenting  participants  for telephone  
screen ing for additional  inclusion/exclusion  criteria  pursuant  to an IRB approved  Waiver  of Documentation  of 

 
 
    
 Informed  Consent  for Screening .  After  informed  consent  procedures  are completed,  enrolled  participants  will 
complete  Baseline  (T1) pencil -and paper  research  
assessments  administered  in-person  by [CONTACT_621171] .  After  completion  of T1 
assessments,  participants  will be randomly  
assigned  to either  the experimental  condition  
(DSME+  Mind -STRIDE)  or the usual  care   
condition  (DSME  -Alone)  (See  Randomization  
Procedure).  Subsequent  post-intervention  research  
assessments  will be completed  at week  12 (T2)  and 
week  24 (T3), and will consist  of biological  
measures   (height , weight,  blood  pressure,  and 
laboratory  assessment  of HbA1c ) performed  by 
[CONTACT_183840] , and completion  of paper  and pencil  
assessments  administered  in person  by [CONTACT_621172].   In 
the DSME  + Mind -STRIDE  group,  participants  will 
also complete  the participant  satisfaction  
assessment  administered  by [CONTACT_621173] 4-week  booster .  A purposively  
sampled  subset  of 25-participants  will complete  a 
qualitative  telephone  interview  at 15-weeks  
(between  T2 and T3). 
 
Participants  in both  groups  will attend  the 4-week  
DSME  follow -up booster  visit  with  the staff  
dietitian  who  is not part  of the study  team.   The 
study  interventionist  will deliver  the Mind -STRIDE  
booster  to participants  in the experimental  group  immediately  follo wing  that dietitian  visit.  The Interventionist  
will administer  the satisf action  questionnaire  to Mind -STRIDE  participant s after  completion  of the booster  
session,  and will ensure  confidentiality  by [CONTACT_621174] s in provided  envelope s.  
In addition,  all participants  will receive  a monthly  post -card  from  the study  team  to help  promote  engagement  
and retention  in the study.  All participants  will receive  reimbursement  for participation  in the study  following  
each  assessment  ($50  at T1, $75 at T2, and $100  at T3) and will also receive  a digital  tablet  as remuneration  for 
their  participation.  DSME  + Mind -STRIDE  participants  will receive  the tablet  following  the initial  Mind -
STRIDE  intervention;  DSME –Alone  participants  receive  the tablet  following  completion  of T3. 
 
 
3.4.[ADDRESS_826876] been completed, all eligible research participants 
entering the study will complete baseline procedures. After baseline assessments are completed, participants will 
be randomized into one of two groups: 1) DSME + Mind -STRIDE (the experimental group), or 2) DSME -Alone 
(usual care). The study statistician will perform the randomization process using statistical softw are with a 
random -number generator to create a list of group assignments before study recruitment begins. Randomization 
will occur in blocks of [ADDRESS_826877] VA issued Home Tele -Health 
equipment  that is available and offered to all patients . 
 
3.5.1 Usual Care Condition (DSME -Alone)  
 
Figure 3. Study Design and Procedures  

 
 
    
 Patients randomized to the Usual Care Condition (DSME -Alone) will receive the standard  3-hour DSME class  
that includes a  didactic presentation, discussion, and interactive activities using a booklet and power point 
slides covering the following topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]:  
a) An overview of diabetes pathophysiology, HbA1c, major elements of DSM; distinguishing between 
T1DM and T2D M 
b) Eating Healthy - identifying nutrients, reading food labels, choosing healthy portion sizes  
 Activity: “My H ealthy Eating Plan” - creating a personal  eating plan  
c) Being Active - Being safe while make physical activity a regular part of your day, sample walking 
schedules  
 “My Activity Lifestyle Plan: getting started” -setting goals for daily activity  
d) Monitoring - Glucose testing tips; managing hypoglycemia a nd hyperglycemia  
e) Medications -Tips for taking medication safely; diabetes oral medications, classes and actions; 
insulin use, action and storage, injection s ite selection, use of a syringe or pen  
 Activity: “Keep T rack of Your Insulin Doses” - writing down in sulin doses  
f) Sick Day Management - maintaining insulin regimen; knowing what to eat when yo u’re sick, 
guidelines for short –term illness, when to call your Health Care Team, when and how to get care 
immediately  
g) Living well with Diabetes - care of your heart, k idneys, eyes, and feet; care of your emotional health 
and travel tips  
1.  Activity: “Tracking Diabetes Health” – documenting recent lab results, goals, targets,  
        recent exams, and vaccines.  
 
Participants in the Usual Ca re (DSME -Alone) condition also receive a 30 - minute booster with the staff 
dietitian in which basic self -management skills  and goals  from DSME class are reinforced.  
 
3.5.2 Experimental C ondition (DSME +Mind -STRIDE)   
 
Participants randomized to the Experimental Condition (DSME +Min d-STRIDE) will receive the same 3-hour 
DSME group class  (described above) plus the 1-hour Mind -STRIDE intervention  delivered by [CONTACT_621175][INVESTIGATOR_621127] : 
a) Group  discussion : exploring the stress of living with diabetes (5 minutes)  
b) Meditation practice: Being in your body,  “Body Scan  Technique”  (10 minutes)  
c) Group activity (“the raisin -eating  exercise”): promoting awareness and differentiation between 
thoughts, judgements,  and sensory perceptions (5 minutes)  
d) Didactic presentation and group discussion of stress theory ; stress and diabetes; responding vs. 
reacting to stressful situations  (15 minutes)  
e) Mindful movement (chair yoga)  (5 minutes)  
f) Didactic presentation of  mindfulness  and mindful approaches to diabetes self -management , (10 
minutes)  
g) Group d iscussion: mindfulness in every day life , mindful eating  (5 minutes)  
h) Group activity: setting  intentions /commit ment  for daily home mindfulnes s practice . Table ts are 
distributed . (5 minutes ) 
 
The DSME + Mind -STRIDE group will also receive  one [ADDRESS_826878]  in addition to the DSME booster with the staff dietician. The  Mind -STRIDE  booster 
consists  of: 
a) 20 minutes of discussion /reinforcement of mindfulness concepts   
b) 10 minutes o f guided mindfulness meditation practice  
 
The D SME+ Mind -STRIDE group will be encouraged to engage in at least 15 
minutes of home mindfulness practice 6 days per week consisting of:  
a) 15-minutes of mindful meditation practice   
b) One daily mindfulness activity  (e.g. mindfully eating one meal)  
c) Real -time tracking of  home meditation practice using 
Mindfulness Coach, a VA -developed and supported application 
(Figure 4 ). 
Figure 4. VA Mindfulness Coach 
Application  
 
 
    
 d) Optional journaling to reflect  the home practi ce experience  answering the question “What did you 
notice?”   
 
Participants have the option of using  3-pre-loaded  audio recor dings on the table ts that were created by [CONTACT_1600] [INVESTIGATOR_20196]. Greco to  guide their home practice and reinforce the guiding mindfulness principles taught 
during  the intervention.  Participants will also access the pre -loaded Mindfulness Coach  application for 
additional home practice support and to  docume nt home meditation practice . Recorded materials will be 
downloaded at each research visit. None of the data stored on the tablets w ill contain identifiable 
information , and personal use of the tablets’ internet  features will be blo cked during the course of study  
 
3.6 Variables  and  Measures    
 
3.6.1 Quantitative  Measures  
 
Diabetes -Related  Distress  (DRD ), the primary  outcome,  will be measured  with  the Problem Areas  in 
Diabetes  scale  (PAID) . The PAID  questionnaire  will also be used  for Screening  to determine  inclusion  criteria  
of moderate  to high  baseline  DRD  (PAID  score>10) . It comprises  20 items  that desc ribe common  negative  
feelings  associated  with  having  diabetes  e.g. “Feeling  scared  when  you think about  living  with  diabetes? ”; “Not  
having  a clear  and concrete  goal  for your  diabetes  care?”  that are answered  on a 5-point  Likert  scale  (“Not a 
problem ” to “Serious  problem ”). Item  scores  are summed  to provide  a total  score  of emotional  distress,  scores  
range  from  0-100, with  higher  scores  denoting  greater  distress.  Scores  over  [ADDRESS_826879]  denial.  The PAID  scale  has high  internal  relia bility  (Cronbach’s  alpha  >.90),  and has 
shown  effect  sizes  between  0.30  and 0.65  across  different  psychosocial,  educational,  and medical  
interventions .19 
 
Mindfulness - Two validated measures, a multi -faceted measure, the Five Facet Mindfulness Qu estionnaire 
(FFMQ), and a one -dimensional  measure, the Revised Cognitive and Affective Mindfulness Scale (CAMS -R), 
will measure mindfulness.  The FFMQ and CAMS -R measures self -reported mindfulness differently and are 
being used to address the complexity of assessing the construct.  Mindfulness wil l be measured as a secondary 
outcome for Aim1 .   
 
The 5 -Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire (FFMQ) is a validated questionnaire consisting of 39 items on a 5 -
point Likert scale (“Never o r Very rarely true” to “Very often or A lways true”) based on a factor anal ytic study of 
5-independently developed mindfulness questionnaires.  It measures 5 -facets representing elements of 
mindfulness: observing, which refers to noticing or attending to internal and external experiences, such as 
thoughts, sensations, emotions, s ounds, sights, and smells; describing, which refers to the ability to describe 
one’s emotions and feelings; acting with awareness, which includes attending to one ’s activities in the present 
moment; non -judging of inner experience, which refers to taking a  non-evaluative attitude toward thoughts 
and feelings; and non -reactivity to inner experience, which includes allowing thoughts and feelings to come 
and go, without getting caught up in or carried away by [CONTACT_476]. Higher scores reflect greater levels of each factor.  
Each factor consists of 7 or 8 items. The five facets demonstrated adequate to good internal consistency (alpha 
ranging from 0.75 to 0.91) when tested in experienced meditators and non -meditators. 70  
 
The Revised 12 -item Cognitive and Affective Mindfulness Scale (CAMS -R) is a  one-dimensional, 12 -item 
inventory on a 4 point  Likert scale (“Rarely/Not at all” to “A lmost always”) t hat measures mindfulness during 
general daily occurrences on four components of mindfulness (i.e., attention, awareness, present -focus, and 
acceptance/non -judgment)  and yields one total score.   Higher  scores denote greater mindfulness. The internal 
consistency of the CAMS -R in this sample is adequate ( alpha = .76), and there is evidence of convergent and 
discriminant validity with concurrent measures of mindfulness, distress, well -being, emotion -regulat ion, and 
problem -solving approaches .71  
 
Self -Efficacy  will be measured  with  the Diabetes  Self-Efficacy  Scale  (DSES).  This  self-administered  
questionnaire  consists  of 8-items  on a 10 point  Likert  scale  (1= Not confident  at all; 10 = Totally  confident ) 
that measures  self-efficacy  in diabetes  self-management  activities,  with  higher  score  denoting  greater  diabetes  
self-efficacy.  Content  validity  of the DSES  was supported  in a study  of 186 subjects  who  completed  a six-week  
community  diabetes  education  and lifestyle  progr am. The internal  consistency  reliability  of this instrument  is 
high  (alpha=.83).72 

 
 
    
  
Diabetes  Self -Management  will be measured  with  the Self-Care  Inventory  Revised  (SCI -R), a 
psychometrically  sound  15-item  self-administered  survey  that measures  perceived  adherence  to recommended  
diabetes  self-care  behaviors  of adults  with  T1DM  and T2DM.  Higher  scor es reflect  greater  diabetes  self-
management  behaviors.  It was tested  in [ADDRESS_826880]  high  
internal  consistency  (r=.63).  Its construct  validity  is supported  by [CONTACT_621176]  (r=-.36);  
self-esteem  (r=.25)  self-efficacy  (r=.47),  depression  (r=-.22) anxiety  (r=-.24) and HbA1c  (r=-.37).  
Responsiveness  analysis  showed  SCI-R scores  improved  with  diabetes  psycho -education  with  a medium  effect  
size of 0.62  and a Guyatt  responsiveness  statistic  of 0.85.73 
 
Glycemic  control,  i.e., HbA1c , the secondary  (distal)  metabolic  outcome , will be assessed  at each  time  point:  
T1, T2, and T3. All tests  will be performed  at VAPHS  laboratories  according  to National  Glyco -hemoglobin  
Standardization  Program  approved  methods  using  high  performance  liquid  chromatography  (Tosoh  Bioscience  
South  San Francisco,  CA).    
 
Potential Covariates  
 
Frequency  and duration  of mindfulness  practice  will be measured  by [CONTACT_621177].  This  application  is a user  -friendly  method  for timing  and tracking  meditation  
practice  (in minutes)  that also includes  guided  meditations  and formats  for personalized  meditation  sounds  
and music .  
 
Depression  will be measured  with  the Patient  Health  Questionnaire  (PHQ -9), a widely  used brief  9-item  
instrument  adapted  from  the longer  PHQ  for measuring  the severity  of symptoms  of depression  over  the past  
two weeks.  The assessment  can be administered  repeatedly,  and can reflect  improvement  or worsening  of 
symptoms.  Response  options  are on a 4-point  Likert  scale  (0=”Not  at all”; 3=”N early  every  day”). Item  [ADDRESS_826881]  affected  the patient’s  level  of function.   The validity  of PHQ -9 was 
tested  in 15 studies  in primary  care  and obstetrical  clinics.  PHQ  scores  ≥ 10 had a sensitivity  of 88%  and a 
specificity  of 88%  for major  depression.  PHQ -9 scores  of 5, 10, 15 and 20 represent  mild,  moderate  and 
moderat ely severe  and severe  depression  respectively.   We will follow  VAPHS  policy  for suicide  assessment/  
crisis  treatment  for those  with  positive  responses  to item  9.[ADDRESS_826882]  for DSM -5 (PCL -5) 
a 20-item  self-report  measure  that assesses  the [ADDRESS_826883]  month  on a scale  of 
0 (“Not  at all”)  to 4 (“Extremely”).  Higher  scores  reflect  greater  PTSD.  Evidence  for the PCL  for DSM -4 
suggests  that a 5-10 point  change  represents  reliable  change  (i.e., change  not due to chance)  and a 10-[ADDRESS_826884]  to further  
validation.  
 
Social  Support  will be measured  with  The Support  Attitudes  Sub-scale  of the Diabetes  Care  Profile  (DCP),  a 
self-administered  questionnaire  that assesses  social  and psychological  factors  related  to diabetes  and its 
treatment.  The DCP  Support  Attitudes  Subscale  consists  of 4 questions:  one single  answer  multiple -choice  
question  and three  other  questions,  each  with  6 sub-questions,  on a 5-point  Likert  scale  (“Strongly  disagree”  to 
“Strongly  agree”).  Higher  subscale  scores reflect  greater  social  support  or social  support  needs .  Cronbach’s  
alpha  for the Support  Attitudes  Subscale  was .69 and .73 demonstrating  reliability.   The Social  Attitudes  
Subscale  is significantly  (p .01) correlated  with  The Social  Provisions  Scale  (r=.51),  CES  depression  scale  (r=-
.35) and the Happi[INVESTIGATOR_621128]  (r=.25)  demonstrating  concurrent  validity.[ADDRESS_826885]  greater  comorbidity.  The 
questionnaire  was tested  in 170 hospi[INVESTIGATOR_621129]’  medical  records.  Responses  are dicho tomous  yes or no answers  to the questions,  “Has  a doctor  or 
other  health  care  provider  ever  told you that you have…”  Test -retest  reliability  assessed  with  the intra -class  
correlation  coefficient  was 0.[ADDRESS_826886] 
level of education completed.  
 
Patient satisfaction  with DSME+  Mind -STRIDE class will be measured with  the Patient Satisfaction 
Questionnaire (PSQ), an [ADDRESS_826887] Attkisson, developer.  
 
3.6.2 Data Collection  
 
A summary of the timeline for  data collection procedures  appears in Table 5.  
 
 
Variables  Measure s* Screen  T1 
(Pre)  Week 4  
Booster  
 T2 
(Week 12)  15-week 
Interview  T3 
(Week 24)  
Anthropomorphic measures  BMI (kg/M2)  X  X  X 
Blood Pressure  BP mm/Hg   X  X  X 
Co-Morbidity  Charlson Self - 
Report index   X     
Demographics  Investigator 
Questionnaire   X     
Depression  PHQ -[ADDRESS_826888]  PAID  X   X  X 
Glycemic Control  HbA1c  X   X  X 
Mindfulness  FFMQ, CAMS -R  X  X  X 
PTSD  PLC -5  X  X  X 
Satisfaction (DSME+ Mind -
STRIDE only)  PSQ    X    
Social Support  DCP Support 
Attitudes Scale   X  X  X 
Veteran Satisfaction and 
Experience with Mind -
STRIDE (Experimental group 
sub-sample)  Qualitative 
Telephone 
Interview      X  
 
3.6.3 Participant Burden  
 
The total estimated time it will take to participate in the study beyond that of usual care over the 24 week study 
duration for the DSME -Alone group is approximately 5-hours , and 30 -hours for the DSME+ Mind -STRIDE 
group , with the bulk of time occurring during the first 6 weeks for  screening, assessments, and class and 
booster attendance .  This  time estimate for the usual care DSME -Alone group includes: screening and 
informed consent processes (2 hours ) and three 1 -hour assessments (3 hours) . The time estimate for the 
experimental g roup also includes the (1 hour) Mind -STRIDE intervention, the 4 -week Mind -STRIDE booster 
session (30 -minutes ), home mindfulnes s practice (~24 hours) . Journaling with  each home practice session  is 
encouraged, but is optional and will depend on each individu al. Journaling can take as little as 1 minute or up 
to several minutes  (~3 hours) . Qualitative tele phone interview s will also be conducted in a subset of 25 
purposively sampled experimental group participants (40 –minutes).  
 
3.7 Data Analysis  
 
Table 5. Variables and Measures Timeline  
 
 
    
 3.7.1 General Analytic Approach fo r Aim 1:    
 
Aim  1: To compare  the effects  of the intervention  (DSME+  Mind -STRIDE)  with  those  of usual  care  (DSME -
alone)  on diabetes  distress,  diabetes  self-efficacy,  and DSM  in military  Veterans  over  time.  
 
 
Hypotheses.  From  baseline  to 24-week  post -intervention,  DSME+  Mind -STRIDE  compared  to DSME -Alone  
will:   
1. Significantly  reduce  DRD   (primary  outcome)  
2. Significantly  increase mindfulness,  diabetes  self-efficacy  and diabetes  self-management  (secondary  
behavioral  outcomes)  
3. Significantly  decrease  HbA1c  (distal  metabolic  outcome)  
 
Independent  variable:  The Mind -STRIDE  intervention , which  includes  mindfulness  stress  reduction,  
mindfulness  meditation  training  and home  practice.  
 
Dependent  variables:  The primary  outcome  on which  the analysis  is powered  is DRD measured by [CONTACT_621178]. Secondary outcomes include diabetes self -efficacy,  diabetes self -management , mindfulness, and glycemic 
control , measured by [CONTACT_13505]1c.  
 
Analysis:  To assess  whether  there  are  group  differences  over  time,  we will use separate  linear  (or non-linear  
depending  on outcome)  mixed  models  for each  outcome   (diabetes  distress,  primary),  diabetes  self-efficacy,  
diabetes  self-management , mindfulness  and glycemic  control  (secondary)  for 3 time  points  (baseline,  [ADDRESS_826889] -intervention).  The base model will include fixed effects for treatment 
group DSME+ Mind -STRIDE, DSME -Alone group, time, and the interaction between treatment group and 
time.  To the extent possible , post -hoc analyses to explore the possible relationships between mindfulness and 
diabetes -related distress (as well as the interaction between them) on the distal secondary outcome, glycemic 
control  will be performed . 
 
Power  analysis:   Power calculations for Aim 1, hypothesis 1 of this study were based on a repeated measures 
design (2 sided α= .05) with 2 treatment groups (DSME+  Mind -STRIDE; DSME -Alone) and 3 time points 
(baseline, [ADDRESS_826890] -intervention) . We computed sample size estimates that 
were powered to detect an overall treatment group difference in DRD  (PAID scale score) as well as a treatment 
group difference over time (interaction between treatment group and time). Based on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_20732], a med ium 
effect size (d=  .6) gives a clinically meaningful change in PAID score.  Using a medium (d=.5) effect size, and 
estimates of the correlations between observations on the same subject of r=.5, powering at 80% gives a sample 
size estimate of 86 ( ~43 per group).  To account for possible clustering due to the randomization occurring in 
groups of n=5 participants, the required total sample size (86) was inflated by a factor of (1+ (5 -1) * p), where p 
is the intra -cluster correlation coefficient.78, 79 A conservative estimate of the intra -cluster correlation of  
p=0.05, gives an increased sample size of 104 ( ~52 per group).  To ensure a sample of 104 at study completion, 
126 Veterans will need to be recruited over the 2 -year study period.  This number of 126 Veterans is 
approximately 20% of the usual number of Veterans re ferred for DSME over two years and is within what is 
considered reasonable to recruit based on our pi[INVESTIGATOR_10299]. Sample size estimates were computed in Stata 
Statistical Software: Release 12 (College Station, TX: StataCorp LP;  2011).  
 
Ada Youk  PhD,  Associate  Professor  of Biostatistics  at the University  of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_621130],  will oversee  statistical  analysis  for Aim  1.  Analyses  for Aim  1 will be performed  using  Stata  statistical  
software.  Diabetes  distress  (the primary  outcome)  and secondary  outcomes  (mindfulness  diabetes  self-efficacy,  
diabetes  self-management , and HbA1c)  will be assessed  for normality  and appropriate  data  transformations  
will be used  if necessary . Descriptive  statistics  will be computed  to determine  central  tendency,  data  
sparseness,  and existence  of outliers  for all other  continuous  variables.  Frequency  distributions  will be 
generated  for categorical  variables  to identify  data  sparseness,  and categories  with  small  frequencies  will be 
merged  when appropriate.  In addition,  we will consider  categorization  of continuous  predictors  if the 
distributions  are skewed  or violate  assumptions  of linearity.  Differences  in covariates  by [CONTACT_621179]-square  (or Fisher’s  exact)  statistics  for categorical  variables  and t-test (or Mann -Whitney)  
for continuous  variables.  Graphical  procedures  will be used  to assess  simple  change  in the outcomes  over  time.  
For the main  analyses  for Aim  1, we will test study  hypotheses  by [CONTACT_621180] d models  (or non-linear  

 
 
    
 mixed  models  where  appropriate),  which  account  for repeated  measures  and assess  change  over  time  (baseline,  
12 weeks,  24 weeks).  The linear  mixed  model  allows  for missing  data  if data  are missing  at random.  
Demographic  variables  with a univariate  association  with  the outcome  (p<0.10)  or differed  by [CONTACT_621181]  (p<0.05)  will be considered  for inclusion  in a multivariate  model . Covariates  will be retained  in the 
final  multivariable  models  if significant  at p<0.05.  All tests will be two-sided.  All analyses  will be conducted  as 
intent -to-treat  analyses  and include  all patients  in the groups  to which  they  were  randomized,  regardless  of 
adherence  and/or  subsequent  withdrawal.   
 
Missing  Data.   We will review  all assessments  for completeness  during  the session  in which  it is collected  to 
attempt  to minimize  missing  data  for Aim  1. We will attempt  to assess  the missing  data  mechanism  for missing  
data  due to lost to follow -up or withdrawal.  If there  are significant  differences  in baseline  variables  between  
those  subjects  that have  complete  outcome  data  and those  that do not, we will adjust  for those  covar iates  as 
part  of the modeling.  80 If no systematic  differences  are found  or if the missing  data  is intermittent,  the 
missingness  will be handled  as part  of the regression  modeling.   Using  linear  mixed  linear  models  allows  the 
use of all available  data,  including  data  from  those  who  are missing  one or more  of the assessments.  We will 
also perform  completers  only  analyses  and see if these  differ  compared  to the modeling  using  all of the 
available  data  to assess  sensitivity  to the missingness.   
 
3.7.2 Gene ral Analytic  Approach  for Aim  2 
 
Aim  2: To identify  Veteran  satisfaction  and experiences  with  DSME  +Mind -STRIDE.  
 
We will use Convergent Parallel Design (Figure 5) to develop 
a more complete understanding of the research questions by 
[CONTACT_621182] (Aim 1) 
and qualitative (Aim 2) data.[ADDRESS_826891]  (FIPS)  140-[ADDRESS_826892]  semi -structured  interviews  developed  specifically  to address  Qualitative -Aim  2. A standardized  
telephone  interview  guide  (Appendix  4) will ensure  sufficient  uniformity  across  the interviews  in topi[INVESTIGATOR_621131] s. As further  interview  preparation,  we will pi[INVESTIGATOR_621132]  2-[ADDRESS_826893]  in determining  whether  refinement  or modification  of questions  is 
needed,  allowing  us to make  necessary  revisions.82 If the interview  guides  are not significantly  modified  as a 
resul t of the pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268],  the information  gathered  from  the people  who  participated  in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_621133].   
 
The semi -structured  interview  guide  will contain  open -ended  questions  (including  clarifying  questions)  that 
also will provide  the flexibility  to explore  topi[INVESTIGATOR_621134] —with  probing  
questions  according  to varied  patient  experiences.  Participant  interviews  will be aimed  at exploring  Vete ran 
satisfaction  and experiences  with  the Mind -STRIDE  class  provided  within  DSME.  The interview  will also 
explore  their  experience  with  mindfulness  training  and home  mindfulness  practice  in general  and relative  to 
diabetes  management .  When  possible,  DSME+  Mind -STRIDE  participants  will be asked  additional  questions  
guided  by [CONTACT_621183].   The interviews  will (1) provide  detailed  "thick " descriptions  about  Veter an experiences  with  Mind -
STRIDE  and mindfulness  practice  that do not rely on predefined  quantitative  study  instrument  categories,83 
and (2) provide  patients  the opportunity  to elaborate  about  moment  to moment  experiences  associated  with  
mindfulness  practice  . The interviews  will take  approximately  20-[ADDRESS_826894]  at the Center  for Health  Equity  Research  and Promotion   Figure 5. Convergent Parallel Design  

 
 
    
 (CHERP).  Results  of interviews  will be summarized  into topi[INVESTIGATOR_318318],  as well as the range  of thematic  
issues,  concerns,  or foci of the patient.  We will also record  the frequencies  of topi[INVESTIGATOR_621135].  
Recordings  will be stored  according  to VA information  security  specifications .  
 
A sub-sample of 25 DSME+  Mind -STRIDE participants will be selected for the interviews  by [CONTACT_621184] a wide range of age groups, race/ethnicity, and 
severity/type of diabetes.84. Verbatim transcripts from interviews with 25 DSME+ Mind -STRIDE participants 
are sufficient for thematic saturation —which requires a minimum of 12 -20 participants of each “type .” 85 The 
transcribed data will be de -identified and imported into ATLAS.ti (Scientific Software, [LOCATION_010]) for 
data management and analysis.[ADDRESS_826895]. Rodriguez will train the coders  (existing study staff)  to develop 
qualitative codebooks for the patient interviews.  
 
Keri  Rodriguez  PhD,  Research  Health  Scientist  and CHERP  Core  Investigator  at VAPHS,  will oversee  
qualitative  data  analysis  for Aim  2.  Using a modified grounded theory approach for data analysis, t rained 
coders  will use the constant comparative method to compare newly gathered data with previously collected 
data to develop categories of responses.[ADDRESS_826896] areas of foci will include Veteran satisfaction and exper iences of mindfulness training and practice. As 
the coders examine more transcripts, they will refine their coding sub -categories and develop a coding scheme. 
In the case of disagreements, they will further develop rules to distinguish codes. If necessary,  the coders will 
consult with the research team to refine the criteria. Both coders will then each code 100% of the transcripts 
independently.[ADDRESS_826897]. Rodriguez’s and the PI’s adjudication. The codes 
determined through this consensus process will be recorded  in a master file, which will become the basis for 
the final analysis. This process of coding will maintain narrative coherence with inter -coder reliability kappa 
scores > 0.75.[ADDRESS_826898]. DiNardo, the Principal Investigator (PI), will be  oversee the  details of the study  including hiring and trainin g 
staff, testing the data entry system, creating study manuals, and recruiting and consenting subjects . She will  lead 
weekly meetings with the Research Team  and bi-monthly  meetings with Co -Investigators so that issues can be 
addressed in a timely manner. The Mentoring team is highly experienced in conducting clinical trials, and will 
guide the investigator in reaching charted milestones on the  timeline . See Gantt chart (Table 6) . 
Table 6. Study Timeline  
Study  Activity  Year  [ADDRESS_826899] that the intervention has been pi[INVESTIGATOR_2268] -
tested at VAPHS and fit  into the already existing DSME format and therefore can realistically be implemented  
without delay . Additionally, to the exten t possible , one trained diabetes educator will deliver the DSME 
component and one trained mindfulness instructor will deliver the Mind -STRIDE intervention to all groups in 
order to decrease instructor bias. In order  to sustain engagement in the study , all participants will r eceive 
monthly postcards from the research study.  Control group participants will receive postcards with healthy tips 
for living with diabetes, and experimental group participants’ postcards will  include these tips plus mindfulness 
tips and quotations.  And finally, our mixed -methods methodology will provide a more comprehensive 
evaluation of the program and inform potential implementation at other VAMCs in the future . 
 
To assure that the mindfulne ss training is delivered in a standardized way, a course manual will be developed 
and instructor guidelines will be followed . Pursuant to IRB approved authorization, all Mind -STRIDE sessions 
will be audiotaped using  a VA -approved encrypted audio -recorder . [CONTACT_621186],  our mindfulness expert,  will 
develop a fidelity -rating guide for the  intervention. [CONTACT_621186] will train the Study Coordinator to use this guide 
to assess the fidelity of each audio -recorded session, so that the interventionist can be made aware of any 
discrepancies from the course manual , and they can be corrected in a timely fashion.  
 
4.0 Dissemination/Implementation  
 
Study findings will be disseminated to the following intended groups as soon as the final study report has been 
completed: Veterans, VA healthcare providers and researchers, and non -VA diabetes researchers and diabetes 
stakeholders outside of the VA.  Strat egies for disseminating findings to each group are described below with an 
estimated timeline of planned dissemination in year three of the study.  
 
4.1 Veterans  
 
Study findings will be disseminated to Veterans using the following methods:  
 a) Articles in VA newsletters, magazines, and other Veteran -related publications  
 b) Presentations at health fairs and community outreach event  
 
4.2 VA Healthcare Providers and Researchers  
 
Study findings will be disseminated to VA providers   locally, regionally, and nationally through the following 
mechanisms:  
a) Publications in peer -reviewed scientific journals (e.g., Diabetes Care, The Diabetes Educator, 
Applied Nursing Research, Journal o f Alternative and Complementary Therapi[INVESTIGATOR_014] ).  
b) In -person presentations at conferences and workshops (e.g., The American Diabetes Association 
Scientific Meetings; The American Academy of Nurse Practitioner Annual Meeting; American 
Association of Diabetes E ducators Annual Meeting), The Society of Behavioral Medicine Annual 
Meeting  
 c) Webinars, teleconferences, and nursing grand rounds  
 
 
    
 d) Creation and dissemination of an educational videotape (included in the budget)  
 
 
5.[ADDRESS_826900]  the diversity of experience and expertise necessary for the successful  
completion of the proposed program of research (see Biosketches). The Primary Investigator has assembled an 
outstanding research team of mentors and co -investigators with whom she has worked with closely in clinical and 
clinical research settings related to diabetes management, education, and healthy behavior change. A 
comprehensive table of mentoring plan activities is included in Appendix 5.  
Monica DiNardo  PhD, ANP, CDE , the PI , is a new investigator  and an experienced certified adult nurse 
practitioner and diabetes educator who has maintained a clinical practice at VA Pi[INVESTIGATOR_621136] [ADDRESS_826901]. Jon Kabat -Zinn at the 
Omega Institute in Rhinebeck, [LOCATION_001]. She has conducted two feasibility pi[INVESTIGATOR_621137], one of wh ich was conducted at the VA Pi[INVESTIGATOR_274725]. She will oversee all aspects of the proposed study in collaboration with the co -investigators and the 
guidance of her strong mentoring team.   
5.2 Mentor s 
Lauren Broyles PhD, RN (Nurse Co-Mentor, Co -Investigator)  is a VA Research Health Scientist, 
HSR&D Career Development Awardee, and Core Investigator in the Veterans Affairs Pi[INVESTIGATOR_274725]’s Center for Health Equity Research and Promotion (CHERP) and investigator in the VI SN [ADDRESS_826902]. Broyles is an Assistant Professor of Medicine, Clinical and Translational 
Science, and Nursing at the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9109] (Pi[INVESTIGATOR_32887]).  [CONTACT_346303] mentoring experience includes serving 
as Co -Director for the Pi[INVESTIGATOR_621138] -professional 
Fellowship in Addictions Treatment and as  Director of the “Ramp  to K ” career development program for junior 
investigators at Pi[INVESTIGATOR_32887]. [CONTACT_346303] will serve as Primary Nursing Co -mentor for Dr. DiNardo. She will meet with 
Dr. DiNardo weekly  and provide direct guidance and oversight of all facets of the Mentoring Plan (Ap pendix 5). 
She offers expertise in grant writing, manuscript, preparation, and navigating the research environment and 
resources at VAPHS, CHERP, and in the VA Nursing Research arena.  
 
Jill Bormann PhD, RN, FAAN (Senior Nurse Co -Mentor, Co -Investigator)  is a highly respected 
nurse scientist with the VHA System and recipi[INVESTIGATOR_63126] 2014 Secretary’s Award for Excellence in Nursing. [CONTACT_621187] is Associate Nurse Executive and Research and Clinical Nurse Specialist in Adult Psychiatric -Mental 
Health Nursing at the VA San Diego Healthcare System and Clinical Professor at San Diego State University 
School of Nursing. [CONTACT_231992]'s research interests include Veterans with PTSD. [CONTACT_231992] pi[INVESTIGATOR_214669] a 
program of research on health -related outcomes of the Mantram  Repetition Program (MRP), a spi[INVESTIGATOR_621139] -related stress.  [CONTACT_621187] will serve as Senior Nurse Co -Mentor.  [CONTACT_231992] brings expertise and experience in successful 
clini cal implementation trials of meditation and mind -body research at VA. She will serve as implementation 
expert for the study. She will also assist with selection of grant and career opportunities in Complementary and 
Alternative Medicine, and will help to g uide Dr.  DiNardo’s research trajectory. She will attend weekly telephone 
meetings with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_621140].  She will be engaged in execution and evaluation of the Mentoring 
Plan.  (Appendix 5 ) 
 
Natalia Morone MD, MS (Mentor, Co-Investigator)  is an Associate Professor of Medicine and Clinical 
and Translational Science at the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_621141]. Her research f ocus is in mindfulness 
interventions for chronic pain in older adults. [CONTACT_621188] has been Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_621142]/NIA RO1 
clinical trial of mindfulness for older adults with chronic pain, and has published extensively on mindfulness 

 
 
    
 for pain as well as stress reduction. She has also completed two qualitative studies of the effects of mindfulness  
meditation on pain and stress.  [CONTACT_621188] is a general internist and has an active clinical practice. She also co -
directs the Career Education and Enhanc ement for Health Care Research Diversity program at the University 
of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_9109], which is committed to providing a solid foundation on which to build a successful research 
career for under -represented minorities. [CONTACT_621188] has expertise in conducting cli nical research in 
mindfulness and will provide guidance and oversight of the proposed study. She will assist with manuscript 
preparation, preparation of presentations, and preparation for future grant writing. [CONTACT_621188] will meet with 
the PI [INVESTIGATOR_621143], and will be actively engaged in the Mentoring Plan.  (Appendix 5 ) 
 
5.3 Co-Investigators/ Members of Core Research Team  
 
Ada Youk PhD (Co -Investigator)  is an Associate  Professor at the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_621144] /Senior Biostatistician  in the Veterans Affairs Pi[INVESTIGATOR_268341]’s Center for Health Equity Research and Promotion (CHERP)  in the Biostatistics and 
Informatics Core (BIC) . [CONTACT_621189] has almost [ADDRESS_826903] study as well contribute to presentations and manuscr ipts. She will meet 
with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_621145].  
 
Keri Rodriguez, PhD (Co -Investigator)  is a full -time Research Health Scientist and CHERP Core 
Investigator at VAPHS. [CONTACT_26429] has extensive experience in the development and implementation of 
qualitative methods and in the interpretation of qualitative data. Her work includes a VA HSR&D M erit Review 
Entry Program award focused on patient -provider communication and decision making in heart failure, and a 
Minority Supplement from the National Cancer Institute supported her work as co -investigator on the 
“Communication Regarding Quality of Li fe Between Oncologists and Patients with Advanced Cancer project; 
both projects include substantial qualitative data components. She has served as Co -Investigator on nurse -led 
projects with [CONTACT_346303] related to health behavioral change in Veterans.  [CONTACT_26429] will provide 
oversight for the qualitative methods employed by [CONTACT_220644]. Specifically, she will assist with development 
of the qualitative assessment and data management tools, and provide input on the coding process. She will 
work with Drs. DiNardo and Morone to train the project staff that will be performing the qualitative coding . 
She will oversee the development of documented coding audit trails and assist with development of the 
qualitative codebook . [CONTACT_26429] will participate in the regular weekly project team meetings  and meetings 
of those working on the qualitative methods. She will participate in the data analysis and interpretation of the 
qualitative data as well as the preparation of manuscripts and presentatio ns related to the qualitative data.  
 
5.4 Co-Investigators with Focused Advisory Roles  
 
Carol Greco PhD (Co -Investigator)  is a licensed clinical psychologist at the UPMC Center for Integrative 
Medicine and Assistant Professor of Psychiatry at the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_99601]. [CONTACT_621186] 
coordinates the Mindfulness -Based Stress Reduction (MBSR) program at UPMC an d has been engaged in 
research of Mind -body interventions for pain control and stress management in patients with chronic illness. 
Dr. G reco has completed five teacher -training programs in MBSR at the University of [LOCATION_005] Medical 
School’s Center for  Mindfulness. She teaches MBSR at the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_621146]. Since 2004, she has taught a total of 17 eight -session MBSR classes to 
approximately 300 individuals.  She also has expertise in patien t-reported outcomes instrument development, 
particularly in the area of non -specific factors that contribute to healing/positive outcomes. [CONTACT_621186] has 
served as MBSR expert regarding program development and will assist with training of the mindfulness 

 
 
    
 interventionist, and will oversee assessment of intervention fidelity.  She will be instrumental in interpretation 
of clinical significance. She will meet with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_621147], and will be available for ad hoc 
telephone meetings with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_621148].  
Linda Siminerio PhD, RN, CDE (Co -Investigator)  is Professor of Medicine, Executive Director, 
University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_621149], Assistant Professor of Nursing, Unive rsity of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_621150]. [CONTACT_621190] is the Director of the Adult Clinical Services Division of the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_621151]. She is a nationally prominent advocate for diabetes care, education and funding, and is 
Chair o f the National Diabetes Education Program (NDEP). She is former Vice President of the American 
Diabetes Association (ADA) and Chair of the International Diabetes Federation (IDF) translation research 
program, and served as Chair of the IDF World Congress. She was Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_8178] a Department of 
Defense (DOD) regional diabetes initiative grant. Her main academic focus is in translation research and 
diabetes quality improvement, self -management, community interventions, and overcoming barriers to 
diabetes care in underserved populations. She has organized the 2nd largest network of ADA recognized 
Diabetes Self -Management Education programs in the US. She will serve as Diabetes Self -Management 
Education expert and will help to oversee assessment and interpretation of diabetes self - care outcomes. She 
will meet with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_621147], and will be available for ad hoc telephone meetings as 
needed. She will help with preparation of manuscripts and presentations, and overall disseminatio n of study 
findings.  
 
R.Harsha Rao, MD (Co -Investigator)  is a board certified endocrinologist, Associate Professor at the 
University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_621152], and Clinical Director of the VAPHS Division of Endocrinology and 
Diabetes. [CONTACT_621191] is active in clinical practice and leads the multidisciplinary Diabetes Management Clinic at 
VAPHS. He also serves as Director of the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_106735] h Endocrinology Fellowship. [CONTACT_156617] worked 
with Dr. DiNardo on her previous feasibility pi[INVESTIGATOR_799], a nd will serve as clinical diabetes expert for this grant.  
His position as C linical Director and daily contact [CONTACT_118735] [INVESTIGATOR_621153]. He will meet with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_621154] m twice monthly, and will 
be available for ad hoc telephone meetings with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_621155].  
 
Carolyn Thorpe PhD, MPH (Co -Investigator)  is Assistant Professor in the University of Pi[INVESTIGATOR_621156] a Core Investigator at Veterans Affairs Pi[INVESTIGATOR_108710]’s Center for 
Health Equity Research and Promotion (CHERP). She is a health services researcher and behavioral scientist 
with interests in quality medication pres cribing and adherence in older adults with T2D M and multiple 
comorbidities, and has published on the topic of copi[INVESTIGATOR_621157]. [CONTACT_621192]’s projects are aimed at 
medication adherence in older adults. The National Institute of Diabetes and Digesti ve and Kidney Diseases 
(NIDDK), the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), and the Department of Veterans Affairs 
has supported her work. Methodologically, [CONTACT_621192] is experienced in a wide range of both quantitative and 
qualitative methods. She has extensive expertise in VA utilization data and the development and evaluation of 
behavioral and health systems interventions. She will serve as consultant on interpretation of medication 
adherence and copi[INVESTIGATOR_208089], and will meet with the PI [INVESTIGATOR_621158] e monthly, and will be available for ad hoc 
meetings as necessary.  
 
5.[ADDRESS_826904]. DiNar do’s development  as a nurse  investigator  prepared  to 
conduct  independent  research  focused  on high  priority,  VA mission -oriented  areas  of investigation.  
 
 
 
                                          
