ID: 
STUDY00011386      Early Powered Mobility for Toddlers With 
Cerebral Palsy Using the Permobil® Explorer 
Mini and a Modified Ride -On Car  
 
 
 
 
Protocol Document  
Approval Date: 12/1/2020      [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
[ADDRESS_56013]. NE, Box 359470 Seattle, WA [ZIP_CODE]
main [PHONE_947]   fax [PHONE_948]   [EMAIL_1002]   www.washington.edu/research/hsd
Implemented 10/15/2020 – Version 2.5 - Page 1 of 2IRB APPROVAL OF APPLICATION
December 1, 2020
Dear Heather Feldner:
On 12/1/2020, University of Washington IRB Committee B reviewed the following application:
Type of Review: Initial Study
Title of Study: Early Powered Mobility for Toddlers with Cerebral Palsy: A Comparative 
Case Series of the Permobil® Explorer Mini and a Modified Ride-On Car
Investigator: Heather Feldner
IRB ID: STUDY00011386
Funding: Name: [CONTACT_52934] (NICHD)
Grant Office ID: A162382
Funding Source ID: P2C HD101912
Pass-through institution: Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University 
IND, IDE, or HDE: None
IRB Approval
Under FWA #00006878, the IRB approved your activity. 
Depending on the nature of your study, you may need to obtain other approvals or 
permissions to conduct your research. For example, you might need to apply for access to 
data or specimens (e.g., to obtain UW student data). Or, you might need to obtain 
permission from facilities managers to approach possible subjects or conduct research 
procedures in the facilities (e.g., Seattle School District; the Harborview Emergency 
Department).
COVID NOTE: Researchers must comply with current infection control requirements and 
complete a self-assessment that activities fit within allowable research as described on the 
HSD website. 
Your application qualified for expedited review (“minimal risk”; Categories 1, 6, & 7)).
Under the Revised Common Rule this IRB approval is valid until study completion. In other 
words, there is no expi[INVESTIGATOR_52853]. However, you are still required to (1) obtain IRB 
approval before making any changes (modifications) to your research, and (2) provide the 
IRB with any Reportable New Information such as breaches of confidentiality or 
unanticipated problems. 
This approval applies only to the activities described in your application (including any 
references to specific grant sections). It does not include other activities that may be 
described in your grant or contract.
This approval applies only to the generic protocol and the UW site. You will receive a 
separate approval notice for each additional participating site.
[ADDRESS_56014]. NE, Box 359470 Seattle, WA [ZIP_CODE]
main [PHONE_947]   fax [PHONE_948]   [EMAIL_1002]   www.washington.edu/research/hsd
Implemented 10/15/2020 – Version 2.5 - Page 2 of 2Your study automatically has a Certificate of Confidentiality (CoC), because you have NIH 
funding. A description of the CoC protections and responsibilities has been placed in your 
study’s Documents section.
If you plan to continue data collection past the expi[INVESTIGATOR_52854], 
contact [CONTACT_52878]. We will help you 
determine whether you need to apply for a CoC extension. 
Determinations, waivers, and regulations 
The IRB made the determinations and waivers listed in the table below. Note that any granted 
waivers of consent or parent permission do not override a subject’s refusal to provide broad 
consent.
Requirement Determination or Waiver
Required elements of consent Waived or altered for the initial eligibility screening
Documentation of consent Waived for all study procedures
Involvement of children Approved
Parental permission Permission of only one parent is required
Documentation of parental permission Waived
Assent Assent is not required
Location of documents
Use the consent materials that were approved and stamped by [CONTACT_1201]. They can be downloaded 
from the Final column under the Documents tab in Zipline.
In addition, HSD has uploaded the following documents to the Documents tab in Zipline: 
Certificate of Confidentiality Acknowledgement Letter
Thank you for your commitment to ethical and responsible research. We wish you great success!
Sincerely,
Bailey Bodell, CIP
Human Subjects Reliance Administrator  
[ADDRESS_56015] NE, Box 359470, Seattle, WA [ZIP_CODE]
p: [PHONE_949]     f: [PHONE_948]     [EMAIL_1003]
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 1 of 50 
  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  
 
 
 
The Human Subjects Division (HSD) strives to ensure that people with disabilities have access to all services and content.  If you 
experience  any accessibility -related issues with this form or any aspect of the application process, email 
[EMAIL_1004]  for assistance.  
 
INSTRUCTIONS  
• This form is only for studies that will be reviewed by [CONTACT_52879] . Before completing this form, check HSD’s website  to 
confirm that this should not be reviewed by [CONTACT_52880] (non -UW) IRB.  
• If yo u are requesting a determination  about whether the planned activity is human subjects research or qualifies for exempt 
status, you may skip all questions except those marked with a          . For example 1.[ADDRESS_56016] be answered.  
• Answer all questions . If a question is not applicable to the research  or if you believe you have already answered a question 
elsewhere in the application , state “ NA” (and if applicable, refer to the question where you provided the information) . If you 
do not answer a question , the IRB does not know whether the question was overlooked or whether it is  not applicable. This 
may result in unnecessary “back and forth” for clarification. Use non -technical language as much as possible.  
• To check a box, place an “X” in the box.  To fil l in a text box, make sure your cursor is within the gray text box bar before 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_52855].  
• For collaborative or multi -site research, describe only the UW activities unless you are requesting that the UW IRB provide 
the review and oversight for non-UW collaborators or co -investigators as well.  
• You may reference other documents (such as a grant application) if they provide the requested information in non -technical 
language. Be sure to provide the document name, page(s), and specific sections, and upload it to Zipline . Also, describe any 
changes that may have occurred since the document was written (for example, changes that you’ve made during or after the 
grant review process). In some cases, you may need to provide additional details in the answer space as well as referencing a 
document .  
 
INDEX  
1 Overview  6 Children (Minors) and Parental Permission  10 Risk / Benefit Assessment  
2 Participants  7 Assent of Children (Minors)  11 Economic Burden to Participants  
3 Non-UW R esearch Setting  8 Consent of Adults  12 Resources  
4 Recruiting and Screening Parti cipants  9 Privacy and Confidentiality  13 Other Approvals, Permissions, and 
Regulatory Issues  
5 Procedures    
 
1 OVERVIEW  
Study Title:  Early Powered Mobility for Toddlers with Cerebral Palsy: A Comparative Case Series of the 
Permobil® Explorer Mini  and a Modified Ride -On Car  

Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56017] the research . Provide any he lpful explanatory information.  
In general, the home institution is the institution (1) that provides the researcher’s paycheck  and that considers him/her to be 
a paid employee, or (2) at which the researcher is a matriculated student. Scholars, faculty, fellows, and students who are 
visiting the UW and who are the lead researcher: identify your home instituti on and describe the purpose and duration of your 
UW visit, as well as  the UW department/center with which you are affiliated while at the UW.  
 
Note that many UW clinical faculty members are paid employees of non -UW institutions . 
 
The UW IRB provides IRB re view and oversight for only those researchers who meet the criteria  described in the SOP: Use of 
the UW IRB . 
 University of Washington  
1.2 Consultation history . Has there been any consultation with someone  at HSD about this study?  
It is not necessary to obtain advance consultation. However, if advance consultation was obtai ned, answering this question 
will help ensure that the IRB is aware of and considers the advice and guidance provided  in that consultation .   
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, briefly describe the consultation: approximate date, with whom, and method (e.g., by [CONTACT_6968], 
phone call, in -person meeting).     
 The lead PI, Heather Feldner, both emailed and spoke via phone call with HSD Team S member and 
IRB Reliance Administrator Jenny Maki. Jenny described  the process for applying for sIRB status 
based on the details of our study and grant funding mechanism (NI H), and provided guidance about 
the nature of sIRB, UW approval processes, and required forms. She discussed our study with the 
Reliance team and communicated approval for UW to serve as the single IRB.  
1.3 Similar and/or related studies . Are there any related IRB applications that provide context for the proposed 
activities?  
Examples of studies for which there is likely to be a related IRB application: Using samples or data collected by [CONTACT_52881]; 
recruiting subjects from a registry established by a colleague’s research activity; conducting Phase [ADDRESS_56018], or 
conducting a continuation of another study; serving as the data coordinating center for a multi -site study that includes a UW 
site. 
 
Providing this information ( if relevant) may significantly improve the efficiency and consistency of the IRB’s review.  
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, briefly describe the other studies or applications and how they relate to the proposed 
activities. If the other applications were reviewed by [CONTACT_52879], please also provide: the UW IRB 
number, the study title, and the lead researcher’s name.    
 Please also see active STUDY00004383, titled ‘Investigating the impacts of adapted ride -on car 
use by [CONTACT_52882]’, also by [CONTACT_976] [INVESTIGATOR_52856]. This expedited review 
study uses much of the same participant population, materials, a nd methods as the new study. The 
new study will incorporate an additional commercial pediatric powered mobility device, and a few 
additional outcome assessments.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56019] 
the proposed activity?  
HSD recognizes that everyone would like their IRB applications to be reviewed as quickly as possible. To ensure fairness, it is 
HSD policy to review applications in the order in which they are received. However, HSD will assign a higher priority to 
researc h with externally -imposed urgency that is beyond the control of the researcher. Researchers are encouraged to 
communicate as soon as possible with their HSD staff contact [CONTACT_52883] (in other words, before  
submitting the IRB a pplication). Examples: a researcher plans to test an experimental vaccine that has just been developed for 
a newly emerging epi[INVESTIGATOR_901]; a researcher has an unexpected opportunity to collect data from students when the end of the 
school year is only four week s away.  
 
HSD may ask for documentation of the externally -imposed urgency. A higher priority should not be requested to compensate 
for a researcher’s failure to prepare an IRB application in a timely manner. Note that IRB review requires a certain minimum 
amount of time; without sufficient time, the IRB may not be able to review and approve an application by a deadline.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, briefly describe the urgency or deadline as well as the reason for it.  
         
1.[ADDRESS_56020] . If hypotheses are being tested, describe them.  You will be asked to describe the specific procedures in a 
later section.  
 
If this application involves the use of a HUD “humanitarian” device: describe whether the use is for “on -label” 
clinical patient care, “off -label” clinical patient care, and/or research (collec ting safety and/or effectiveness data).  
 The use of powered mobility devices for young children with cerebral palsy (CP) has been gaining traction, with 
evidence that the use of powered mobility at young ages complements (rather than detracts from) other 
interventions focused on more traditional mobility skills such as crawling and walking. This study will collect 
preliminary data (both numeric and opi[INVESTIGATOR_1649]/perception data)  to investigate device use patterns, caregiver 
perceptions, and developmental o utcomes of children with CP as families are introduced to two early powered 
mobility interventions: the Permobil® Explorer Mini, and a modified ride -on toy car . Specific Aims include: Aim 1:  
Evaluate a powered mobility intervention to understand  developmental, activity and participation outcomes of 
young children with CP . Aim 2:  Compare the use patterns (frequency, duration, environment) and acceptability, 
feasibility, and intervention appropr iateness of two powered mobility options: The Explorer Mini and a modified 
ride-on car.  
1.6 Study design . Provide a one -sentence description of the general study design and/or type of methodology.   
Your answer will help HSD in assigning applications to  reviewers and in managing workload. Examples: a longitudinal 
observational study; a double -blind, placebo -controlled randomized study; ethnographic interviews; web scrapi[INVESTIGATOR_52857] a 
convenience sample of blogs; medical record review; coordinating center for  a multi -site study.  
 This is a mixed -methods, randomized, counterbalanced AB crossover intervention study.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56021] an “X” in at least one box.  
This question is essential for ensuring that your application is correctly reviewed. Please read each option carefully.  
 Descriptor  
  1. Class project or other activity whose purpose is to provide an educational experience for the researcher 
(for example, to learn about the process or methods of doing research).    
  
  
2. Part of an institution, organization, or program’s own internal operational monitoring.    
  
  
3. Improve the quality of service provided by a specific institution, organization, or program.   X 
  
  4. Designed to expand the knowledge base of a scientific discipline or other scholarly field of study, and 
produce results that:  
• Are expected to be applicable to a larger population beyond the site of data collection or the specific 
subjects studied, or  
• Are intended to be used to develop, test, or support theories, principles, and statements of 
relationships, or to inform policy beyond the study.   X 
  
  5. Focus directly on the specific individuals about whom the information or biospecimens are collected 
through oral history, journalism, biography, or historical scholarship activities, to provide an accurate and 
evidence -based portrayal of the individuals.    
  
  6. A quality improvement or program improvement activity conducted to improve the implementation 
(delivery or quality) of an accepted practice, or to collect data about the implementation of the practice 
for clinical, practical, or administrative purposes. This does not include the evaluatio n of the efficacy of 
different accepted practices, or a comparison of their efficacy.   X 
  
  7. Public health surveillance activities conducted, requested, or authorized by a public health authority for 
the sole purpose of identifying or investigating potential public health signals or timely awareness and 
priority setting during a situation that threatens public health.    
  
  
8. Preliminary, exploratory, or research development activities (such as pi[INVESTIGATOR_52858], or 
reliability/validation testing of a questionnaire)    
  
  
9. Expanded access use of a drug or device not yet approved for this purpose    
  
  
10. Use of a Humanitarian Use Device    
  
  
11. Other. Explain:    
  
         
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 5 of 50 
 1.8 Background, experience, and preliminary work . Answer this question only  if the proposed activity has one or 
more of the following characteristics. The purpose of this question is to provide the IRB with information that is 
relevant to its risk/benefit analysis.  
• Involves more than minimal risk (physical or non -physical)  
• Is a clinical trial, or 
• Involves having the subjects use a drug, biological, botanical, nutritional supplement, or me dical 
device.  
“Minimal risk” means that the probability and magnitude of harm or discomfort anticipated in the research are not greater 
than those ordinarily encountered in daily life or during the performance of routine physical or psychological examinations or 
tests.  
 a. Background . Provide the rationale and the scientific or scholarly background for the proposed activity, based 
on existing literature (or clinical knowledge). Describe the gaps in current knowledge that the proje ct is 
intended to address.  
 This should be a plain language description. Do not provide scholarly citations. Limit your answer t o less than one page, or 
refer to an attached document with background information that is no more than three pages long.  
       
 b. Experience and p reliminary work . Briefly describe experience or preliminary work or data (if any) that you, 
your team, or your collaborators/co -investigators have that supports the feasibility and/or safety of this study.   
 It is not necessary to summarize all discussion that has led to the development of the study protocol. The IRB is interested 
only in short summaries about experiences or preliminary work that suggest the study is feasible and that risks are 
reasonable relative to the benefits. Examples: You r team  has already conducted a Ph ase 1 study of an experimental drug 
which supports the Phase 2 study being proposed in this application ; you r team has  already done a small pi[INVESTIGATOR_52859] -schoo l program with 
classroom aides; you r team has  experience with the type of surgery that is required to implant the study device; the study 
coordinator is experienced in working with subjects who have significant cognitive impairment.  
   
1.9 Supplements . Check all boxes that apply, to identify relevant Supplements that should be complete d and 
upload ed to Zipline . 
This section is here instead of at the end of the form to reduce the risk of duplicating information in this IRB Protocol for m that 
you will need to provide in these Supplements.  
 Check all 
That A pply  Type of R esearch  Supplement N ame  
    
Department of Defense  
The research involves Department of Defense funding, facilities, data, or 
personnel.  SUPPLEMENT 
Department of Defense      
    
    
Department of Energy  
The research involves Department of Energy funding, facilities, data, or 
personnel.  SUPPLEMENT 
Department of Energy      
    
    
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 6 of 50 
     Drug, biologic, botanical, supplement  
Procedures involve the use of any drug, biologic, botanical or 
supplement, even if the item is not the focus of the proposed research  SUPPLEMENT Drugs  
    
    Emergency exception to informed consent  
Research that requires this special consent waiver for research involving 
more than minimal risk  SUPPLEMENT Exception 
from Informed Consent 
for Emergency Research 
(EFIC)      
    
    
Genomic data sharing  
Genomic data are being collected and will be deposited in an external 
database (such as the NIH dbGaP database) for sharing with other 
researchers, and the UW is being asked to provide the required 
certification or to ensure that the consent forms can be certified  SUPPLEMENT Genomic 
Data Sharing      
    
    Medical device  
Procedures involve the use of any medical device, even if the device is 
not the focus of the proposed research, except when the device is FDA -
approved and is being used through a clinical facility in the manner for 
which it is approved  SUPPLEMENT Devices    X  
    
    Multi -site or collaborative study  
The UW IRB is being asked to review on behalf of one or more non -UW 
institutions in a multi -site or collaborative study.  SUPPLEMENT: Multi -site 
or Collaborative Research    X  
    
    Non -UW Individual Investigators  
The UW IRB is being asked to review on behalf of one or more non -UW 
individuals who are not affiliated with another organization for the 
purpose of the research.  SUPPLEMENT: Non -UW 
Individual Investigators      
    
    
None of the above     X  
    
1.[ADDRESS_56022] an exception granted by [CONTACT_52884]:  (a) the only in -person interactions are 
essential for the study; (b) study t eam members and participants will wear face coverings throughout all 
procedures; (c) all study staff and participants will be screened for COVID -[ADDRESS_56023] prior to each research visit; and 
(d) no participants over the age of 85 years will be enrolled if thei r in-person participation is not connected with a 
clinical visit. See this webpage  for details,  including what “screening” means.  
Review the HSD website  for current guidelines about which in -person research activities are allowable.  
 
 X Confirmed  
 
 
[ADDRESS_56024] populations or groups , including age range, 
gender, health status, and any other relevant characteristics.  
 Participants will include children of all genders, ages 12 -36 months, with diagnoses of cerebral palsy or who are 
at risk for cerebral palsy, and their parent or legal guardian of all genders ages 18 and above.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 7 of 50 
 2.2 Inclusion and exclusion criteria.   
a. Inclusion criteria.  Describe the specific criteria that will be used  to decide who will be included  in the research  
from among interested or potential subjects. Define any technical terms in lay language.  
 Inclusion criteria  for the study : 1) The child  will be between 12 -36 months old ; 2) have a medical diagnosis of 
CP with any level (I -V) of associated motor ability according to the Gross Motor Function Classification 
System ( GMFCS ) or be at risk for CP according to birth history and current developmental statu s; 3) be able 
to attain a seated position with or without support ; 4) be able to tolerate upright sitting with or without support 
while moving through space for 30 minutes ; 5) and live in a household where English is spoken proficiently ; 
Adults  will 1) be 18 years or older  and be  the legal caregiver for the child  participant ; and  2) demonstrate 
proficiency in English.  Inclusion criteria will be secured via caregiver report using screening questions.  
b. Exclusion criteria. Describe the specific criteria that will  be used  to decide who will be excluded from the 
research  from subjects who meet the inclusion criteria listed above. Define any technical terms in lay 
language.  
 Children will be excluded from the study if : 1) they have not been given a medical diagnosis of CP  or are not 
at risk for CP (per parent report  of birth history and current developmental status ); 2) if they cannot attain a 
seated position with or without support; 3) if they cannot tolerate upright sitting with or without support for 30 
minutes; 4)  all participants will be excluded if they are not proficient in English  (determined per screening 
process) .  
 
2.3 Prisoners . IRB approval is required in order to include prisoners in research, even when prisoners are not an 
intended target population.  
a. Will the proposed research  recruit or obtain data from individuals that are known  to be prisoners?  
For records reviews: if the records do not indicate prisoner status and prisoners are not  a target population, select “No ”. 
See the WORKSHEET Prisoners  for the definition of “prisoner”.  
 X No → If no, skip the rest of part a. and continue to 2.3.b  
  Yes → If yes, answer the following questions  (i – iv). 
 i. Describe the type of prisoners, and which prisons/jails:  
       
 ii. One concern about prisoner research is whether the effect of participation on prisoners’ 
general living conditions, medical care, quality of food, amenities, and /or opportunity for 
earnings in prison will be so great that it will make it difficult for prisoners to adequately 
consider the research risks. How will the chances of this be reduced?  
       
 iii. Describe what will be done  to make sure that (a) recruitment and subject selection 
procedures will be fair to all eligible prisoners and (b) prison authorities or other prisoners 
will not b e able to arbitrarily prevent or require particular prisoners from participating.  
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 8 of 50 
  iv. If the research will involve prisoners in federal facilities or in state/local facilities outsid e of 
Washington State: c heck the box below to provide assurance that study team members will 
(a) not encourage or facilitate the use of a prisoner’s  participation in the research to 
influence parole decisions, and (b) clearly inform each prisoner in advance (for example, in a 
consent  form) that participation in th e research  will have no effect on his or her parole.  
  Confirmed   
 b. Is the research likely to have subjects who become prisoners while participating in the study?   
For example, a longitudinal study of youth with drug problems is likely to have subjects who will be prisoners at some 
point during the study.  
  No  
  Yes → If yes, if a subject becomes a prisoner while participating in the study, will any study 
procedures and/or data collection related to the subject be continued while the subject is a 
prisoner?   
  No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the procedures and/or data collection that will continue with 
prisoner subjects    
       
2.[ADDRESS_56025] populations listed here. Check the 
boxes for any of these populations that will be purposefully include d. (In other words, being a part of the 
population is an inclusion criterion for the study.)  
The WORKSHEETS describe the criteria for approval  but do not need to be completed and should not be submitted . 
 Population  Worksheet  
  
Fetuses in utero  WORKSHEET Pregnant Women    
  
  
Neonates of uncertain viability  WORKSHEET Neonates    
  
  
Non-viable neonates  WORKSHEET Neonates    
  
  
Pregnant women  WORKSHEET Pregnant Women    
  
a. If you check any of the boxes above, use this space to provide any information that may be relevant for the IRB 
to consider.   
 N/A 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 9 of 50 
 2.5 Native Americans or non-U.S. indigenous populations.  Will Native American or non -U.S. indigenous populations 
be actively recruited through a tribe, tribe -focused organization, or similar community -based organization?  
Indigenous people are defined in international or national legislation as having a set of s pecific rights based on their 
historical ties to a particular territory and their cultural or historical distinctiveness from other populations that are often 
politically dominant.  
 
Exam ples: a reservation school or health clinic; recruiting during a triba l community gathering  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes,  name [CONTACT_52935], tribal -focused organization, or similar community -based  organization. T he 
UW IRB expects that tribal/indigenous approval will be obtained before beginning the research . 
This may or may not involve approval from a tribal IRB. The study team and any 
collaborators/investigators are also responsible for identifying any tribal laws that may affect the 
research.     
       
2.[ADDRESS_56026] private identifiable  information about other individuals  from the 
study  subjects? Common examples include: collecting medical history information or contact [CONTACT_52885], friends, co -workers.  
“Identifiable” means any direct or indirect identifier that, alone or in combination, would allow you or another m ember of 
the research team to readily identify  the person. For example, suppose that the research is about immigration history. If 
subjects are asked  questions about their grandparents but are not asked for  names or other information that would allow 
easy identification  of the grandparents, then private identifiable information is not being collected about the grandparents  
and the grandparents are not subjects .  
 
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, these individuals are considered human subjects in the study. Describe them and what 
data will be collect ed about them.     
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56027] or describe the maximum number of subjects (or subject units) 
need ed to complete the study, for each subject group?  
Subject units  mean units within a group. For most research studies, a group will consist of individuals. However, the unit of 
interest in some research is not the individual. Examples:   
• Dyads such as caregiver -and-Alzheimer’s patient, or parent and child  
• Families  
• Othe r units, such as student -parent -teacher  
Subject group  means categories of subjects that are meaningful for  the specific study . Some research has only one subject 
group – for example, all UW students taking Introductory Psychology. Some common ways in which subjects are grouped 
include:  
• By [CONTACT_52886] – for example, an intervention group and a control group.  
• By [CONTACT_52887] – for example, urban versus rural families  
• By [CONTACT_654] – for example, children who are 6, 10, or 14 years old.  
 
The IR B reviews the number of subjects in the context of risks and benefits. Unless otherwise specified, if the IRB determines 
that the research involves no more than minimal risk: there are no restrictions on the total number of subjects  that may be 
enrolled . If the research involves more than minimal risk: The number of enrolled subjects must be limited to the number 
described in this  application. If it is necessary later to increase the number of subjects, submit  a Modification . Exceeding the 
IRB-approved numb er (over -enrollment ) will be considered non -compliance.   
  No → If no, provide the rationale in the box below. Also, provide any other available information about 
the scope/size of the research. You do not need to complete the table.    
  Example: It may not be possible to predict the number of subjects who will complete an online survey 
advertised through Craigslist, but you can state that  the survey will be posted  for two weeks and the number 
who respond is the number who will be in the study.  
        
 X Yes → If yes, for each subject group, use the table below to provide the estimate of the maximum 
desired number of individuals (or other subject unit, such as families) who will complete the 
research.    
 Group name/description  Maximum desired number of individuals (or other 
subject unit, such as families) who will complete 
the research  
Provide numbers for the  site(s) reviewed by [CONTACT_52888] -wide total number ; example: 20/100  
 Children with CP or at risk for CP  18 
 Parent/Legal Guardian  [ADDRESS_56028] with  the subjects.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56029] of symptoms and declaring the presence or absence 
of tho se symptoms. HSD strongly encourages adapting this Washington State Department of Health Screening Tool  
https://www.doh.wa.gov/Portals/1/Documen ts/1600/coronavirus/Employervisitorscreeningguidance.pdf  or the UW 
EH&S Example Symptom Self -Attestation in this document: 
https://www.ehs.washington.edu/system/files/resources/guidance -symptom -monitoring -COVID -19.pdf . If you will test 
for the virus, you must also describe here whether the testing lab is CLIA -certified and how the  results will be reported to 
the subjects.  
 In-person interactions will be minimal, limited to [ADDRESS_56030] ed according to the UW Environmental Health & Safety protocols, 
prior to delivery and upon return to the research team.  
 
 
3 NON -UW RESEARCH SETTING   
Complete this section only if UW investigators  and people named in the SUPPLEMENT: 
Non -UW Individual Investigators  will conduct research procedures  outside  of UW and 
Harborview  
3.1 Reason for locations . Describe the reason(s) for choosing the location s.  
This is especially important when the research will occur in locations or with populations that may be vulnerable to 
exploitation. One of the three ethical principles the IRB must consider is justice: ensuring that reasonable, non -exploitative, 
and well -considered procedures are administered fairly, with a fair distribution of costs and potential benefits.  
 This study is a multi -site collaboration wh ich involves two additional co -investigators and research sites: [CONTACT_52944] at Oregon State University, and [CONTACT_52945] at Grand Valley State University. These locations have 
been selected due to an ongoing collaborative relationship with Drs. Logan  and Kenyon, who, together with [CONTACT_52946] from UW have a history of research collaboration and publication in the field of early powered mobility 
for children with disabilities. This project allows for a diverse demographic and geographic study sample wh ich 
will strengthen the rigor of our work.  
3.[ADDRESS_56031] the 
research , how it is conducted, or how consent is obtained or documented . 
Examples: It would be culturally inappropriate in some international settings for a woman to be directly contact[CONTACT_426] a male 
researcher; instead, the researcher may need to ask a male family member for permission before the woman can be 
approached. It may be appropriate to obtain permission from community leaders prior to obtaining consent from individual 
members of a group.  In some distinct cultural groups, signing forms may not be the norm.  
 
This federal site maintains an international list of human research standards and requirements:  
 http://www.hhs.go v/ohrp/i nternational/index.html   
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56032] the research (especially the research design and 
consent procedures). The most common examples are laws about:  
• Specimens  – for example, some countries will not allow biospecimens to be taken out of the country.  
• Age of consent  – laws about when an individual i s considered old enough to be able to provide consent vary 
across states, and across countries.   
• Legally authorized representative  – laws about who can serve as a legally authorized representative (and who 
has priority when more than one person is availab le) vary across states and countries.  
• Use of healthcare records  – many states (including Washington State) have laws that are similar to the 
federal HIPAA law but that have additional requirements.  
 All study sites fall within US states with laws that state that age of consent is 18 yrs or older. This study does not 
involve the collection of health information that falls under HIPAA law. No healthcare records will be accessed 
and the child’s diagnostic information will be provid ed directly by [CONTACT_52889].  
3.[ADDRESS_56033] the research.  
Example: A school district may require researchers  to obtain permission from the head district office as well as school 
principals before approaching teachers or students; a factory in China may allow researchers  to interview factory workers  but 
not allow the workers to be paid for their participation . 
 N/A  
3.5 If the PI [CONTACT_832] a s tudent: Does the research involve traveling outside of the US?   
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, confirm by [CONTACT_52890] (1) you will register with the UW Office of Global Affairs  
before traveling; (2) you will notify your advisor when the registration is complete; and (3) you will 
request a UW Travel Waiver if the research involves travel to the list of countries  requiring a UW 
Travel Waiver.  
 Confirmed  
 
 
4 RECRUITING and SCREENING PARTICIPANTS  
4.1 Recruiting and Screening . Describe how subjects will be identified, recruited, and screened.  Include information 
about: how, when, where, and in what setting. Identify who (by [CONTACT_52891], not name) will approach and 
recruit subjects, and who wil l screen them for eligibility.  
 Participants will be recruited by [CONTACT_52892], emails to known rehabilitation 
professionals in the WWAMI, Oregon, and Michigan areas, and via fliers hung -up and passed out at local 
healthcare clinics and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600]. The resea rch team will also send emails to past research participants who had 
shared their email address and had agreed to be contact[CONTACT_7678]. Potential participants  will self-elect to 
call or email the research team to hear more about the study to det ermine whether or not they are interested in 
participating. Interested potential participants  would then be screened for eligibility by a member of the research 
team.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 13 of 50 
 4.2 Recruitment materials .  
 
a. What materials (if any ) will be used  to recruit and screen subjects?  
Examples: talking points for phone or in -person conversations; video or audio presentations; websites; social media 
messages; written materials such as letters, flyers for posting, brochures, or printed advertisements; questionnaires filled 
out by [CONTACT_52893].  
 Written materials, such as flyers for posting and an email script will be used to recruit and screen subjects. 
Talking points for a phone or in -person conversation will be used. Description s of these materials are included as 
attachments to this application.  
b. Upload descriptions of each type of material (or the materials themselves) to Zipline . If letters  or emails  will be 
sent to any subjects, the se should include a statement about how the subject’s name  [CONTACT_3669] [CONTACT_52894] . No sensitive information about the person (such as a diagnosis of a medical condition) should 
be included in the letter.  
HSD encourages researchers to consider  uploading descriptions of most recruitment and screening materials instead of the 
materials themselves. The goal is to provide the researchers with the flexibility to change some information on the materials  
without submitting a Modification for IRB appro val of the changes. Examples:  
• Provide a list of talking points that will be used for phone or in -person conversations instead of a script.   
• For the description of a flyer, include the information that it will provide the study phone number and the name [CONTACT_4007]  a 
study contact [CONTACT_9702] (without providing the actual phone number or name). This means that a Modification would 
not be necessary if/when the study phone number or contact [CONTACT_52895]. Also, instead of listing the 
inclusion/exclusion criteria, the description below might  state that the flyer will list one or a few of the major 
inclusion/exclusion criteria.  
• For the description of a  video or a website, include a description of the possible visual elements and a list of the 
content (e.g., study phone number; study contact [CONTACT_9702]; top three inclusion/exclusion criteria; payment of $50; 
study name; UW research er).  
4.[ADDRESS_56034] an existing relationship with 
the study population(s)?  
Examples: a study team member may have a dual role with the study population (for example, being their clinical care 
provider, teacher, laboratory directory or tribal leader in addition to recruiting them for his/her research).  
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, describe the nature of the relationship.  
   All investigators have done previous research work with this population and may reach out to 
previously known participants who meet the inclusion criteria and who have provided their written 
consent to be contact[CONTACT_52896]. None  of the investigators have or will 
have a dual role or other type of relationship.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 14 of 50 
 4.4 Payment to participants . Describe any payment that will be provide d, including:  
• The total amount/value  
• Whether payment will be “pro -rated” so that participants who are  unable to complete the research may still 
receive some part of the payment  
The IRB expect s the consent process or study information provided to the subjects to include information about the number 
and amount of payments, and especially the time when subjects can expect to receive payment. One of the most frequent 
complaints received by [CONTACT_52897] f rom subjects who expected to receive cash or a check on the day that they completed a study 
and who were angry or disappointed when payment took 6 -8 weeks to reach them.  
 
Do not include a description of any expenses that will be reimbursed.  
 Participant s will receive monetary compensation in the amount of $ 75.00 . This will be prorated based on $25.00 
per visit for each of the three scheduled research visits, and will be delivered electronically immediately following 
each study visit.  
4.5 Non -monetary compensation . Describe any non -monetary compensation that will be provide d. Example: extra 
credit for students; a toy for a child. If class credit will be offered to students, there must be  an alternate way for 
the students to earn the extra credit without participating in the research.  
 Child participants will receive a developmentally appropriate toy  at the end of the study .  
4.6 Will data or specimens be accessed or obtained for recruiting and screening procedures prior to enrollment?   
Examples: names and contact [CONTACT_3031]; the information gathered from records that were screened; results of screening 
questionnaires or screening blood tests; Protected Health Information (PHI) from screening medical records to identify pos sible 
subjects.  
  No → If no, skip the rest of this section; go to question 5.1. 
 X Yes → If yes, describe the data and/or specimens (including PHI) and  whether it will be retained  as part of 
the study data.  
   Prior to enrollment, families will be screened to ensure they meet the inclusion criteria of the study.  
4.7 Consent for recruiting and screening . Will consent be obtained for any of the recruiting and screening 
procedures? (Section 8: Consent of Adults  asks about consent for the main study procedures).  
“Consent” includes: consent from individuals for their own par ticipation; parental permission; assent from children; consent 
from a legally authorized representative for adult individuals who are unable to provide consent.  
 
Examples:   
• For a study in which names and contact [CONTACT_52898] a registry: the registry should have consent 
from the registry participants to release their names and contact [CONTACT_52899].  
• For a study in which possible subjects are identified by [CONTACT_52900]: there will be no consent process.  
• For a study in which individuals respond to an announcement and call into a study phone line: the study team person 
talking to the individual may obtain non -written consent to ask eligibility questions over the phone.  
 X No → If no, skip the rest of this  section; go to question 5.1. 
  Yes → If yes, describe the consent process.  
         
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56035] on a 
consent form be used to document consent for  the recruiting and screening procedures ? 
  No → If no, describe the information that will be provide d during the consent process  
and for which procedures.  
          
  Yes 
→ If yes, upload the consent form to Zipline .    
 
 
5 PROCEDURES  
5.1 Study procedures . Using lay language, p rovide a complete description of the study procedures , including the 
sequence,  intervention or manipulation (if any),  drug dosing information (if any) , blood volumes and frequency of 
draws (if any), use of records,  time required, and setting/location. If it is available: Upload a study flow sheet or 
table  to Zipline .  
For studies comparing standards of care : It is important to accurately identify the research procedures. See  UW IRB POLICY : 
Risks of Harm from Standard Care  and the draft guidance from the federal Office of Human Research Protections, “Guidance 
on Disclosing Reasonably Foreseeable Risks in Research Evaluating Standards of Care”;  October 20, 2014.  
Information about pediatric blood volume and fre quency of draws that would qualify for expedited review can be found in  this 
reference table  on the Seattle Children’ s IRB website . 
 Research Design  and TImeline : We will conduct our work using a mixed -methods, counterbalanced AB crossover 
design, where intervention A is use of the Explorer Mini, and intervent ion B is use of the modified ride -on car. All 
participants at all sites will undergo the same research procedures. Participants will receive both  powered 
mobility interventions, and randomization into two groups at each site will occur to determine which 
intervention participants will receive first  (Modified ride -on car: n = 3; Explorer Mini: n = 3). Three research visits 
will be scheduled during the study. Baseline assessment (T0)  will consist of initial device training and safety 
checkoff, interview, and administration of outcome measures. Intervention phase [ADDRESS_56036] for 8 weeks, 
followed by a mid -study assessment (T1) at which time interviews and outcome measures will be  repeated and 
parent perception/satisfaction with device will be assessed. Training and safety checkoff on the second device 
will occur. No washout period between devices is indicated because both devices provide self -initiated mobility. 
Intervention phase  [ADDRESS_56037] for 8 weeks, followed by [CONTACT_52901] (T2), where devices will 
be removed from the participants’ homes and a final set of interviews and outcome measures will be 
administered.  During each [ADDRESS_56038] activity suggestions for device use (i.e. open 
exploration, switch/joystick play, goal -directed driving).  
Equipment:  
Modified Ride -On Cars . Commercially available, off -the-shelf, battery -operated ride -
on toy cars will be modified. Switch activation . Unmodified, a child uses their foot to 
press a pedal or their finger to press a small switch located on the steering wheel to 
activate the ride -on car which is difficult for young children with CP. Modifications of 
ride-on cars will include installation of  an easy -to-press switch that has a large 
surface area and responds to a light touch for activation.  Seating support . Common 
materials, such as PVC pi[INVESTIGATOR_5836], swimming kickboards, and Velcro will be used to build a 
customized supportive seating system. Seatbelt s are added in all cars, and five -
point harnesses are available if needed for appropriate postural support. Cars 
Figure 1. Child with CP using 
a modified ride -on car.    
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 16 of 50 
 operate using a rechargeable 6 -volt battery, allow for 45 -60 minutes of driving, and a maximum speed of 2.5 
mph.  
 
Explorer Mini . The Explorer Mini (Permobil AB, Sweden) is a commercially available , 
FDA approved  powered mobility device intended for young children between 12-36 
months of age with mobility limitations (weight limit: 35 lbs; height limit: 39.4 inches). 
It is lightweight (52 lbs. including battery) and fits in most automobiles (length: 25 
inches; width: 19 inches; adjustable height: 29 -37 inches). The Explorer M ini runs on a 
12-volt battery with a driving range of 3.5 miles and a maximum speed of 1.5 m ph, is 
controlled via a joystick with a 360 -degree turning radius, has proportional speed 
control with 5 speed options , and can be used in a seated or standing posi tion.   
 
Safety Training : A detailed device operation and safety training , home safety 
assessment,  and check -off procedure will be completed by [CONTACT_52902]-on ca r or Explorer Mini at their home and provide their child with 
opportunities to use the devices per the study protocol.  These activities will be 
conducted at the first and second scheduled in -person research visits. Families will also have access to 
supplem entary training videos throughout the study if a refresher is needed.  
 
Dependent Measures  
Aim 1: Developmental, self-care, and participation outcomes  
Bayley Scales of Infant Development (BSID), 4th Edition.  30-70 minutes  to administer . The BSID -IV is an 
internationally recognized, norm referenced set of tests designed to assess developmental domains from one 
month to 42 months of age. The BSID -IV includ es assessment of cognitive, motor (fine motor and gross motor), 
social -emotional, adaptive, and language (receptive and expressive communication) subscales. All domains and 
subscales will be assessed . The administration of the developmental items on the Ba yley will be conducted 
together with a researcher trained in the administration of the measure, the caregiver, and the child. 
Administration will be video -taped and scored at a later time in order to minimize length of in -person contact. 
The BSID -IV is a newly released version of the BSID -III, of which the score sheet and description are included in 
this application as attachments. We do not yet have access to the BSID -IV equivalents of these materials as the 
release of our funding  to purchase the BSID IV  is contingent on IRB approval. However, the differences between 
the III and the IV are noted in this publisher webinar (available at: https://youtu.be/Rp3QRz7qHhg  ) and  are 
listed in the attached publisher presentation. These differences  include shorter administration time, fewer items 
in several of the domains, a digital option for administration and scoring , and a more sensitive scoring scheme to 
identify disability . Similar to  the III, the IV continues to allow for administration of structured test items  in the 
five developmental domains described above  using a standard kit, direct observation of behaviors and 
milestones, and active participation of the caregiver in the evaluat ion process. The BSID -IV has strong 
psychometric properties and has been empi[INVESTIGATOR_52860]. Once the BSID -IV has been 
purchased, our research team will submit the scoring and overview materials upon a subsequent IRB 
modificatio n.  
Child Engagement in Daily Life (CEDL).  10 minutes to complete. The CEDL is a caregiver survey tool that assesses 
participation in family and recreational activities and uses a 5 -point Likert scale to assess frequency of 
participation and enjoyment of p articipation. The CEDL also assesses participation in self -care behaviors and 
uses a 5 -point Likert scale to assess the degree to which the child participates in the daily self -care activities of 
feeding, dressing, bathing, and toileting. Caregivers will c omplete the CEDL remotely.  
Young Children’s Participation & Environment Measure (YC -PEM).  20 minutes  to complete . The YC -PEM is a 
caregiver survey tool that has 3 sections: home , daycare/preschool , and community , with each section assess ing 
participation and the environment. For participation items, parents are asked how often their child has 
Figure 2. Child with CP 
using the Explorer Mini.    
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 17 of 50 
 participated in different types of activities , how involved their child is when participating in  activities of this type , 
and if parents would like their child’s participation to change . For environment items, parents are asked if 
specific aspects of the environment facilitate or hinder their child ’s participat ion and if specific supports are 
available and/or adequate to sup port their child’s participation. Caregivers will complete the YC -PEM remotely.  
 
Aim 2: Use patterns (frequency, duration, environment) & families’ perspective and experiences  
Assessment of Learning Powered Mobility Use (ALP  v. 2.0 ). 10 minutes or less to  complete. The ALP is an 
observational performance assessment focused specifically on stages of learning and proficiency with powered 
mobility devices. The tool uses eight descriptive, behavior -based categories ranging from Novice to Expert across 
five per formance domains, including Attention, Activity and Movement, Understanding of Tool Use, Expressions 
and Emotions, and Interaction and Communication. These eight categories are grouped into three learning 
stages: Explore Function (categories 1 -3), Explore Sequence (categories 4 -5), Explore Performance (categories 6 -
8). Members of the research team will observe each child participant in their natural setting for up to 10 minutes 
to identify a child’s performance categories and learning stage during the three  scheduled research visits. They 
will provide each family with associated ALP strategies for facilitating device use based on the learning stage of 
the child. This activity may be done during the scheduled in -person visits or remotely , and will be video -recorded 
for scoring by [CONTACT_52903] a later time .  
 
Daily driving log.  Less than five  minutes to complete. Caregivers will complete a daily driving log that indicates 
the date, time, and environment of Explorer Mini (A) or modified ride -on car use (B). Caregivers will also make 
notes about the child’s enjoyment level and general activities while using each device. To supplement caregiver 
reported data, automated device use data such as frequency and duration of activation, average speed, and 
distanc e traveled, will be collected either via a custom data logger (mounted on the modified ride -on car) or 
through integrated device systems  (built -in to the Explorer Mini)  which allow designated users  (in this case, 
members of the research team)  to access device use data via mobile Apps and secure servers. Driving logs will be 
completed remotely.  
 
Semi -structured interviews. 30-45 minutes to complete.  At the baseline, midpoint, and conclusion of the s tudy a 
researcher will lead interviews with caregivers  using a semi -structured interview guide  to understand  their 
experiences using the respective powered mobility device s, barriers encountered and solutions discovered, and 
perceptions of self -efficacy an d behavioral capacity. Two key questions asked at each interview will provide 
insight as to caregiver perceptions of their child’s emerging agency and powered mobility devices over time: 
“Can you describe [child’s name] for me?” and “How do you think your child will respond/responded to power 
mobility device use ?”.64,65 All interviews will be audio recorded and de -identified transcriptions will be created.  
Interviews will be conducted remotely.   
 
Acceptability, Intervention Appropriateness, and Feasibility . 5 minutes to complete. After each intervention 
period, caregivers will complete a 3 -measure perceptual implementation outcome survey. All measures are 4 -
item likert -scale surveys. The Acceptability of Intervention Measure (AIM) is designed to measure how  receptive 
stakeholders are to adopting an intervention, the Intervention Appropriateness Measure (IAM) is designed to 
measure suitability of the intervention in a given environment or circumstance, and the Feasibility of 
Intervention Measure (FIM) is desi gned to measure how possible and likely stakeholders are to adopt an 
intervention. The AIM -IAM-FIM will be completed remotely.  
 
Study Timeline/Flowsheet:  
 
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 18 of 50 
  
All sites will complete all study procedures listed above.   
5.2 Recordings . Does the research involve creating audio or video recordings?  
  No → If no, go to question 5.3. 
 X Yes → If yes, verify that you have described what will be record ed in 5.1 and answer question  a. 
 a. Before recording, will consent for being recorded be obtained from  subjects and any other 
individuals who may be recorded?  
  No → If no, email [EMAIL_1004]  before submitting this application in Zipline. In 
the email, include a brief description of the research and a note that 
individuals will be recorded without their advance consent.     
 X Yes  
5.[ADDRESS_56039] a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scan as part of the study procedures?  
This means scans that are performed solely for research purposes or clinical scans that are modified for research purposes (f or 
example, using a gadolinium -based contrast agent when it is not required for clinical reasons ).  
 X No → If no, go to question  5.4. 
  Yes → If yes, answer questions a through c. 
a. Describe the MRI scan(s).  Specifically:  
• What is the purpose of the scan(s)? Examples: obtain research data;  safety assessment 
associated with a research procedure.  
• Which subjects will receive an MRI scan?  
• Describe the minimum and maximum number of scans per subject, and ov er what time period 
the scans will occur. For example: all subjects will undergo two MRI scans, six months apart.  
       

Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56040] agent 
(GBCA?)  
  No  
  Yes → If yes, which agents will be used? Check all that apply.  
 Brand Name  [CONTACT_52936] / Primovist  Gadoxetate disodium  Linear  
  Gadavist  Gadobutro  Macrocyclic  
  Magnevist  Gadpe ntetate dimeglumine  Linear  
  MultiHance  Gadobenate dimeglumine  Linear  
  Omniscan  Gadodiamide  Linear  
  OptiMARK  Gadoversetamide  Linear  
  ProHance  Gadoteridol  Macrocyclic  
  Other, provide name:        
 1.) The FDA has concluded that gadolinium is retained in the body and brain for 
a significantly longer time than previously recognized, especially for linear 
GBCAs. The health -related risks of this longer retention are not yet clearly 
established. However, the UW IRB expects researchers to provide a 
compelling justification for using a linear GBCA instead of a macrocyclic 
GBCA, to manage the risks associated with GBCAs.  
 Describe why it is important to use a GBCA with the MRI scan(s). Describe 
the dose that will be used  and (if it is more than the standard clinical dose 
recommended by [CONTACT_3455]) why it is necessary to use a higher 
dose . If a linear GBCA  will be used , explain why a mac rocyclic GBCA  cannot 
be used . 
        
 2.) Information for subjects. Confirm by [CONTACT_52904] -approve d Patient Medication Guide for th e GBCA 
being used in the research  or that the same information will be inserted into 
the consent form.  
  Confirmed  
c. MRI facility . At which facility(ies) will the MRI scans occur? Check all that apply.  
  UWMC Radiology/Imaging Services (the UWMC clinical facility)  
  DISC Diagnostic Imaging Sciences Center (UWMC research facility)  
  BMIC Biomolecular Imaging Center (South Lake Union research facility)  
  Harborview Radiology/Imaging Services (the Harborview clinical facility)  
  SCCA Imaging Services  
  Northwest Diagnostic Imaging  
  Other: identify in the text box below:  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 20 of 50 
         
Personnel. For MRI scans that will be conducted at the DISC or BMIC resear ch facilities: The role, qualifications, and 
training of individuals who will operate the scanner, administer the GBCA (if applicable), and/or insert and 
remove the IV catheter should be described in question 12.3 . 
5.4 Data variables.  Describe the specific data that will be obtained  (including a description of the most sensitive items). 
Alternatively, a list of the data variables  may be uploaded  to Zipline . 
 Data variables include: demographic information, developmental outcome measures (Bayley IV Scales), caregiver 
survey measures (YC -PEM, CEDL, AIM -FIM-IAM), powered mobility observational assessment levels 
(ALP), qualitative interview data, and quantitative device use data  (caregiver and automated driving logs) .  
5.[ADDRESS_56041] ed for this research: Identify whether the data are 
being obtained  from the subjects (or subjects’ specimens) or whether they are being obtained  from some other 
source (and identify the source).  
If you have already provided this information in Question 5.1, you do not need to repeat the information here.  
 All data sources will be obtained directly from study participants.  
5.6 Identifiability of data and specimens . Answer these questions carefully and completely. This will allow HSD to 
accurately determine the type of review that is required and the relev ant compliance requirements.  Review the 
following definitions before answering the questions:  
Access means to view or perceive data, but not to possess or record it. See, in contrast, the definition of “obtain”.  
Identifiable  means that the identity  of an individual is or may be readily (1) ascertained by [CONTACT_52905] a combination of data variables, or (2) associated with the informatio n.  
Direct ide ntifiers  are direct links between a subject and data/specimens. Examples include (but are not limited to): name, date 
of birth, medical record number, email or IP address, pathology or surgery accession number, student number, or a collection 
of data that is (when taken together) identifiable.  
Indirect identifiers  are information that links between direct identifiers and data/specimens. Examples: a subject code or 
pseudonym.   
Key refers to a single place where direct identifiers and indirect identifiers a re linked together so that, for example, coded data 
can be identified as relating to a specific person. Example: a master list that contains the data code and the identifiers li nked to 
the codes.  
Obtain  means to possess or record in any fashion (writing, e lectronic document, video, email, voice recording, etc.) for research 
purposes and to retain for any length of time. This is different from accessing , which means to view or perceive data.  
a. Will you or any members of your team have access  to any direct  or indirect identifiers?  
 X Yes → If yes, describe which identifiers and for which data/specimens.  
   Members of the research team will have access to direct identifiers via name [CONTACT_3669] 
[CONTACT_3031], in order to recruit subjects. Indirect identifiers will then be assigned from a 
master list of subjects. The research team will have access to indirect identifiers via a 
subject code after consent is obtained. The research team will have access to audio 
recordings of interviews , video recording s of Bayley developmental assessments  and de -
identified study data.  
  No → If no, select the reason(s) why you (and all members of your team) will not have access to 
direct or indirect identifiers.  
  
There will be no identifiers.    
  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56042] been (or will have been) destroyed before access.    
  
  
There is an agreement with the holder of the identifiers (or key) that prohibits the 
release of the identifiers (or key) to study team members under any circumstances.    
  
  This agreement should be available upon request from the IRB.  Examples: a Data Use Agreement, 
Repository Gatekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_52861], or documented email.  
  
There are written policies and procedures for the repository/database/data 
management center that prohibit the release of the identifiers (or identifying link). This 
includes situations involving an Honest Broker.    
  
  
There are other legal requirements prohibiting the release of the identifiers or key. 
Describe them below.    
  
        
b. Will you  or any study team members  obtain  any direct or indirect identifiers?  
 X Yes → If yes, describe which identifiers and for which data/specimens.  
   
 Members of the research team will obtain direct identifiers via name [CONTACT_3669] 
[CONTACT_3031], in order to recruit subjects. Indirect identifiers will then be assigned 
from a master list of subjects. The research team will obtain indirect identifiers via a 
subject code after consent is docu mented. The research team will obtain audio 
recordings of interviews  and video recordings of the Bayley developmental 
assessments  which may include direct identifiers. We will also obtain  study data in 
the form of surveys, developmental assessments, and ob servational assessment  
which will use indirect identification . 
  No → If no, select the reason(s) why you (and all members of your team) will not obtain direct 
or indirect identifiers.  
  
There will be no identifiers.    
  
  
Identifiers or the key have been (or will have been) destroyed before access.    
  
  
There will be an agreement with the holder of the identifiers (or key) that prohibits the 
release of the identifiers (or key) under any circumstances.     
  
  This agreement should be available upon request from the IRB.  Examples: a Data Use Agreement, 
Repository Gatekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_52861], or documented email.  
  There are written policies and procedures for the repository/database/data 
management center that prohibit the release of the identifiers (or identifying link). This 
includes situations involving an Honest Broker.    
  
  
There are other legal requirements prohibiting the release of the identifiers or key. 
Describe them below.     
  
        
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 22 of 50 
 c. If any identifiers  will be obtained , indicate how the identifiers will be stored (and for which data).  NOTE: Do 
not describe the data security plan here – that information is requested in section 9.6.  
  
Identifiers will be stored with the data . Describe the data to which this applies:   X 
  
  Because we are collecting audio and video data, this may be inherently identifiable. This 
data will be stored directly on a secured and encrypted university server.  
  
Identifiers and study data will be stored separately but a link will be maintained between 
the identifiers and the study data (for example, through the use of a code) . Describe the 
data to which this applies:   X 
  
  For all remaining data, e ach subject will be assigned an indirect identifier in the form of a 
participant code and pseudonym. A master list of the subject’s direct and indirect 
identifiers will be kept separately from the data, in a locked file cabinet inside a locked 
office, or electronically on a secure and encrypted university server. This appli es to all 
data collected in the study.  
  
Identifiers and study data will be stored separately, with no link between the identifiers 
and the study data. Describe the data to which this applies:    
  
        
d. Research collaboration . Will individuals who provide coded information or specimens  for the research also 
collaborate on other  activities for this research? If yes, identify the activities and provide the name [CONTACT_52937]’s institution/organization.  
Examples include but are not limited to: (1) study, interpretation, or analysis of the data that results from the coded 
information or specimens; and (2) authorship on presentations or manuscripts related to this work.  
 N/A  
5.7 Protected Health Information (PHI).  Will participants’ identifiable PHI be  access ed, obtain ed, use d, or disclose d for 
any reason (for example, to identify or screen potential subjects, to obtain study data or specimens, for study 
follow -up) that does not involve the creation or obtaining of a Limited Data Set?  
PHI is individually identifiable  healthcare record information or clinical specimens from an organization considered a “covered 
entity” by [CONTACT_52906], in any form or media, whether electronic, paper, or oral. You must answer yes to this 
question  if the research involves id entifiable health care records (e.g., medical, dental, pharmacy, nursing, billing, etc.), 
identifiable healthcare information from a clinical department repository, or observations or recordings of clinical 
interactions.  
 X No → If no, skip the rest of this question; go to question  5.8 
  Yes → If yes, answer all of the questions below.  
  a. Describe the PHI and the reason for using  it. Be specific.  For example, will any “free text” fields 
(such as physician notes) be accessed, obtained, or used?   
       
b. Is any of the PHI located in Washington State?  
  No  
  Yes  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56043] of how the PHI will be accessed or obtained, starting with the 
source/location and then describing the system/path/mechanism by [CONTACT_52907], 
accessed, and copi[INVESTIGATOR_52862] . Be specific.  For example: directly view records; search 
through a department’s clinical database; submit a request to Leaf.  
       
d. For which PHI will subjects provide HIPAA authorization  before the PHI is accessed, obtained 
and/or used ?  
       
 Confirm by [CONTACT_52908], obtain, use, or disclose any UW Medicine PH I. 
  Confirmed    
e. For which PHI will HIPAA authorization NOT be obtained from the subjects?  
       
 Provide the following assurances by [CONTACT_52909].  
 
 
The minimum necessary amount of PHI to accomplish the purposes described in this 
application will be accessed, obtained and/or used.   
 
 
 
 
 
The PHI will not be reused or disclosed to any other person or entity, except as required by 
[CONTACT_2371], for authorized oversight of the research study, or for other research for which the use or 
disclosure of PHI would be permitted.   
 
 
 
 
 
The HIPAA “accounting for disclosures” requirement will be fulfilled, if applicable. See UW 
Medicine Compliance  Policy # 104.   
 
 
 
   
 
There will be reasonable safeguards to protect against identifying, directly or indirectly, any 
patient in any report of the research.     
 
   
 
5.8 Genomic data sharing . Will the research  obtain or generate genomic data ? 
 X No  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 24 of 50 
   Yes → If yes, answer the question below.  
 a. Will genomic data from this research be sent to a national database (for example, NIH’s dbGaP 
database)?  
   No  
   Yes → If yes, complete the SUPPLEMENT Genomic Data Sharing  and upload it to 
Zipline . 
5.9 Whole genome sequencing. For re search involving biospecim ens: W ill the research include whole genome 
sequencing?  
Whole genome sequencing is sequencing of a human germline or somatic specimen with the intent to generate the genome or 
exome sequence of that specimen.  
  No  
  Yes  
5.[ADDRESS_56044] information will be used for any of the following:  
• Future research not descr ibed in this application (in other words, secondary research)  
• Submission to a repository, registry, or database managed by [CONTACT_3476] , colleagues, or others for 
research purposes  
• Sharing with others for their own research  
Please  consider the broadest p ossible future plans and whether consent will be obtained now from the subjects 
for future sharing or research  uses  (which it may not be possible to describe in detail  at this time).  Answer  YES 
even if  future sharing or uses will use de -identified informat ion or specimens. Answer  NO if sharing is unlikely or if 
the only sharing will be through the NIH Genomic Data Sha ring described in question 5. 8. 
Many federal grants and contracts now require data or specimen sharing as a condition of funding, and many journals require 
data sharing as a condition of publication. “Sharing” may include  (for example) : informal arrangements to share banked 
data/specimens with other investigators; establishing a repository that will formally share with  other  researchers  through 
written agreements; or sending data/specimens to a third party repository/archive/entity such as the Social Science Open 
Access Repository (SSOAR), or the  UCLA Ethnomusicology Archive.  
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, answer all of the questions below.  
 a. Describe what will be store d for future use,  including whether any direct or indirect (e.g., subject 
codes) identifiers will be stored.  
 De-identified data will be stored for future use, including interview transcriptions, score 
report data from participation and developmental measures, and device use reports.  
 b. Describe what will be shared  with other researchers or with a repository/da tabase/registry , 
including whether direct identifiers will be shared and (for specimens) what data will be 
released with the specimens.  
 Because this study meets the criteria for an NIH clinical trial, de -identified data will be 
submitted to Clinicaltrials.gov.  
 c. Who will oversee and/or manage the sharing?  
 The study PI [INVESTIGATOR_52863].gov.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 25 of 50 
  d. Describe the possible future uses , including limitations or restrictions (if any) on future uses or 
users.  As stated above, consider the broadest possible uses . 
 Examples: data will be used only for cardiovascular research; data will not be used for research on 
population origins.  
 Data will be used for scientific presentations, publications, and in future grant 
applications.  
 e. Consent . Will consent be obtained now from subjects for the secondary use, banking and/or 
future sharing?  
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, be sure to include the information about this consent process in the 
consent form (if there is one) and in the answers to the consent questions in 
Section 8.  
 f. Withdrawal . Will subjects be able to withdraw their data/specimens from secondary use, 
banking or sharing?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe how, and whether there are any limitations on withdrawal.  
 Example: data can be withdrawn from the repository but cannot be retrieved after they 
are released.  
       
 g. Agreements for sharing or release . Confirm by [CONTACT_52910] (and, if applicable, UW Medicine) policies that require a formal agreement 
with  the r ecipi[INVESTIGATOR_52864].  
 Data Use Agreements or Gatekeepi[INVESTIGATOR_52865]; Material Transfer Agreements are used for 
specimens (or specimens plus data ). Do not attach  any template agreement forms; the IRB neither reviews nor 
approves them  
 X  Confirmed  
5.11 Communication with subjects during the study . Describe the types of communication (if any) the research team 
will have with already -enrolled subjects during the study. Provide a description instead of the actual materials 
themselves.   
Examples: email, texts, phone, or letter reminders about appointments or about returning study materials such as a 
questionnaire; requests to confirm contact [CONTACT_3031].   
 Participants enrolled in the study will be contact[CONTACT_24211], phone, or text (as requested) about 
appointments for study procedures and to answer questions or provide reminders about study materials.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56045] information  for subjects  so that they can be 
contact[CONTACT_52911] ? 
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, describe the purpose of the future contact, and whether use of the contact [CONTACT_52912]; if not, describe who else could be provided with the contact 
[CONTACT_3031].  Describe the criteria for approving requests for the informa tion.    
 Examples: inform subjects about other studies; ask subjects for additional information or medical record access 
that is not currently part of the study proposed in this application; obtain another sample.  
 Contact [CONTACT_52913], and be used to either obtain additional 
information, or to inform subjects about other studies if they elect to be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530].  
5.13 Alternatives to participation . Are there any alternative procedures or treatments that might be advantageous  to 
the subjects ? 
If there are no alternative procedures or treatments, select “No”. Examples of advantageous alternatives: earning extra class  
credit in some time -equivalent way  other than research participation; obtaining supportive care or a standard clinical 
treatment from a health care provider instead of participating in research with an experimental drug.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the alternatives.  
         
5.14 Upload to Zipline  all data collection forms  (if any) that will be directly used by [CONTACT_52914], and any  
scripts/talking points that will be used to collect the data . Do not include data collection forms that will be used 
to abstract data from other sources (such as medical or academic reco rds), or video recordings.  
• Examples : survey, questionnaires, subject logs or diaries, focus group questions.  
• NOTE: Some times the IRB can approve the general content of surveys and other data collection instruments rather than 
the specific form itself. This prevents the need to submit a modification request for future minor changes that do not add 
new topi[INVESTIGATOR_52866]. To request this general approval, use the text box below to identify  
the questionnaires/survey s/ etc. for which you are seeking this more general approval. Then briefly describe the scope of 
the topi[INVESTIGATOR_52867]. The HSD staff person who screens this 
application will let you know whether this  is sufficient or whether you will need to provide more information.  
• For materials that cannot be uploaded : upload screenshots or written descriptions that are sufficient to enable the IRB to 
understand the types of data that will be collected and the natu re of the experience for the participant. You may also 
provide URLs (website addresses) or written descriptions below. Examples of materials that usually cannot be uploaded: 
mobile apps; computer -administered test; licensed and restricted standardized test s. 
• For data that will be gathered in an evolving way : This refers to data collection/questions that are not pre -determined 
but rather are shaped during interactions with participants in response to observations and responses made during those 
interactions. If this applies to the proposed  research, provide a  description of the process by [CONTACT_52915]/questions will be established during the interactions  with subjects, how the data collection/questions  will be 
documented , the topi[INVESTIGATOR_52868] , the most sensitive type of information likely to be gathered , and the 
limitations (if any) on topi[INVESTIGATOR_52869] d or pursue d. 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 27 of 50 
 Use this text box (if desired) to provide:  
• Short written descriptions of materials that cannot be uploaded, such as URLs  
• A description of the process that will be used  for data that will be gathered in an evolving way.  
• The general content of questionnaires, surveys and similar instruments for which general approval  is being 
sought . (See the NOTE  bullet point in the instructi ons above.)  
       
5.15  SARS -CoV-2 testing . Will the subjects be tested for the SARS -CoV-2 coronavirus?  
If the only testing is to screen the subjects (question 2.8), you do not need to answer this question  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes : 
• Name [CONTACT_52938]  
• Confirm that the lab and its use of this test is CLIA -certified or certified by [CONTACT_52916]  
• Describe whether you will return the results to the participants and, if yes, who will do it and 
how (including any information you would provide to subjects with positive test results).    
        
5.[ADDRESS_56046] that is not part of a clinical facility?  
Examples: a computer tablet, a portable research ultra -sound device).  
  No  
 X Yes → If yes : confirm by [CONTACT_52917] d UW Environmental Health & Safety requirements described here: 
https://www.ehs.washington.edu/system/files/resources/cleaning -disinfection -prot ocols -covid -
19.pdf   
 X  Confirmed  
 
 
6 CHILDREN (MINORS) and PARENTAL PERMISSION  
6.1 Involvement of minors . Does the research include minors (children )? 
Minor or child  means someone who has not yet attained the legal age for consent for the research procedures, as 
described in the applicable laws of the jurisdiction in which the research will be conducted. This may or may not 
be the same as the definition used by [CONTACT_52918] g agencies such as the National Institutes of Health.  
• In Washington State the generic age of consent is 18, meaning that anyone under the age of 18 is 
considered a child.  
• There are some procedures for which the age of consent is much lower in Washington S tate. 
• The generic age of consent may be different in other states, and in other countries.  
  No → If no, go to Section 8 . 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 28 of 50 
  X Yes → If yes, provide the age range of the minor subjects for this study and the legal age for consent in 
the study  population(s). If there is more than one answer, explain.      
  Children ages 12 -36 months. Due to their young age, parental permission will be sought and 
consent and permission will be provided by a legal caregiver over 18 years of age.  
  
Don’t know  →This means is it not possible to know the age of the subjects. For example, this may be true 
for some research involving social media, the Internet, or a dataset that is obtained  from 
another researcher or from a government agency. Go to Section 8 .  
 
6.2 Parental permission . Parental permission  means actively obtaining the permission of the parents. This is not the 
same as “passive” or “opt out” permission where it is assumed that parents are allowing their children to 
participate because they have been provided with information about the res earch and have not objected or 
returned a form indicating they don’t wa nt their children to participate.  
a. Will parental permission be obtained for: 
  
All of the research procedures  → Go to question 6.2b.  X 
  
  
None  of the research procedures  → Use the table belo w to provide justification , and skip question 
6.2b.    
  
  
Some of the research procedures  → Use the table below to identify the procedures for which 
parental permission  will not be obtained .   
  
Be sure to consider all research procedures and plans, including screening, future contact, and sharing/banking of data and 
specimens for future work.  
Children  
Group1 Describe the procedures or 
data/specimen collection (if any) for 
which there will be NO parental 
permission2 Reason why parental 
permission  will not be 
obtained  Will parents be 
informed  about 
the research ?3 
   YES NO 
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all children groups or all procedures : collapse the answer across the groups  and/or procedures . 
2. If identifiable information or biospecimens will be obtained without parent permission, any waiver granted by [CONTACT_52919]’ refusal to provide broad consent (for example, through the Northwest Biotrust).  
3. Will parents be informed  about the research beforehand even though active permission  is not being obtained ? 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56047] be checked.  
  Both parents, unless one parent is deceased, unknown, incompetent, or not reasonably available; or when 
only one parent has legal responsibility for the care and custody of the child    
  
  
One parent, even if the other parent is alive, known, competent, reasonably available, and shares legal 
responsibility for the care and custody of the child.   X 
  
  This is all that is required for minimal risk research.  
 If both boxes  are checked , explain:  
       
6.3 Children who are wards. Will any of the children be wards of the State or any other agency, institution, or entity?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, an advocate may need to be  appointed for each child who is a ward. The advocate must be in 
addition to any other individual acting on behalf of the child as guardian or in loco parentis. The 
same individual can serve as advocate for all children w ho are wards.    
 Describe who will be the advocate(s). The description  must address the following points:  
• Background and experience  
• Willingness to act in the best interests of the child for the duration of the research  
• Independence of the research, research team, and any guardian organization  
       
 
 
7 ASSENT OF CHILDREN (MINORS)  
Go to Section 8  if your research does not involve children (minors).  
7.1 Assent of children (minors) . Though children do not have the legal capacity to “consent” to participate in 
research, they should be involved in the process if they are able to “assent” by [CONTACT_7661] a study explained to them 
and/or by [CONTACT_5978] a simple form about the study, and then giving  their verbal choice about whether they want to 
participate. They may also provide a written assent if they are older. See WORKSHEET Children  for circumstances 
in which a child’s assent may be unnecessary or inappropriate.   
a. Will assent be obtained for: 
  
All research procedures and child groups  → Go to question 7.2.   
  
  
None  of the research procedures and child groups  → Use the table below to provide justification , 
then skip to question 7.6  X 
  
  
Some of your research procedures and child groups  → Use the table below to identify the 
procedures for which  assent  will not be 
obtain ed.    
  
Be sure to consider all research procedures and plans, including screening, future contact, and sharing/banking of data and 
specimens for future work.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 30 of 50 
 Children  Group1 Describe the procedures or 
data/specimen collection (if 
any) for which assent will NOT 
be obtained  Reason why assent will not  be obtain ed 
Children ages 12 -36 months  All research procedures  Reason 46.108(a)/50.55 - The capability of the 
children is limited by [CONTACT_52920]. Parent consent/permission 
will be documented  
                  
                  
                  
                  
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all children groups or all procedures, collapse your answer across the groups  and/or procedures . 
7.2 Assent process. Describe how assent will be obtained , for each child group. If the research involves children of 
different ages, answer separately for each group. If the children are non -English speakers, include a description of 
how their comprehension of the information will be evaluated . 
       
7.3 Dissent or resistance. Describe how a child’s objection or resistance to participation (including non -verbal 
indications) will be identified during the research, and what the response will be .  
 Although we will not be seeking assent due to child age, as pediatric rehabilitatio n professionals the research 
team is well -trained to recognize signs of dissent or resistance, such as negative facial expressions or crying. 
When this behavior occurs, the research team will temporarily discontinue research activities and/or cue 
caregiver s to discontinue research activities and provide a break before resuming activities. It is anticipated that 
these behaviors may be more prevalent at the onset of research activities and new experiences, but will diminish 
over time. If this does not occur, caregivers will be provided with resources and suggestions to mitigate these 
behaviors using play -based, developmental strategies. If these behaviors persist after these strategies are 
implemented, caregivers will be reminded of their right to withdraw fro m the study at any time.  
7.4 E -consent. Will any electronic processes (email, websites, electronic signatures, etc.) be used to present assent 
information to subjects/and or to obtain documentation (signatures) of assent? If yes, describe how this will b e 
done . 
       
7.5 Documentation of assent.  Which of the following statements describes whether documentation of assent  will be 
obtained ? 
  
None of the research procedures and child groups  → Use the table below to provide justif ication, 
then go to question  7.5.b    
  
  
All of the research procedures and child groups  → Go to question 7.5.a, do not complete the 
table    
  
  
Some of the research procedures and/or child groups  
  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 31 of 50 
   → Complete the table below and then to go 
question 7.5.a 
Children  
Group1 Describe the procedures or data/specimen collection (if any) for which assent 
will NOT be documented  
            
            
            
            
            
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all children groups or all procedures, collapse the answer across the groups  and/or procedures . 
 a. Describe how assent will be documented . If the children are functionally illiterate or are not fluent in English, 
include a description of the documentation process for them . 
        
 b. Upload all assent materials  (talking points, videos, forms, etc.) to Zipline . Assent materials are not required to 
provide all of the standard elements of adult consent; the information should be appropriate to the age, 
population, and research procedures. The documents sho uld be in Word, if possible.  
7.6 Children who reach the legal age of consent during participation in longitudinal research .  
Children who were enrolled at a young age and continue for many years : It is best practice to re -obtain assent (or 
to obtain it f or the first time, if it was not obtained  at the beginning of their participation).  
Children who reach the legal age of consent : Informed consent must be obtained from the now -adult subject for 
(1) any ongoing interactions or interventions with the subjec ts, or (2) the continued analysis of specimens or data 
for which the subject’s identify is readily identifiable to the researcher, unless the IRB waives this requirement.  
 a. Describe the plans (if any) to re -obtain assent from children.   
 N/A 
 b. Describe the plans (if any) to obtain consent for children who reach the legal age of consent.  
• If adult consent  will be obtained from them , describe what will happen regarding  now -adult subjects 
who cannot be contact[INVESTIGATOR_530] . 
• If consent will not obtained or will not be possible:  explain why.  
 N/A 
7.7 Other regulatory requirements . (This is for  information only; no answer or response is required.)  Researchers are 
responsible for determining whether their research conducted in schools, with student records, or over the 
Internet comply with permission, consent, and inspection requirements of the following federal regulations:  
• PPRA – Protection of Pup il Rights Amendment  
• FERPA – Family Education Rights and Privacy Act  
• COPPA – Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56048]’s decision to participate in the research is documented. 
This is typi[INVESTIGATOR_52870] a consent form.  
CONSENT FORM  is a document signed by [CONTACT_1766], by [CONTACT_52921].  
ELEMENTS OF CONSENT  are specific information that is required to be provided to subjects.  
CHARACTERISTICS OF CONSENT  are the qualities of the consent pro cess  as a whole. These are:  
• Consent must be legally effective.  
• The process minimizes the possibility of coercion or undue influence.  
• Subjects or their representatives must be given sufficient opportunity to 
discuss and consider participation.  
• The information provided must:  
o Begin with presentation of key information (for consent materials 
over 2,000 words)  
o Be what a reasonable person would want to have  
o Be organized and presented so as to facilitate understanding  
o Be provided in sufficient detail  
o Not ask or appear to ask  subjects to waive their rights  
PARENTAL PERMISSION  is the parent’s active permission for the child t o participate in the research. 
Parental permission is subject to the same requirements as consent, including 
written documentation of permission and required elements.  
SHORT FORM CONSENT  is an alternative way of obtaining written documentation of consent that is most 
commonly used with individuals who are illiterate or whose language is one for 
which translated consent forms are not available.  
WAIVER OF CONSENT  means there is IRB approval for not obtaining consen t or for not including some of 
the elements of consent in the consent process.  
 
NOTE : If you plan to obtain identifiable information or identifiable biospecimens 
without consent, any waiver granted by [CONTACT_52922] a subject’s 
refusal to provid e broad consent (for example, the Northwest Biotrust).  
WAIVER OF DOCUMENTATION 
OF CONSENT  means that there is IRB approval for not obtaining written documentation of 
consent.  
8.1 Groups  Identify  the groups to which the answers in this section apply.  
 X Adult subjects  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 33 of 50 
  X Parents who are providing permission for their children to participate in research  
 → If you selected PARENTS , the word “consent” below should also be interpreted as applying to parental 
permission and “subjects” should also be interpreted as applying to the parents.  
8.2 The consent process  and characteristics . This series of questions is about whether consent  will be obtained for all 
procedures except recruiting and screening  and, if yes, how.  
The issue of consent for recruiting and screening activities is addressed in question 4. 7. You do not need to repeat your answer 
to question 4.6.  
 a. Are there any procedures for which consent  will not be obtained ? 
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, use the table below to identify the procedures for which consent will not be obtained . “All” 
is an acceptable answer for some studies.    
Be sure to consider all research procedures and plans, including future contact, and sharing/banking of data and specimens for 
future work.  
Group1 Describe the procedures or 
data/specimen collection (if any) 
for which there will be NO consent 
process  Reason why consent  will not be 
obtain ed Will subjects  be 
provided with 
info about the 
research after 
they finish?  
   YES NO 
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
                        
      
      
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all groups , collaps e your answer across the groups and/or procedures.  
b. Describe the consent process , if consent will be obtained  for any or all procedures, for any or all groups. 
Address groups and procedures separately if the consent processes are different.  
Be sure to include:  
• The location/setting where consent will be obtained  
• Who will obtain consent (refer to positi ons, roles, or titles, not names)  
• How subjects  will be provide d sufficient opportunity to discuss the study with the research team and consider 
participation  
 Consent procedures will be conducted over the phone or via Zoom video conference . Only members of the 
research team will obtain consent and parent permission. The research team will provide the consent and 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56049] the subjects ’ understanding of the 
information  during the consent process . 
 During the consent process, each potential subject will be asked to repeat back the main purpose of the study, 
using the English language. The subject will be asked to verify that they understand they have a choice to 
participate or not, and asked whether they recall if and when they can withdraw from the study.  
d. Influence . Does  the research involve any subject groups that might find it difficult to say “no” to participation  
because o f the setting or their relationship with someone on the study team , even if they aren’t pressured  to 
participate ?   
Examples: Student participants being recruited into their teacher’s research; patients being recruited into their healthcare 
provider’s research, study team members who are participants; outpatients recruited from an outpatient surgery waiting 
room just prior to their surgery.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe what will be done to reduce any effect of the setting or relationship on the 
participation  decision.    
  Examples: a study coordinator will obtain consent instead of the subjects’ physician; the researcher will not 
know which subjects agreed to participate; subjects will have two days to decide after hearing about the 
study.  
       
e. Information provided is tailored to needs of subject population . Describe the basis for concluding that  the 
information that will be provided  to subjects (via written or oral methods ) is what a reasonable member of the 
subject population(s)  would want to know. If the research  consent materials contain a key information section, 
also describe the basis for concluding that the informatio n presented in that section is t hat which is most likely  
to assist the selected subject population with making a decision. See GUIDA NCE Key I nformation for Consent 
Materials . 
 
For example : Consultation  with publications about research subjects’  preferences, disease -focused nonprofit groups, patient 
interest groups, or other researchers/study staff with experience with the specific population. It may also involve directly 
consulting selected members of the study population.  
 Information provided is tailored to the needs of the participant population based on the research team’s 
extensive experience as rehabilitation clinicians and researchers with this population, as well as consultation 
with publications and previous feedback  from past research participants.   
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 35 of 50 
 f. Ongoing process . For research that involves multiple or continued interaction with subjects over time, describe 
the opportunities (if any) that will be given to  subjects to ask questions or to change their minds about 
participating.  
 Upon each subsequent research encounter, the subject will be asked for verbal confirmation of their consent  to 
continue participating in the research, as well as be reminded that they can withdraw from the research at any 
time without penalty.  
8.3 Electron ic presentation of consent information. Will any part of the consent -related information be provided 
electronically for some or all of the subjects?  
This refers to the use of electronic systems and processes instead of (or in addition to) a paper consent form. For example, an 
emailed consent form, a passive or an interactive website, graphics, audio, video podcasts. See GUIDANCE Electronic Informed 
Consent  for information  about electronic consent requirements at UW . 
  No → If no, skip to question 8.4  
 X Yes → If yes, answer questions a through e 
a. Describe the electronic consent  methodology and the information that will be provided . 
All informational materials must be made available to the IRB. Website content should be provided as a 
Word document. It is considered best practice to give subjects  information about multi -page/multi -screen 
information that will help them assess how long it will take them to complete the process. For example, 
telling them that it will take about 15 minutes, or that it involves reading six screens or pages.  
 The rese arch team will provide a copy of the consent information via email, and verbally present 
the consent and permission document remotely via video conference (i.e. Zoom) or phone to the 
parent/legal guardian. The potential participant will have a chance to re view an electronic copy 
of the consent/permission document and ask the research team questions.  
b. Describe how the information can be navigated (if relevant). For example, will the subject  be able to 
proceed forward or backward within the system, or to stop and continue at a later time?  
  
c. In a standard paper -based consent process, the subjects generally have the opportunity to go 
through the consent form with study staff and/or to ask study staff about any question they may 
have after reading the consent form. Describe  what  will be done , if anything, to facilitate the 
subject’s comprehension and opportunity to ask questions when consent information is 
presented electronically. Include a description of any provisions to help ensure privacy and 
confidentiality during this process.  
Examples: h yperlinks, help text, telephone calls, text messages or other type of electronic messaging, video 
conference, live chat with remotely located study team members.  
 This process will occur via video conference in the same manner it would take place if using an 
in-person paper document.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56050] access to 
the consent methodology being use d, or who do not wish to use it? Are there alternative ways in 
which they can obtain the information, or will there be some assistance available? If this is a 
clinical trial, these individuals cannot be excluded from the research  unless there is  a compelli ng 
rationale.  
 
For example, consider individuals who lack familiarity with electronic systems, have poor eyesight or 
impaired motor skills, or who do not have easy email or internet access.  
 Sharing of study information and review of the consent and permission document is able to be 
conducted in person or remotely. If a participant does not have access to appropriate technology, 
these procedures will be conducted in person  using social distance precautions . The research staff 
may read the document to the participant over the phone or in person should it be necessary.  
e. How will additional information  be provided to subjects during the research , including any 
significant new findings (such as new risk information)  If this is not an issue, explain why . 
 New information will be provided to the participant via their preferred method of communication 
(phone, email, video conference, in -person visit)   
8.4 Written documentation of consent. Which of the statements below describe whether documentation of consent 
will be obtained?  NOTE: This question does not apply to screening and recruiting procedures which have already 
been addressed in question 4. 7. 
Documentation of consent that is obtained electronically is not considered written consent unless it is obtained by a method 
that allows verification of the individual’s signature. In other words, saying “yes” by [CONTACT_52923]  
a. Is written documentation of consent being obtained for: 
  
None of the research procedures  → Use the table below to provide justification then g o to question 
8.5.  X 
  
  
All of the research procedures  → Do not complete the table; go to question 8.4.b.   
  
  
Some of the research procedures  → Use the table below to identify the procedures for which written 
documentation of consent  will not be obtained  from adult  
subjects.    
  
Adult 
subject 
group1 Describe the procedures or data/specimen collection (if any) for which 
there will be NO documentation of consent  Will they be 
provided  with a 
written 
statement 
describing the 
research 
(optional)?  
  YES NO 
Parent 
participants 
over the age 
of 18 yrs  Verbal consent and permission will be conducted for all research procedures. The 
research team will document the date and time that verbal consent and permission 
was obtained.        
 X     
      
                  
      
      
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 37 of 50 
                  
 
     
      
                  
      
      
                  
      
      
Table footnotes  
1. If the answer is the same for all adult  groups or all procedures, collaps e the answer across the groups and/or procedures.  
b. Electronic consent signature. For studies in which documentation of consent will be obtained: will subjects use 
an electronic method to provide their consent signature?  
• FDA-regulated studies must use a system that complies with the FDA’s “Part 11” requirements about electronic 
systems and records.  Note that the UW -IT supported DocuSign e -signature [CONTACT_52939] . 
• Having subjects check a box at the beginning of an emailed or web -based questionnaire is not considered legally 
effective documentation of consent.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes,  describe the methodology that will be used . 
See the GUIDANCE Electronic Informed Consent  for information about options (including the DocuSign 
system available through UW-IT) and requirements.  
  
b.1 Is this method legally valid in the jurisdiction where the research will occur?  
  No  
  Yes → If yes,  what is the source of information  about legal validity ? 
       
b.[ADDRESS_56051]’s identity be obtained if the signature [CONTACT_52940] a member of the study team? Note that this is required for FDA -regulated 
studies.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 38 of 50 
 See the GUIDANCE Electronic Informed Consent  for information and examples  
  No →If no, provide the rationale  for why this is appropriate. Also, what would  
be the risks to the actual subject if somebody other than the intended  
signer provides the consent signature?  
  
  Yes →If yes,  how ? 
  
b.3 How will the requirement be met to provide a copy of the consent information (consent 
form) to individuals who provide an e -signature?  
The copy can be paper or electronic and may be provided on an electronic storage device or via 
email. If the electronic consent information uses hyperlinks or other websites or podcasts to convey 
information specifically related to the research, the information in these hyperlinks should be 
included in the cop y provided to the subjects and the website must be maintained for the duration 
of the entire study.  
  
8.5 Non -English -speaking or -reading adult subjects . Will the research  enroll adult subjects who do not speak English 
or who lack fluency or literacy in English?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe the process that will be used  to ensure that the oral and written information 
provided to them during the consent process and throughout the study will be in a language readily 
understandable to them and (for written materials such as consent forms or questionnaires) at an 
appropriate  reading/comprehension level.    
       
 a. Interpretation . Describe how interpretation will be provided,  and when. Also, describe the 
qualifications of the interpreter(s) – for example, background, experience, language proficiency 
in English and in the other language, certification, other credentials, familiarity with the research -
related vocabulary in Engli sh and the target language.  
       
 b. Translation s. Describe how translations will be obtained for  all study materials (not just consent 
forms) . Also, describe the method for ensuring  that the translations meet the UW IRB’s 
requirement that translated documents will be linguistically accurate, at an appropriate reading 
level for the participant population, and culturally sensitive for the locale in which they will be 
used.  
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 39 of 50 
 8.6 Barriers to written documentation of consent . There are many possible barriers to obtaining written 
documentation of consent. Consider, for example, individuals who are functionally  illiterate; do not read English 
well; or have sensory or motor impairments that may impede the ability to read and sign a consent form.  
a. Describe the plans (if any) for obtaining written documentation of consent from potential subjects who may 
have difficulty with the standard documentation process (that is, reading and signing a consent form). Skip this 
question if written documentation of consent is not being obtained for any part of  the research.  
Examples of solutions : Translated consent forms; use of the Short Form consent process; reading the form to the person  
before they sign it ; excluding individuals who cannot read an d understand the consent form.  
 N/A  
8.7 Deception . Will information  be deliberately withheld,  or will false information  be provided,  to any of the subjects? 
Note: “Blinding” subjects to their study group/condition/arm is not considered to be deception , but not telling them ahead of 
time that they will be subject to an intervention or about the purpose of the procedure(s) is deception . 
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, describe what information and why.  
  Example: It may be necessary to deceive subjects about the purpose of the study  (describe why) . 
       
 a. Will subjects  be informed  beforehand that they will be unaware of or misled regarding the 
nature or purposes of the research ? (Note: this is not necessarily required.)  
  No  
  Yes  
 b. Will subjects be debrief ed later? (Note: this is not necessarily required.)  
  No  
  Yes → If yes, describe how  and when  this will occur . Upload any debriefing materials, 
including talking points or a script, to Zipline .   
       
8.8 Cognitively impaired adults, and other adults unable to consent . Will such individuals be included in the 
research?  
Examples: individuals with Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) or dementia; individuals who are unconscious, or who are significantly 
intoxicated.  
 X No → If no, go to question  8.9. 
  Yes → If yes, answer the following questions.  
 a. Rationale . Provide the rationale for including this population.  
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 40 of 50 
  b. Capacity for consent / decision making capacity . Describe the process that will be used  to 
determine whether a cognitively impaired  individual is capable of consent  decision making 
with respect to the research protocol and setting.  
        
 b.1. If there  will be repeated interactions with the impaired subjects over a time period when 
cognitive capacity could increase or diminish, also describe how (if at all) decision -
making capacity will be re -assessed and (if appropriate) consent obtained during that 
time.  
       
 c. Permission (surrogate consent) . If the research  will include adults who cannot consent for 
themselves, describe the process for obtaining permission (“surrogate consent”) from a legally 
authorized representative (LAR).   
 For research conducted in Washington State, see the GUIDANCE  Legally Authorized Representative  to 
learn which individuals meet the  state  definition of “legally authorized representative”.  
        
 d. Assent . Describe whether assent will be required of all, some, or none of the subjects. If some, 
indicate which subjects will be required to assent and which will not (and why not). Describe 
any process that will be used to obtain and document assent from the subjects.  
        
 e. Dissent or resistance . Describe how a subject’s objection or resistance to participation 
(including non -verbal) during the research  will be identified , and what will occur in response . 
        
8.[ADDRESS_56052] the method of abortion.  
  No enticements, benefits, or financial incentives will be used at any level of the process to incentivize  
abortion or the donation of human fetal tissue.  
  The informed consent form for the donation of fetal tissue for use in research will be signed by [CONTACT_52924] & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 41 of 50 
 woman and the person who obtains the informed consent.  
8.10 Consent -related materials . Upload to Zipline  all consent scripts/talking points, consent forms, debriefing 
statements, Information Statements, Short Form consent forms, parental permission forms, and any other 
consent -related materials that will be used . Materials that will be used by a specific site  should be up loaded to 
that site’s Local Site Documents  page.  
• Translations must be submitted and approved before they can be used . However, we strongly encourage you to wait to 
provide them until the IRB has approve d the English versions.  
• Combination forms : It may be appropriate to combine parental permission with consent, if parents are subjects as well as 
providing permission for the participation of their children. Similarly, a consent form may be appropriately con sidered an 
assent form for older children.  
• For materials that cannot be uploaded : upload screenshots or written descriptions that are sufficient to enable the IRB to 
understand the types of data that will be collected and the nature of the experience for the participant. URLs (website 
addresses) may also  be provide d, or written descriptions  of websites . Examples of materials that usually cannot be 
uploaded: mobile apps; computer -administered test; licensed and restricted standardized tests.  
 
 
[ADDRESS_56053] to 
recruiting, consenting, sensitivity of the data being collected, and the method of data collection.  
Examples:  
• Many subjects will feel a violation of privacy if they receive a letter asking them to participat e in a study because they 
have ____ medical condition, when their name, contact [CONTACT_3031], and medical condition were drawn from medical 
records without their consent.  Example: the IRB expects that “cold call” recruitment letters will inform the subject 
about how their information was obtained.  
• Recruiting subjects immediately prior to a sensitive or invasive procedure  (e.g., in an outpatient surgery waiting 
room) will feel like an invasion of privacy to some individuals . 
• Asking subjects about sensitive topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102] (e.g. details about sexual behavior) may feel like an invasion of privacy to some 
individuals.  
 Potential subjects will self -identify and self -refer to participate in the study. All subjects will be assigned a 
participant code and pseudon ym to protect privacy.  
9.2 Identification of individuals in publications and presentations . Will potentially identifiable information about 
subjects be used in publications and presentations, or is it possible that individual identities could be inferred from 
what is planned to be publish ed or present ed?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, will subject consent be obtained for this use?  
  Yes  
  No → If no, describe the steps that will be taken to protect subjects (or small groups of 
subjects) from being identifiable.     
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 42 of 50 
 9.3 State mandatory reporting. Each state has reporting laws that require some types of individuals to report some 
kinds of abuse, and medical conditions that are under public health surveillance. These include:  
• Child abuse  
• Abuse, abandonment, neglect, or financial exploitation of a vul nerable adult  
• Sexual assault  
• Serious physical assault  
• Medical conditions subject to mandatory reporting (notification) for public health surveillance  
 
Are you or a member of the research team  likely to learn of any of the above events or circumstances whil e 
conduc ting the research AND  feel obligated to report it to state authorities?  
  No  
 X Yes → If yes,  the UW IRB expects subjects to be informed of this possibility in the consent form or during 
the consent process, unless you provide a rationale for not doing so:    
   Members of the research team are licensed rehabilitation professionals and considered mandated 
reporters of suspected or witnessed abuse. Although it is not anticipated that the research team is 
likely to learn of these events while conducting the research, if they are suspected or witnessed , 
we are obligated to report. Language describing this process  is included in the 
consent/permission document.  
9.4 Retention of identifiers  and data . Check the box below to indicate assurance that any identifiers (or links between 
identifiers and data/specimens)  and data  that are part of the research records will not be destroyed until after the 
end of the applicable records retention requirements (e.g. Washington State; fund ing agency or sponsor; Food 
and Drug Administration).  If it is important to say something about destruction of identifiers (or links to identifiers) 
in the consent form, state something like “the link between your identifier and the research data will be d estroyed 
after the records retention period required by [CONTACT_52925]/or federal law.”  
This question can be left blank for conversion applications (existing paper applications that are being “converted” into a Zi pline 
application.)  
 
See the “Research Data” sections of the following website for UW Records management for the Washington State research 
rectords retention schedules that apply in general to the UW  (not involving UW Medicine data) : 
http://f2.washington.edu/fm/recmgt/gs/research?title=R  
 
See the “Research Records and Data ” information in Section 8 of this document for the retention schedules for UW Medicine 
Records : https://www.uwmedicine.org/recordsmanagementuwm -records -retention -schedule.pdf  
 X Confirm  
9.5 Certificates of Confidentiality . Will a federal Certificate of Confidentiality be obtained for the research data? 
NOTE: Answer “No”  if the study is funded by [CONTACT_52926] , because all NIH -funded  and CDC -funded  studies 
automatically have a Certificate.  
 X No  
  Yes  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56054] ied to the data and specimens? If more than one level  will be used , 
describe which level  will apply to which data and which specimens  and at which sites . 
  Level [ADDRESS_56055] those 
here , including identifying the sites where this exception will apply . 
        
 
 
10 RISK / BENEFIT ASSESSMENT  
10.[ADDRESS_56056]:  
• Describe the magnitude, probability, duration, and/or reversibility of the harm, discomfort, or hazard, AND  
• Describe how the risks  will be reduced or managed . Do not describe data security protections here, these are 
already described in Question 9.6.  
• Consider possible physical, psychological, social, legal, and economic harms , including  possible negative effects on  
financial standi ng, employability, insurability, educational advancement or reputation.  For example, a breach of 
confidentiality might have these effects.  
• Examples of “others”: embryo, fetus, or nursing child; family members; a specific group.  
• Do not include the risks of  non-research procedures that are already being performed.  
• If the study design specifies that subjects will be assigned to a specific condition or intervention, then the condition or 
intervention is a research procedure - even if it is a standard of care.  
• Examples of mitigation strategies: inclusion/exclusion cri teria; applying appropriate data security measures to prevent 
unauthorized access to individually identifiable data; coding data; taking blood samples to monitor something that 
indicates drug toxicity.  
• As with all questions on this application, you may ref er to uploaded documents.  
 The risks of participating in this study are minimal. There are no identifiable social or legal risks associated with 
the proposed research. Ride -on cars are a common toy and many families with small children use the cars. 
Similarly, the Explorer Mini is a n FDA -approved Class II Medical Device commonly used for children with 
mobility impairments. The foreseeable risks are primarily physical or psychological risks. This study is designed 
to reduce known potential risks. There are no known alternative procedu res that can further reduce risk and 
provide the same type of scientific information.  
The potential risks to the subject are: 1) physical injury as a result of unsupervised device use; 2) fatigue resulting 
from device use; 3) electrical shock associated w ith battery -powered devices; 4) loss of confidentiality as a result 
of unauthorized access to participant data; and 5) emotional duress resulting from the discussion of potentially 
sensitive topi[INVESTIGATOR_52871].  
To mitigate t hese risks, 1) subjects will undergo safety and operations training and check -offs for appropriate 
device use; 2) Subjects will undergo training to limit device use as appropriate based on child’s individual 
fatigue/tolerance, and will be instructed to rem ove the child from the device if child is showing signs of 
discomfort or fatigue. 3) Any malfunctions, adjustments, repairs, or damages to the devices must be reported 
immediately to the research staff, and all repairs or replacements will be completed by [CONTACT_52927]. 4) All research -related documentation will use indirect identifiers of 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56057] codes stored in a separate, locked file cabinet in a 
locked office. 5)  Subjects will be reminded at each research session that their participation is voluntary and that 
they do not have to answer any question that might cause discomfort or stress. Further, the researchers will discuss 
discontinuation of participation with the subject, should the subject demonstrate visible signs of psychological or 
emotional stress. Each device will be registered with the research team contact [CONTACT_52928] -included product registration form, to ensure direct and timely notification of any product safety 
warnings/recalls.  
 
10.2 Reproductive  risks . Are there any ris ks of the study procedures to me n and women (who are subjects, or partner 
of subjects) related to pregnancy, fertility, lactation or effects on a fetus or neonate?  
Example s: direct teratogenic effects; possible germline effects; effects on fertility; effects on a woman’s ability to continue a 
pregnancy; effects on future pregnancies.  
 X No → If no go to question 10.3  
  Yes → If yes,  answer the following questions:  
 a. Risks . Describe the magnitude, probability, duration and/or reversibility of the risks.  
         
 b. Steps to minimize risk . Describe the specific steps that will be taken  to minimize the 
magnitude, probability, or duration of these risks.  
Example s: inform the subjects about the risks and how to minimize them;  require a pregnancy test before 
and during the study; require subjects to use contraception; advise subjects about  banking of sperm and 
ova.  
 
If the use of contraception  will be required : describe the allowable methods and the time period when 
contraception must be used.  
         
 c. Pregnancy . Describe what will be done  if a subject (or a subject’s partner) becomes pregnant  
For example; will subject s be required  to immediately notify study staff , so that the study procedures  can be 
discontinue or modified , or for a discussion of  risks, and/or referrals or counseling?  
         
10.3 MRI risk management. Answer this question only if the subjects will receive MRI scans . A rare but serious adverse 
reaction called nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF) has been observed in individuals with kidney disease who 
received gadolinium -based contrast agents (GBCAs) for the scans. Also, a few healthy individuals have a severe 
allergic reaction to GBCAs.  
a. Describe how the renal function of subjects will be assessed prior to MRI scans and how that information will 
be used to exclude subjects at risk for NSF.  
       
b. Describe the protocol for handling a sever e allergic reaction to the GBCA or any other medical 
event/emergency during the MRI scan, including who will be responsible for which actions.   
       
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/[ADDRESS_56058] risks that are currently unforeseeable?  
Example: using a drug that hasn’t been used before in this subject population.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes,  identify the procedures.  
         
10.5  Subjects who will be under regional or general anesthesiology . Will any research procedures occur while 
patients are under general or regional anesthesia, or during the 3 hours preceding general or regional anesthesia 
(supplied for non -research reasons)?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, check all the boxes that apply.  
    
Administration of any drug for research purposes      
    
  
Inserting an intra -venous (central or peripheral) or intra -arterial line for research purposes    
  
  Obtaining samples of blood, urine, bone marrow or cerebrospi[INVESTIGATOR_52872] a research sample from tissue or organs that would not otherwise be removed 
during surgery    
  
  
Administration of a radio -isotope for research purposes**    
  
  
Implantation of an experimental device    
  
  
Other manipulations or procedures performed solely for research purposes (e.g., 
experimental liver dialysis, experimental brain stimulation)    
  
  If any of the boxe s are checked : 
Provide the name [CONTACT_52941] a physician anesthesiologist who is a 
member of the research team or who will serve as a safety consultant about the interactions 
between the research procedures and the general or regional anesthesia of the subject -
patients. If the procedures will be performed at a UW Medicine facility or affiliate, the 
anesthesiologist must be a UW faculty member, and  the Vice Chair o f Clinical Research in 
the UW Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine must be consulted in advance for 
feasibility, safety and billing.  
        
  ** If the box about radio -isotopes  is checked : the study team is  responsible for informing in advance 
all appropriate clinical personnel (e.g., nurses, technicians, anesthesiologists, surgeons) about the 
administration and use of the radio -isotope, to ensure that any personal safety issues (e.g., 
pregnancy) can be appr opriately addressed. This is a condition of IRB approval.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 46 of 50 
 10.6  Data and Safety Monitoring . A Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) is required for clinical trials (as defined 
by [CONTACT_4289]). If required for this research , or if there is a DSMP for the research regardless of whether it is required , 
upload the DSMP to Zipline . If it is embedded in another document being  uploading (for example, a Study 
Protocol ) use the text box below to name [CONTACT_52942].  Alternatively, provide a description 
of the DSMP in the text box below .  
 This study is a clinical trial funded by [CONTACT_18121]. The required DSMP will be uploaded to zipline.  
10.7  Un-blinding . If this is a double -blind ed or single -blinded  study in which the participant and/or relevant study 
team members  do not k now the group to wh ich the participant is assigned: describe the circumstances under 
which un -blinding would be necessary, and to whom the un -blinded information would be provided.  
 N/A  
10.8 Withdrawal of participants . If applicable, d escribe  the anticipated circumstances under which participants will be 
withdrawn from the research without their consent. Also, describe any procedures for orderly withdrawal of a 
participant, regardless of the reason, including whether it will involve partial wi thdrawal from procedures and 
any intervention but continued data collection or long -term follow -up. 
 We do not anticipate the need to withdraw any participants involuntarily, however, in cases where significant 
and consistent emotional distress of the chi ld or caregiver is observed by [CONTACT_3021], this would warrant 
withdrawal from the study without consent. Because participants will be temporarily using a ride -on car 
and Explorer Mini Device, procedures for orderly withdrawal and removal of the devices  will include: 1) 
written and verbal communication of set use periods for each device (8 weeks +/ - 5 day  grace period). 
Written or verbal communication of device drop off and removal plan (set date for device drop off and 
pi[INVESTIGATOR_9107] , explain pi[INVESTIGATOR_52873]).  
10.[ADDRESS_56059] research -related benefits that some or all 
individual participants are likely to experience f rom taking part in the research, describe them below:  
Do not include benefits to society or others, and do not include subject payment (if any). Examples: medical benefits such as 
laboratory tests (if subjects receive the results); psychological resources made available to participants; training or educa tion 
that is provided.   
 A direct benefit for participants will be to receive training, educati on, and trial use of two pediatric powered 
mobility devices.   
10.10 Return of individual research results.  
In this section , provide your plans for the return of individual results. An “individual research result” is any information 
collected, generated or discovered in the course of a research study that is linked to the identity of a research participant . 
These may be results  from screening procedures, results that are actively sought for purposes of the study, results that are 
discovered unintentionally, or after analysis of the collected data and/or results has been completed.  
 
 See the GUIDANCE Return of Individual Results  for information about results that should and should not be returned, validity 
of results, the Clinical Laboratory Improve ment Amendment (CLIA), consent requirements and communicating results.  
 a. Is it anticipated  that the research will produce any individual research results that are clinically actionable?  
 “Clinically actionable” means that there are established therapeutic or preventive interventions or other available 
actions that have the potential to change the clinical course of the disease/condition, or lead to an improved health 
outcome.  
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 47 of 50 
 In general, e very effort should be made to offer results that are clinically actionable, valid and pose life -threatening or 
severe health consequences if not treated or a ddressed quickly. Other clinically actionable results should be offered if 
this can be accomplished without compromising the research.  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, answer the following questions ( a.1-a.3). 
 a.1. Describe the clinically actionable results that are anticipated and explain which results, 
if any, could be urgent (i.e. because they pose life -threatening or severe health 
consequences if not treated or addressed quickly).  
 Examples  of urgent results include  very high calciu m levels, highly elevated liver function test results, 
positive results for reportable STDs . 
       
 a.2. Explain which of these results will be offered to subjects.  
       
 a.3. Explain which results will not be offered to subjects and provide the rationale for not 
offering these results.  
 Reasons not to offer the results might include:  
• There are serious questions regarding validity or reliability  
• Returning the results has the potential to cause bias  
• There are insufficient resources to communicate the results effectively and appropriately  
• Knowledge of the result could cause psychosocial harm to subjects  
       
 b. Is there a  plan for offering  subjects any results that are not clinically actionable?  
 Examples: non -actionable genetic results, clinical tests in the normal range, experimental and/or uncertain results.  
  No  
 X Yes → If yes, explain which results will be offered to subjects and provide the rationale for 
offering these results.   
 For qualitative interview methods, it is common to provide subjects with de -identified, 
aggregate data summaries of main themes or findings as a way of Member Checking, 
which is a technique used to ensure data accuracy and avoid researcher 
misinterpretatio n of data. Broad themes, and not individual quotes, will be shared.  
 c. Describe the validity and reliability of any results that will be offered to subjects.  
 The IRB will consider evidence of validity such as studies demonstrating diagnostic, prognostic, or predictive value, 
use of confirmatory testing, and quality management systems.  
 Member checking as described above, is part of the process of determining credibility and consistency of 
results, which in the qualitative research paradigm is akin to establishing validity and reliability.  
 d. Describe the process for communicating results to subjects and facilitating understanding of the results. In 
the description, include who will approach the participant with regard to the offer of results, who will 
communicate the result (if different), the circumstances, timing, and communication methods that will be 
used.  
 The research team will send a summary email to participants (using individual emails or BCC) describing 
the themes d erived from the qualitative findings and encourage feedback or clarifying questions from the 
participants.  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 48 of 50 
  e. Describe any plans to share results with family members (e.g. in the event a subject becomes 
incapacitated or deceased).  
 N/A  
 f. Check the box to indicate that any plans for return of individual research results  have been described  in 
the consent document. If there are no plans to provide results to participants, this should be stated in the 
consent form.  
 See the GUIDANCE Return of Individual Results  for information about consent requirements.  
 X Confirmed   
10.[ADDRESS_56060] or patent could result from this 
study?  
 X No  
  Yes → If yes,  describe whether subjects might receive any remuneration/compensation and, if yes, 
how the amount will be determined.   
         
 
 
11 ECONOMIC BURDEN TO PARTICIPANTS  
11.1 Financial responsibility for research -related injuries.  Answer this question only if the lead research er is not a 
UW student, staff member, or faculty member whose primary  paid appointment is at the UW.  
 
For each institution involved in conducting the research: Describe who will be financially responsible for 
research -related injuries experienced by [CONTACT_1766], and any limitations. Describe the process (if any) by [CONTACT_52929]/compensation.  
 N/A  
11.2 Costs to subjects . Describe any research -related costs for which subjects and/or their health insurance may be 
responsible ( examples might include:  CT scan required for research eligibility screening; co -pays; surgical costs 
when a subject is randomized to a specific procedu re; cost of a device ; travel and parking expenses that will not 
be reimbursed ). 
 There are no research -related costs to participants of the study. Devices used in the study will be temporarily 
provided to families at no cost.  
11.3 Reimbursement for costs . Describe any costs to subjects  that will be reimbursed  (such as travel expenses) . 
 N/A  
 
 
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 49 of 50 
 12 RESOURCES  
12.1 Faculty Advisor . (For researchers who are students, fellows, or post -docs.) Provide the following information 
about the faculty advisor.  
• Advisor’s name  
• Your relationship with your advisor (for example: graduate advisor; course instructor)  
• Your plans for communication/cons ultation with your advisor about progress, problems, and changes.  
 N/A  
12.2 UW Principal Investigator [INVESTIGATOR_52874] . Upload a current  or recent  Curriculum Vitae  (CV) , Biosketch (as 
provided to federal funding agencies), or similar document to the Local Site Documents page in Zipline. The  
purpose of this is to  address the PI’s qualifications to conduct the proposed research (education, experience, 
training, certifications, etc.).  
For help with creating a CV, see  http://adai.uw.edu/grants/nsf_biosketch_template.pdf  and 
https://education.uwmedicine.org/student -affairs/career -advising/year -4/residency -applications/curriculum -vitae/   
 X The CV will be uploaded.  
12.3 UW Study team qualifications . Describe the qualifications  and/or training for  each UW study team member to 
fulfill their role on the study and perform study procedures.  (You may be asked about non -UW study team 
members during the review; they should not be described here.) You may list these individuals by [CONTACT_2300], 
however if you list an indi vidual by [CONTACT_2300], you will need to modify this application if that individual is replaced. 
Alternatively, you can describe study roles  and the  qualifications and training the PI [INVESTIGATOR_52875]. The IRB will use this information to assess whether risks to 
subjects are minimized because study activities are being conducted by [CONTACT_52930].  
Describe: The role (or name [CONTACT_52943]), the study activities they will perform, and the qualifications or 
training that are relevant to performing those study activities . 
 
 Examples:  
Research Study Coordinator:  Obtain consent, administe r surveys, blood draw. Will have previous  experience 
coordinating  clinical research and be a certified phlebotomist in WA.  
Undergraduate Research Assistant:  Obtain consent, perform all study procedures. Will have had coursework in 
research methods, complet e an orientation to human subjects protections given by [CONTACT_8569], and will 
receive training from the PI  [INVESTIGATOR_52876].  
Acupuncturist:  Perform acupuncture procedures and administer su rveys. Must be licensed with WA State DoH 
and complete training in administering research surveys given by [CONTACT_52931], an experienced survey 
researcher . 
Co-Investigator:  Supervise MRI and CT scan procedures and data interpretation, obtain consent . MD, specialty in 
interventional radiology and body imaging. 5 -years clinical research experience.  
 
   
 Research Study Coordinator:  Perform eligibility screening, o btain consent, administer surveys, maintain 
communication with families. Will have previous experience coordinating clinical research.  
Undergraduate  or Graduate  Research Assistant:  Perform screenings, o btain consent, perform all study 
procedures. Will have had coursework in research methods, complete an orientation to human subjects 
protections given by [CONTACT_8569], and will receive training from the PI [INVESTIGATOR_52877].  
Document Date & Version   Researcher Date & Version  
08/14/2020  APPLICATION IRB Protocol  12/1/2020  
Version 2.6 Version 1.2  
  Page 50 of 50 
 Co-Investigator : Obtain consent, perform all study procedures. Will be a licensed rehabilitation professional (i.e. 
PT or OT and/or a PhD level investigator with required human subjects research training and past experience 
participating in or leading human subjects rese arch.  
 
 
12.4 Study team training and communication . Describe how it will be ensured that each study team member is 
adequately trained and informed about the research procedures and requirements (including any changes) as 
well as their research -related du ties and functions.  
  There is no study team.  
   
 Each member of the research team has a current CITI training certificate, and are versed in the 
management of subject data and ethics involved in human subjects research. Regular team meetings 
will occur throughout the research to ensure all team members are appropriately informed about the 
research procedures and data, as well as any unanticipated changes. Bi -monthly progress meetings 
will be held with all members of the research team.  
 
 
13 OTHER APPROVALS, PERMISSIONS, and REGULATORY ISSUES  
13.1 Approvals and permissions.  Identify any other approvals or perm issions that will be obtained. For example: from 
a school, external site/organization, funding agency, employee uni on, UW Medicine clinical unit.  
Do not attach the approvals and permissions unless requested by [CONTACT_1201].  
 UW will serve as the single IRB administrator for this study, and the UW HSD Reliance Team will coordinate 
additional approvals or permissions directly with Oregon State University and Grand Valley State University.  
13.[ADDRESS_56061] (SFI) with this research as defined by [CONTACT_52932] 10 ? 
 X No  
  Yes → If yes, has the Office of Research made a determination regarding this SFI as it pertains to the 
proposed research?    
  No → If no, contact [CONTACT_52933] ([PHONE_950], [EMAIL_1005] ) for  
guidance on how to obtain the determination   
  Yes → If yes, upload the Conflict Management Plan for every UW team member who has 
a FCOI with respect to the research, to Zipline . If it is not yet available, use the text 
box to describe whether the Significant Financial Interest has been disclosed 
already to the UW Office of Research and include the FIDS Disclosure  ID if 
available.   
       
 
 