Transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation (TENS) for pain control during first trimester abortion: A 
blinded randomized controlled trial  
, MD (Principal Investigator)  
, MD, MS 
Abstract 
Surgical abortion remains the most common outpatient gynecologic procedure in the world and most 
commonly occurs in the first-t rimester. This procedure has been found, repeatedly, to be highly safe and 
efficacious
. Globally, access to abortion is largely determined by a number of extraneous circumstances. In 
the 
[LOCATION_002], among these determinants are political, geographical, social, and clinical factors. Clinical 
factors, including access to pain control, can contribute to abortion access. A recent National Abortion 
Federation provider survey documented that 54% of respondents prefer the use of local anesthesia with 
additional 
IV sedation, deep sedation, or general anesthesia. A disadvantage to receiving these types of 
sedation is the inability for patients to drive home themselves, which can be a barrier to receiving care. 
Inv
esting in e xpanding m odalities o f pain c ontrol could le ad to e xpanded a ccess to a bortion. A p reviou s 
abortion trial comparing TENS to IV sedation found similar postoperative pain scores with a significantly 
shorter 
recovery time in the TENS group, however, they did not evaluate intraoperative pain scores. Our team 
conducted
 a randomized controlled trial comparing TENS to IV sedation (in conjunction with local anesthesia) 
for first-tr imester surgical abortion a nd found that TENS had non-in ferior pain scores to IV sedation and was 
considered an 
acceptable modality for pain control among participants. In this proposed study, our primary 
outcome will be reported pain using a Visual Analogue Scale (VAS) during cervical dilation. Secondary 
outcomes will include VAS scores at other time points, satisfaction, and time spent in recovery. 
Specific aims 
Through 
this double blinded randomized controlled trial, we hope to demonstrate evidence that 
Transcutaneous electrical nerve-s timulation (TENS) is an acceptable, non-i nvasive alternative pain control 
option 
for people undergoing surgical abortion in the first-t rimester who would otherwise only be using local 
anesthesia. Ultimately, we hope to identify a pain control strategy that is inexpensive and free of anesthesia 
risks in e
ffort to break down barriers to abortion care, particularly in low-r esource settings, where access to 
pain 
control medications is limited. 
Rationale  
Worldwide, 
in 2010-2 014, 25% of all pregnancies ended in abortion making surgical abortion one of the most 
common g
ynecologic procedures. Globally, access to abortion is largely determined by a number of 
extraneous 
circumstances. In the [LOCATION_002], among these determinants are political, geographical, social, 
and clinical factors. Clinical factors, including access to pain control, can contribute to abortion access. A 
recent National Abortion Federation provider survey documented that 54% of respondents prefer the use of 
local anesthesia with IV mild, moderation or deep sedation, or general anesthesia. A disadvantage to 
receiving th
ese types of IV sedation is the inability for patients to drive home themselves, which is a barrier to 
receiving c
are that will only worsen as people will be expected to travel farther for abortion. Investing in 
expanding
 modalities of pain control could lead to expanded access to abortion in addition to improved 
experience
 for patient. 
Transcutaneous electrical nerve-s timulation (TENS) is a nonpharmacologic means of pain control that delivers 
electrical c
urrents through the skin and reduces pain by [CONTACT_814375]. TENS activates 
descending inhibitory systems in the central nervous system to reduce sensitivity to pain (hypoalgesia). 
Previous TENS research identifies intensity as a critical factor in efficacy. High intensity is associated with 
better 
pain control, as higher pulses activate deeper tissue afferents. TENS has been researched as pain 
control i
n a number of different settings, including cancer pain, lower back pain, labor, and a range of 
July	 [ADDRESS_1127350] conclusions regarding 
the efficacy of TENS for pain control in the majority of settings. 
A recent study examined the use of TENS for pain relief during office hysteroscopy (rigid).  found that 
high intensity TENS was associated with a clinically significant reduction in VAS pain scores in comparison to 
placebo. While hysteroscopy d
iffers procedurally from first-t rimester surgical abortions, we are motivated by 
[CONTACT_814376], as the timing for greatest pain reported with surgical 
abortion is when
 instruments enter the uterus.  
Previous research of
 TENS use for pain control in abortion care show TENS to be effective for pain 
associated with medication abortion, uterine aspi[INVESTIGATOR_1516], and postoperative pain. Compared to IV sedation, 
pain control in th
e TENS group was non-i nferior for reducing aspi[INVESTIGATOR_814373]. Bot
h groups reported a pain level of greater than 6cm on a 10cm visual analogue scale (VAS), 
where 10cm was labeled as “worst pain imaginable”. In a postoperative setting, Platon found that 
participants using TENS reported pain relief levels greater or equal to 3cm on a VAS. TENS subjects  spent 
significantly less time
 to recover.  
Although TENS may be non -inferior to IV s edation fo r pain c ontrol, IV s edation is n ot always a n option  in an 
outpatient setti ng and m ay act as a barrier for patient s who do not have a ri de hom e after t he procedure. I n 
such cases, alternati ves modalit ies fo r pain c ontrol include ib uprofen a nd a p aracervical block. If effective, 
TENS woul d provi de a useful non -pharmacologi c adjunct t o the current standar d and impr ove pain 
management for patients undergoing aspi[INVESTIGATOR_814374].  
We propose a double blinded, randomized controlled trial that studies the effect of adding TENS to the 
standar d ibuprof en pl us lidocai ne paracervical bl ock for pai n control. W e hope t o identif y a m eans of non -
pharmacologi c pai n control for first -trimeste r surgical aborti on that i s inexpensive, noninvasive, accessible, 
free o f side
 effects, safe fro m complications, and e asy to u se.  
Researc h desi gn and methods 
Design:  Parallel, double -blinded, randomized, controll ed superiorit y trial 
Enrollment/procedure visit:  
Patients
 presenting to Stanford Gynecology Clinic for first trimester surgical abortion (gestational age < 12 
weeks), who plan to have ibuprofen and local anesthesia, will be approached for enrollment. If participants 
agree to be
 blinded and randomized, they will be assigned a study ID. The patient will be block randomized 
to one of two s
tudy groups following consent: 1) Active TENS or 2) Sham TENS.  Demographic data will be 
collected.  
For parti
cipant s randomi zed t o the experimental gr oup (TENS), car e will be provi ded t o the followi ng protocol: 
●A baseline and anticipated pain score will be collected using a Visual Analog Scale (VAS) pain
assessment tool on a 0 -100 mm scale ([ADDRESS_1127351] pain imaginable) by a
research coordinator.
●The patient will receive pre -procedure medications  (promethazine, ibuprofen, azithromycin) pe r
standard  protocols .
●Prior to the procedure, the patient will have two sets of two self -adhesive electrodes placed parallel to
the spi[INVESTIGATOR_27322] T -10-L1 and S2 -S4 levels for TENS administration.
oNon- blinded study coordinator will turn on the TENS unit 5 minutes prior to the procedure and
monitor stimulating frequency level (80 -100Hz and pulse duration of 400 microseconds;
intensity or frequency will be monitored to be administered to a non -painful  level). The study
coordinator will use a script with all patients to ensure provider blinding between participants.
●The procedure will commence and various VAS pain scores will be collected at the completion of each
of the following steps:

July	2022oSpeculum placement (time recorded)
oTenaculum placement
oParacervical black administration
oCervical dilation (collected after largest dilator passed)
oUterine evacuation
oSpeculum removal (time recorded)
●TENS unit will be turned off and electrode s removed.
●Overall VAS pain score will be collected.
For participants randomized to the control group (sham TENS), care will be provided to the following protocol:  
●A baseline and anticipated pain score will be collected using a Visual Analog Scale (VAS) pain
assessment tool on a 0 -100 mm scale ([ADDRESS_1127352] pain imaginable) by a
research coordinator.
●The patient will receive pre -procedure medications  (promethazine, ibuprofen, azithromycin) pe r
standard protocols.
●Prior to the procedure, the patient will have two sets of two self -adhesive electrodes placed parallel to
the spi[INVESTIGATOR_27322] T -10-L1 and S2 -S4 levels.
oNon- blinded study coordinator will turn on the TENS unit and connect the patient to the unit;
however, the unit will not be delivering electrical stimulation. The study coordinator will use a
script with all patients to ensure provider blinding between par ticipants.
●The procedure will commence and various VAS pain scores will be collected at the completion of eachof the following steps:
oSpeculum placement (time recorded)
oTenaculum placement
oParacervical black administration
oCervical dilation (collected after largest dilator passed)
oUterine evacuation
oSpeculum removal (time recorded)
●TENS electrodes removed.
●Overall VAS pain score will be collected.
All groups:  
●Post-procedure satisfaction questions will be administered to participants on a 0 -100mm VAS (0 being
“very dissatisfied” and 100 being “very satisfied”).
●Participants will rate their likelihood to recommend the pain control methodology to friends (0 being“very unlikely” and 100 being “very likely”)
●Post-procedure provider questions will be administered.
oEase of procedure,  VAS score will be collected (0 being “very easy” and 100 being “very
difficult”) . Blinding assessment questions  will collect which intervention both the provider and
participant believed the participant  had been randomized to.
●Side effects and adverse events will be documented.
●Time spent in recovery before being discharged will be documented.
TENS Administration Protocol  
The TENS unit to be used in this study is a TENS 7000 (ROSCOE Medical). TENS will be emitted asymmetric, 
biphasic square waveform at consistent pulse rate of [ADDRESS_1127353] level at which patient begins to feel sensation and when it is at
appropriate “slightly uncomfortable but not painful” stage.10. Shut off unit, disconnect lead wires, and prepare for procedure.
The TENS device’s intensity (amplitude) will be individually adjusted to each participant’s maximum sensory 
level (strongest reported tingling feeling without pain and with no muscle contractions). Patients will be  
counseled on the importance of maintaining the simulation at a maximum non -painful level. The TENS unit’s 
output intensity will be increased during the treatment every time the patient indicates they accommodated to 
the TENS stimulus.   
Procedure TENS Administration for TENS Group  
1. Once patient is prepared for procedure increase intensity to the setting recorded from Step 9.2. Ensure patient is comfortable with setting and instruct them that at any point during the procedure if they are
feeling pain they can ask for you to increase the setting.
3. Signal to provider that you are ready for the procedure to begin.4. Adjust setting as necessary throughout procedure, recording any adjustments you make in the AdjustmentLog.
5. When the provider indicates that procedure is complete, notify the patient that you will be turning the TENS
unit off. Turn off the unit, disconnect the lead wires, and remove the adhesive electrodes.
Procedure TENS Administration for Sham TENS with Standard Ibuprofen and 
lidocaine paracervical block Group  
1. Once patient is prepared for procedure maintain blinding by [CONTACT_814377]
(the device should not be fully connected to the TENS electrodes).
2. Ensure patient is comfortable and instruct them that at any point during the procedure if they are feeling painthey can ask for you to increase the setting.3. Signal to provider that you are ready for the procedure to begin.
4. Adjust setting as necessary throughout procedure, recording any adjustments you make in the Adjustment
Log.5. When the provider indicates that procedure is complete, notify the patient that you will be turning the TENS
unit off. Turn off the unit, disconnect the lead wires, and remove the adhesive electrodes.
Primary outcome: 
●Procedural pain with cervical dilation as measured by [CONTACT_8298].
Secondary outcomes: 
●Procedural pain at various time points:
oSpeculum placement
oTenaculum placement
oParacervical block administration
oUterine evacuation
oSpeculum removal
●Procedure time
●Provider perceived ease of procedure
●Participant satisfaction
●Complications
●Time spent in recovery
●Participant’s perceived group allocation
Criteria for the selection of subjects:  
Inclusion criteria:  
●Presenting for surgical abortion
●Gestational age <12 weeks
●>18 years of age
●Agrees to be randomized
Exclusion criteria:  
●< 18 years of age
●Fetal demise
●Pre-procedure use of misoprostol
Data Analysis: 
Prior studies have established that a difference of 30% or 13mm to 20mm difference on the 100mm pain 
visual analog scale (VAS) is considered clinically significant. The standard deviation in such studies was 
24mm.  T
o detect at least a 15 mm mean difference on the 100 mm VAS with 80% power and a significance 
level of 0.05, a total of 82 participants are required. Adding 10% to compensate for potential participant drop 
out and protocol violation we will aim to recruit 90 total of participants (45 per group).  
Demographic characteristics will be compared between the two groups with descriptive statistics, specifically 
Chi-s quare 
test or Student’s t-t est where appropriate. Mean  VAS scores will be compared to be consistent 
with published literature on VAS results. A t-t est will be used  to evaluate the primary outcome of pain at the 
time of cervical dilation. Median scores will also be assessed, as the data are not likely to be normally 
distributed; Wilcoxon’s two-s ample test will be used. To assess the mean change in pain score during the 
procedure and m
ean difference at various time points between groups, a mixed effects model and a 
repeated-m easures ANOVA will be used. Univariate and multivariate analyses will be performed to evaluate 
potential confounder
s and determine independent predictors of pain at the time of cervical dilation. 
Study data will be collected and managed using REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) tools hosted at 
Stanford University. Statistical analyses will be performed with SPSS Version 23 (IBM, Armonk, NY, [LOCATION_003]). 
Links wit
h other projects 
This project is not currently linked with any other projects. 
Impact statement 
The potential  
impact of the proposed research is far-r eaching a nd  applicable to abortion care in high- and 
low-r esource settings. Reducing pain with surgical abortion mitigates a s ignificant barrier to abortion care. In 
our c urrent
 political climate in the [LOCATION_002], we may observe more people than ever traveling across 
state lines to access abortion care. Ensuring those who do not have the means to pay the additional cost 
associated wit
h IV sedation and those who must drive or transport themselves (by [CONTACT_814378]) 
July	 [ADDRESS_1127354] e continue 
to receive a bortion c are in lo w-resource c linics a nd hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600], many w ithout the o ption to p rovide IV 
sedation —due t o cost, provider level, or acce ss to medical supplies. TENS i s a low -cost strat egy that many 
contribute to ensuring access abortion under circumstances that are low-ri sk a nd comfortable.  
Further, if TENS is found to be superior to ibuprofen and local anesthesia alone, IV sedation may be avoided
—reducing a known complication risk associated with surgical abortion. 