 
Version 12May2022                                                                                                                                      [ADDRESS_601488] of Antibacterial Mouthwash on Muscle  
Function in Healthy Young Men and Women  
 
Principal Investigator: [INVESTIGATOR_154159] R. Coggan, Ph.D.  
Associate Professor, Department of Kinesiology  
I.U. School of Health and Human Sciences  
 
Sub-Investigator: Edgar Gallardo  
Student , Department of Kinesiology  
I.U. School of Health and Human Sciences  
 
Sub-Investigator: Richard Hoffman  
Clinical Research Specialist, Department of Kinesiology  
I.U. School of Health and Human Sciences  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Version 12May2022                                                                                                                                      2 
 Table of Contents:  
 
Study Schema  
1.0 Background  
2.0 Rationale and Specific Aims  
3.0 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
4.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
5.0 Study Procedures  
6.0 Reporting of Adverse Events or Unanticipated Problems involving Risk to Participants or 
Others  
7.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
8.0 Statistical Considerations  
9.0 Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
10.[ADDRESS_601489] Retention  
11.0 References  
12.0 Appendix  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 12May2022                                                                                                                                      3 
 1.0  Background  
 
Approximately $1,400,000,000 worth of antiseptic/antibacterial mouthwash is sold in the US each year.[ADDRESS_601490] use such products. 
Antiseptic/antibacterial mouthwash use can improve oral health, by [CONTACT_469114]. However, such products may also have detrimental e ffects. In particular, prior research has 
demonstrated that antibacterial mouthwash can destroy  the nitrate (NO 3-) -reducing bacteria normally 
found in the mouth.2 These facultative anaerobes reduce salivary NO 3- to nitrite (NO 2-), which after being 
swallo wed and absorbed into the circulation can be further reduced by, e.g., deoxyhemoglobin, to form 
nitric oxide (NO).3 NO is a key signaling molecule involved in a variety of physiological responses, including, 
but not limited to, the regulation of blood flow/pressure. As a result, interruption of the bacteria -
dependent enterosalivary pathway of NO production via twice -daily use of chlorhexidine -containing 
mouthwash (i.e., Corsodyl©) for 7 d has been shown to decrease plasma NO 2- levels by 25% and increased 
systolic blood pressure by 2 -3 mmHg.4 The latter change is potentially clinically significant, as it would 
raise the chance of dying of ischemic heart disease and stroke by 7 and 10%, respectively.[ADDRESS_601491] been found following use of cetylpyridinium -containing 
mouthwash (i.e., Cepacol©).[ADDRESS_601492] 
unintended negative consequences. On the other hand, use of Listerine©, an antiseptic (vs. antibacterial) 
mouthwash, has minimal effect on blood pressure.1 
 
In addition to influencing blood flow/pressure, NO is involved in the regulation of numerous other 
physiological functions, e.g., neural transmission, immune function, mitochondrial respi[INVESTIGATOR_1516], etc. This 
includes the regulation of muscle contractility, i. e., the force and speed of muscle contraction. Specifically, 
NO may (or may not) slightly suppress isometric force production, by [CONTACT_469115] -
contraction coupling at the level of Ca2+ release and/or by [CONTACT_469116] S -nitrosylation 
of cysteine residues.6 Indirectly, however, NO causes an overall “slow -to-fast” shift characterized, in part, 
by [CONTACT_469117], maximal shortening velocity, and maximal power of both 
single muscle fibers and isolated muscles of animals.[ADDRESS_601493] demonstrated that the acute ingestion of NO 3--rich beet juice can increase plasma 
NO 3-/NO 2- and breath NO and enhance muscle contractile function in healthy young and middle -aged 
individuals,8 athletes,9 and patients with heart failure.10 It is not known, however, whether a reduction in 
NO bioavailability resulting from use of antibacterial mouthwash can inhibit muscle function. Such 
knowledge is obviously relevant not only in the context of athletic performance but also to clinical 
populations (e.g., the elderly) in whom baseline muscle strength, speed, and power are impaired, thus 
limiting activities of daily li ving and increasing the risk of falls.  
 
2.0  Rationale and Specific Aims  
 
Specific Aim #1: To determine the effects of antibacterial mouthwash on maximal knee extensor speed 
and power in healthy young men and women.  
 
We hypothesize that use of an antibacterial mouthwash will significantly reduce maximal knee extensor 
speed and power (primary endpoints). This will be accompanied by [CONTACT_469118] 3-
/NO 2- and breath NO levels  (secondary endpoints).  
 
 
Version 12May2022                                                                                                                                      [ADDRESS_601494] these hypotheses using isokinetic dynamometry and salivary and breath sampling in n = 24 
healthy young men and women (n = 8/group).  
 
3.0  Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria  
 
Inclusion:  
 
● Men and Women age 18 -30 years old  
● No current use of mouthwash  
 
Exclusion:  
  
● Men and Women <18 or 30> y of age  
● Unable to provide informed consent  
● Current users of mouthwash  
● Current antibiotic use  
● Current smokers  
● Stage II hypertension (resting blood pressure >140/>90)  
 
An answer of yes to any of the seven questions on the first page of the Physical Activity Readiness 
Questionnaire (PAR -Q) indicating that the subject is not physically ready for exercise without a medical 
exam. These exclusions include the following:  
 
● If participant’s doctor has ever said that he/she has a heart condition and that he/she should only 
do physical activity recommended by a doctor  
● Pain in chest when doing physical activity  
● In past month, chest pain when not doing physical activity  
● If participant has ever lost balance because of dizziness or has ever lost consciousness  
● Bone or joint problem that could be made worse by [CONTACT_469119]  
● Currently on prescribed drugs for blood pressure or heart condition.  
● If the participant knows of any other reason why he/she should not do physical activity.  
 
Session exclusion criteria:  
 
● These criteria do not apply to the first study visit , only for visits 2 and 3.  Subjects will be instructed 
to not smoke, perform exercise on the day of the visit, and to not attend the visit in a fasting or 
hungry state.   They will also be asked to not consume caffeine  or alcohol  or use chewing gum in 
the 24 hours prior to the visit.  They will be asked to avoid consuming foods (e.g., spi[INVESTIGATOR_87957], beets, 
collard greens) high in NO 3- during th e evening prior to visits . Subjects will also be instructed to 
not use any other mouthwash products other than those provided during the study.  Subj ects will 
be excluded from a session if their resting blood pressure is greater than 140/90.  
 
4.0 Enrollment/Randomization  
 
Study participants will be given a consent form ahead of the screening visit . The study participant will be 
given time  to review the consent form, and a study staff member will contact [CONTACT_469120] y may have. If interested, then the potential subject will be schedule d for a 
meeting where the consent form will be reviewed again. The potential subject will be given as much time 
 
Version 12May2022                                                                                                                                      [ADDRESS_601495]  
with participating , then the consent form will be signed by [CONTACT_469121]’s signature. A copy of the signed consent form will be 
provided  to the subject . Both the participants and the investigators will be blinded to the order of 
treatment, which will be randomized in four blocks of four using randomization.com.  
 
5.0 Study Procedures  
 
Study Design  
 
 
 
Figure 1. Overall study design . 
 
Study Procedures  
 
Study Visit  1 (Screening and muscle function testing p ractice) : The consent statement will be reviewed 
with the subject including the procedures of the study and the risks of participating. Subjects will also be 
instructed on the re quirements while in the study including not exercis ing on the day of study visits prior 
to the visit and to not attend the visit in a fasting or hungry state.  They will also be asked to not consume 
caffeine or alcohol or use chewing gum in the 24 hours prior to the visit.  They will be asked to avoid 
consuming foods (e.g., spi[INVESTIGATOR_87957], bee ts, collard greens ) high in NO 3- during this [ADDRESS_601496]’s dominant leg.  This is done using a Biodex 4 Isokinetic Dynamometer 
(Biodex Medical Systems, Shirley, NY).   
 
Study Visit 2 (Baseline Testing) : participants will be asked to return and undergo baseline testing. This will 
include 1) collection of a saliva sample for a measurement of NO 3- and NO 2-, and, 2) assessment of the 
muscle function of the knee extensors (see Study Methods). The subjects will then be randomly assigned 
(via randomization.com)  in four blocks of four subjects each  to receive either an antibacterial mouthwash 
(Cepacol©, Reckitt Benckiser, Parsippany, NJ) or, as a control solution, an alcohol -free “natural” 
mouthwash (Tom’s of Maine©, Kennebunk, ME). Participants will be asked to rinse their mouth as directed 
on the product’s packaging for [ADDRESS_601497] the usage of the mouthwash 
on a provided form . Subjects will then return for Study Visit  3. Note that although the two products differ 
significantly in terms of packaging, color, taste, etc., the subjects will be told that the study is simply to 
compare the two products, with no expectation as to the outcome.  
 
Study Visit  3 (Final Testing), participants will be asked to return to undergo the same procedures  as 
described above for Study Day 2.  
  

 
Version 12May2022                                                                                                                                      6 
 Study Methods  
 
Measurement of Salivary Nitrate & Nitrite: Saliva samples will be obtained using a salivary sample 
collection kit (Salivette, Sarstedt, Newton, NC). The NO 3- and NO 2- of each sample will be determined using 
high performance liquid chromatography (ENO -30, Eicom [LOCATION_003], San Diego, CA).  
 
Measurement of skeletal muscle contractile functions: A Biodex 4 System isokinetic dynamometer (Biodex 
Medical Systems, Shirley, NY) will be used to measure the subject’s muscle contractile properties as 
previously described. Briefly, participants will be asked to perform three maximal isometric knee 
extensions with the ir dominant leg at a joint angle of [ADDRESS_601498] will perform three maximal 
isokinetic efforts at angular velocities of 1.57, 3.14, 4.71, and 6.28 rad/s, with [ADDRESS_601499] between each 
set. To eliminate artifacts, the dynamometer data will be “windowed” to isolate the isokinetic phase and 
smoothed using using a nine point weighte d moving average filter, after which the highest torque 
generated at each velocity will be multiplied by [CONTACT_469122]. 
The resulting power -velocity data will then be fit with a 2nd order polynomial function (i.e ., y=ax2+bx+c) 
which will be solved to determine the subject’s maximal knee extensor velocity (Vmax; = -b/a) and power 
(Pmax; =(4ac -b2)/4a).  
 
Risks  
 
Likely: Muscle soreness from using the Biodex Isokinetic Dynamometer. Subjects may have muscle 
soreness in their quadriceps because the quadriceps is responsible for extension of the knee.   They might 
also experience soreness in their knee joint.  Fatigue may also be experienced from exercising the muscles.  
 
Very rarely, an exercise test, such as the muscular function test, may be associated with serious 
complications including, but not limited to:  
 
• Fainting and disorders of the heart beat (too fast or too slow) which may require hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059];  
• heart attack, stroke, or death .   
 
The risk of arrhythmia and heart attack are rare and the risk of death during exercise testing is extremely 
rare. The estimated risk of a fatal event during maximal exercise testing ranges from 0.[ADDRESS_601500] minimal  resistance .  
 
To minimize the risk of exercise testing, subjects will be screened using an accepted exercise risk 
screening tool ( Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire - PAR-Q) to ensure subjects are at minimal risk.  
High risk individuals (those reporting cardiovascular, pulmonary, or metabolic disease) will be excluded 
from this study.  
 
If any of the following occurs, the subject will be excluded from participating in any test involving 
physical activity on that day:  
•             Resting blood pressure systolic > 1 40 mm Hg or diastolic > 9 0 mm Hg  
•             Resting heart rate > 120 beats/min or < 45 beats/min  
 
Blood pressure and heart rate will be taken before and after the isokinetic test.  
 
During exercise testing s ubjects will be instructed on proper technique including avoiding the valsalva 
maneuver (holding their breath during exertion) which has been shown to increase blood pressure.  
Subjects will be instructed that they may stop the tests at any time with no adverse 
consequences.   Subjects will also be instructed to talk with the experimenter about any discomforts that 
occur during the physical tests.   If for any reason the participan t reports an injury, chest pain, excessive 
shortness o f breath, abnormal heart rhythm or dizziness, the test will be terminated and they will be 
referred to their doctor, or the PI [INVESTIGATOR_469113].   
 
Additionally, all exercises will occur in an air conditioned facility because environmental extremes can be 
poorly tolerated during exercise.   Also, every precaution will be taken to provide fluids, rest and other 
measures to insure each participant is com fortable, safe, and secure in the testing/exercise 
environment.   In the unlikely event that an emergency may occur, a CPR certified person will be 
available for all testing sessions.  
 
To simplify scheduling, the isokinetic muscle assessments will be completed in either The National 
Institute of Fitness and Sport  (location of the human performance laboratory ), or on an identical system 
in IU-Health University Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307] , [ADDRESS_601501], Indianapolis IN [ZIP_CODE], on the 5th floor  
adjacent to the Clinical Research Center.  The National Institute of Fitness and Sport  has set up 
provisions to respond to a medical emergency which include: 1) Evaluate the condition of the individual 
(consc iousness, breathing, and pulse), 2) Call [ADDRESS_601502] another staff or lab member to call 911 and 
state "We have an emergency situation at our facility.   The individual appears to have (give 
 
Version 12May2022                                                                                                                                      8 
 condition).   Please send a paramedic team to the National Institute for Fitness and Sport located at [ADDRESS_601503].   We are South of the Natatorium on the IUPUI campus. Someone will meet you at the 
main entrance to the building."   For a life threaten ing emergency, we are instructed to dial "799" for a 
NIFS building page. Say "There is a medical emergency in the (given location)."   Then hang -up. and 3) 
initiate CPR procedures if needed. A fully equipped automated external defibrillator is also availabl e in 
the building. The NIFS emergency procedures will be located in the lab and all research staff will be 
trained on the emergency procedures . Within the hospi[INVESTIGATOR_307], emergency equipment and trained personnel 
are available to deal with any emergency.  
 
To minimize the loss of confidentiality, all records will be kept in a locked file cabinet inside an office which 
has locking doors.  All study procedures will be completed behind closed doors inside the Human 
Performance Laboratory located in the National Institute of Fitness and Sport at [ADDRESS_601504] definitions will be used for this study:  
 
Adverse event (AE): Any untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a human study participant, 
including any abnormal sign (e.g. abnormal physical exam or laboratory finding), symptom, or disease, 
temporally associated with the participants’ involvement in the research, whether or not considered 
related to participation in the research.  
 
Serious Adverse Event (SAE): Any AE that results is place the participant at immediate risk of death from 
the event as it occurred, or results in inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], prolongation of existing hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], 
persistent or significant disability/inca pacity, congenital abnormalities or birth defects, or death.  
 
Unanticipated problem: As Defined by [CONTACT_32119] 45 CFR part 46, any incident, experience, or outcome that 
meets all of the following criteria: 1) is unexpected, in terms of nature, severity, or frequency, given (a) 
the research procedures that are described in t he protocol -related documents, such as the IRB -approved 
research protocol and informed consent document; and (b) the characteristics of the study population; 2) 
is related or possibly related to participation in the research (in this guidance document, pos sibly related 
means there is a reasonable possibility that the incident, experience, or outcome may have been caused 
by [CONTACT_3459]); and 3) suggests that the research places participants or others 
at a greater risk of harm (inc luding physical, psychological, economic, or social harm) than was previously 
known or recognized.  
 
AEs will be graded according to the following scale:  
 
● Mild : An experience that is transient, and requires no special treatment or intervention. The 
experience does not generally interfere with usual daily activities. This includes transient 
laboratory test alterations.  
● Moderate : An experience that is alleviated with simple therapeutic treatments. The experience 
impacts usual daily activities. Includes laboratory test alterations indicating injury, but without 
long -term risk.  
 
Version 12May2022                                                                                                                                      9 
 ● Severe : An experience that requires therapeutic intervention. The experience interrupts usual 
daily activities. If hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] (or prolongation of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]) is required for treatment it 
becomes an SAE.  
 
Attribution of AEs and SAEs will be categorized as:  
 
● Not related : The AE is clearly not related to the study procedures (i.e., another cause of the event 
is most plausible and/or a clinically plausible temporal sequence is inconsistent with the onset of 
the event).  
● Possibly related : An event that follows a reasonable temporal sequence from the initiation of 
study procedures, but that could readily have been produced by a number of other factors.  
● Related : The AE is clearly related to the study procedures.  
  
Reporting of AEs, SAEs, and unanticipated problems will follow the guidelines of the IU  HRPP Policy on 
Reportable Events . Specifically, the following events will be reported promptly (i.e., within five business 
days) to the IRB:  
 
● AEs (including SAEs)  that are assessed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_5768] -investigators as (1) unexpected, (2) related 
or possibly related to participation, AND (3) suggests that the research places subject(s) or others 
at greater risk of harm than was previously known;  
● Major protocol deviations  that may, in the opi[INVESTIGATOR_17439], (1) impact subject safety, (2) affect 
the integrity of the data, OR (3) affect study participant' willingness to participate in the study;  
● Noncompliance , which includes any action or activity associated with the conduct or oversight of 
the research that fails to comply with federal or state regulations, institutional policies governing 
human study participant research, or the requirements or determination s of the IRB.  
 
Unanticipated problems that do not meet the criteria for prompt reporting will be reported at time of 
protocol renewal to ensure the IRB has a full understanding of the conduct of the research.   
 
7.0 Study Withdrawal/Discontinuation  
 
A participant may withdraw from the study at any time verbally or by [CONTACT_469123]. As outlined in the consent document, if the 
participant/patient wishes to withdraw consent, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_1318]:  
 
● no longer use and take reasonable steps to destroy all saliva samples and information  
● not take back any research / analyses already completed  
 
8.0     Statistical Considerations  
 
Non-PHI p rimary data will be stored electronically on both the measurement instruments and as Excel 
and/or Prism data files on the PI’s university -supplied , DUO -protected laptop computer. The laptop is 
backed up automatically by [CONTACT_469124], whereas the instrument data files will be backed up manually on a 
monthly basis . Other data sources include the subjects’ sex, age, and body mass will be collected as paper 
records and merged with the primary data as needed. Data quality will be assured by [CONTACT_469125]/examination of data use d for subsequent statistical analysis every 6 
months.   
 
 
Version 12May2022                                                                                                                                      10 
 Statistical analyses will be performed using Prism© version 8.0.1 (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA). 
Normality of data distribution will first be tested using the D’Agostino -Pearson omnibus test. Analysis of 
individual endpoints will then be conducted using a mixed model analysis of variance (ANOVA) approa ch, 
with treatment and trial number as fixed effects and subject as a random effect to account for repeated 
measurements. Post -hoc testing will be performed using the Šidák -Holms multiple comparison approach. 
A P value of <0.05 will be considered significa nt. 
 
As this is a pi[INVESTIGATOR_255952], we lack the preliminary data necessary to perform a formal sample 
size/power analysis. In previous research,[ADDRESS_601505] observed than an increase in NO 
bioavailability resulting from ingestion of NO 3--rich beet juice increased (P<0.05) Vmax and Pmax by 
11.4±16.5 and 6.3±8.7%, respectively. Assuming similar intersubject variability when NO bioavailability is 
reduced by [CONTACT_469126], our chosen sample size will allow us to detect any effect 
size ≥1.3 with an alpha of 0.05 and 1 -beta of 0.80.  
 
9.0  Privacy/Confidentiality Issues  
 
All study activities will be performed within areas respective of the participants’ right to privacy.  
 
Although there can be no absolute guarantee of confidentiality, every practical precaution will be taken.  
 
Each stu dy participant will be assigned a unique ID. Samples and information will be de -identified using 
this unique ID.  
 
10.[ADDRESS_601506] access. Files 
will be kept on site until 2 y after study completion, and then sent to a s ecure archiving facility. Files will 
be kept as long as required by [CONTACT_2371] . 
 
11.0  References  
 
1. Woessner M, Smoliga JM, Tarzia B, Stabler T, Van Bruggen M, Allen JD (2016). A stepwise reduction 
in plasma and salivary nitrite with increasing strengths of mouthwash following a dietary nitrate load. 
Nitric Oxide 54: 1 -7. 
2. Cousido MC, Carmona T, Garcia -Caballero L, Limeres J, Alvarez M, Diz P (2010). In vivo substantivity 
of 0.12% and 0.2% chlorhexidine mouthrinses on salivary bacteria. Clin Oral Investig  14:397 -202.  
3. Lundberg JO, Weitzberg E (2009). NO generation from inorganic nitrate and nitrite: Role in 
physiology, nutrition, and therapeutics. Arch Pharm Res 32: 1119 -1126.  
4. Kapil, V, Haydar SMA, Pearl V, Lundberg JO, Weitzberg E,& Ahluwalia A (2012). Physiological role for 
nitrate -reducing oral bacteria In blood pressure control. Free Radical Biology and Medicine  55: 93 -
100.  
 
Version 12May2022                                                                                                                                      11 
 5. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, Peto R, Collins R, Collaboration PS (2002). Age -specific relevance 
of usual blood pressure to vascular mortality: a meta -analysis of individual data for one million adults 
in 61 prospective studies. Lancet 360: 1903 –1913.  
6. Maréchal G, Gaily P (1999). Effects of nitric oxide on the contraction of skeletal muscle. Cell Mol Life 
Sci 55:1088 -1102.  
7. Coggan AR, Peterson LR (2018). Dietary nitrate influences the contractile properties of human 
muscle. Exerc Sport Sci Rev  46: 254 -261.  
8. Coggan AR, Leibowitz JL, Kadkhodayan A, Thomas DP, Sujata R, Spearie CA, Waller S, Farmer M, 
Peterson LR (2014). Effect of acute dietary nitrate intake on knee extensor speed and power in 
healthy men and women. Nitric Oxide  48:16 -21 
9. Rimer EG, Peterson LR, Coggan AR, Martin JC (2016). Acute dietary nitrate supplementation increases 
maximal cycling power in athletes. Int J Sports Physiol Perf  11: 715 -720.  
10. Coggan AR, Leibowitz JL, Anderson Spearie C, Kadkhodayan A, Thomas DP, Ramamurthy S, Mahmood 
K, Park S, Waller S, Farmer M, Peterson LR (2015). Acute dietary nitrate intake improves muscle 
contractile function in patients with heart failure: a double -blind , placebo -controlled, randomized 
trial. Circ Heart Fail 8: 914 -920.  
11. Goodman J , Thomas S , Burr JF . (2013). Physical activity series: cardiovascular risks of physical activity 
in apparently healthy individuals: risk evaluation for exercise clearance and prescription.  Can Fam 
Physician.  2013 Jan:59(1):46 -9, e6 -e10.  