 
Official Title: Oxalobacter Formigenes Colonization and Oxalate Excretion in Healthy Adults  
NCT#: 03752684 
Document Date:  May 22, 2025  
   
 
  
STUDY PROTO COL  
 
Objective of the study  
 The primary objective of the study was to determine if healthy adults can be colonized with Oxalobacter 
formigenes, a naturally occurring oxalate degrading intestinal bacteri um, and  if colonization r esults in a decrease 
in urinary oxalate excretion on a fixed diet . 
 
Study Design 
 
This study was designed as a sequential, diet -controlled study. The study recruited healthy adults from  the 
Greater Birmingham area. The individuals  were  recruited, consented, and had blood samples  collected at the 
UAB CCTS Clinical Research Unit. Sample processing, data acquisition and analysis was performed in the 
Urology Stone Research Laboratory.  
 
• Inclusion criteria:  not colonized with Oxalobacter formigenes, mentally competent adults  without history 
of kidney stones, who are able to read and comprehend the consent form (written in Engl ish); >18 and 
<65 yrs; BMI 18.5 -40 kg/m2; good health as judged from a medical history without other medical 
comorbidit ies. individuals  will need a normal blood comprehensive metabolic panel .  
• Exclusion criteria:  colonized with Oxalobacter formigenes, history of any hepatic, renal (including kidney 
stone disease), bowel or endocrine disease (including diabetes) or any other condition that may influence 
the absorption, transport or urine excretion of ions, which will compromise the interpretation of results ; 
abnormal blood metabolic profiles; poor 24 hour urine collections judged by 24 hour urine creatinine 
excretion (indicative of not collecting all urine in 24 hour period); pregnancy, intention to become pregnant 
in the near future, or lactation; <18 and > 65 years of age; BMI< 18.5 >40 kg/m2  
 
Study Methods  
 Screening.  The screening phase involved a fasted blood draw for comprehensive metabolic profile (CMP), two 24 -
hr urine collections (creatinine) and stool collections on self -choice diets. Screening blood tests were used as a 
health assessment, and urinary creatinine as measure of the candidates’ ability to accurately collect urine. Stool at screening was used to test for O. formigenes  colonization. If negative, participants were further tested after 
consuming a high oxalate containing meal.  
 
Pre-Colonization Fixed Diet Study:  Participants who passed scr eening collected stool and 24 -hour urine 
specimens while ingesting a moderately high oxalate (210 – 240 mg/day) and low calcium (500 - 700 mg 
calcium/day) diet. For reference, a healthy diet rich in whole grain products, fruits and vegetables may contain close to 200 mg of oxalate per day, and the recommended dietary calcium intake per day for calcium oxalate 
kidney stone formers is 1000 mg.  Twenty -four-hour urine and stool specimens were collected on days 3- 5 of 
each dietary phase to allow for dietary equilibration. Lack of colonization with O. formigenes (pre-colonization 
phase) was again confirmed by [CONTACT_230355].  
 
Oxalobact er formigenes colonization procedure:  Following completion of the pre -colonization controlled diet, 
partic ipants ingested live O.formigenes ,cells spread on a sandwich. One week later participants collected stool 
for colonization culture testing.  
 
Post-Colonization Fixed Diet Study:  Successfully colonized participants repeated stool and urine collections on 
the same controlled diet.  
 
Assays: Urine and stool oxalate was measured in urines and stool  by [CONTACT_230356] . 
  
  
Statistical Analysis Plan 
T
he primary outco me measure was decrease in urinary oxalate content after colonization with O. formigenes  on 
the fixed diet. The secondary  outcome was decrease in stool  oxalate content after colonization with O. 
formigenes  on the fixed diet .  
The means of oxalate content  of repeated urine and stool collections for each phase (pre and post colonization) 
were used, and the decrease in oxalate content  after colonization determined for each partici pant. Paired 
comparisons were performed using linear mixed- effects models (for repeated measures). The covar iates 
included gender, body mass index, age, and a dichotomous variable denoting loss of colonization during the 
follow -up period (adjusted analyses); these covariates were included because of potential associations with 
endogenous oxalate synthesis or gut  permeability and absorption. Statistical tests were two -sided and were 
performed using a significance level of 5%. Statistical analyses were performed using SAS software (version 9.4; SAS Institute, Cary, NC). PROC MIXED of SAS was used to perform linear mixed effects models analyses. 
The sample size w as selected based on feasibility considerations for this pi[INVESTIGATOR_230354] (BESH).  