 
[ADDRESS_110233] a specific “protocol,” such as  a grant application.  This form must 
be submitted along with a copy of the complete grant proposal and all the information in this form must  be consistent with that proposal.  
This protocol form, once IRB approved, will be the working protocol for that re search.  When completing this document, do not refer to 
page numbers within your grant .   If revisions are necessary during the course of the research, amendments should refer to this protocol 
form, not the grant proposal.  Enter responses for all sections .  Check N/A if the section does not apply. All materials must be submitted 
electronically to the IRB via InfoEd. Proper security access is needed to make electronic submissions. Visit the InfoEd 
Resource Materials  page for more information.  
 
 
 
PROTOCOL SUMMARY  
 
Project Title:  Protocol 
Version 
Date:  
Phase I Pi[INVESTIGATOR_100021] a Novel Restraint Device for Critically Ill Patien ts with 
Acute Respi[INVESTIGATOR_60064]  10-31-18 
  
Principal Investigator:   [INVESTIGATOR_100022], MD PhD; Dale Needham, FCPA  MD  PhD  
 
NCT Numbe r: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]    
 
 
Lay Language Summary:   (Please use non-technical  language that would be understood by [CONTACT_100058].  The information must include: (1) a brief statement of the problem and related  theory supporting the intent of 
the study, and (2) a brief but specific description of the procedure(s) involving the human subjects.  Please do not exceed o ne single -spaced 
8 ½ X 11” page.)  
 
The goal of this Fast -Track STTR project is to optimize and te st a novel arm restraint in older critically ill 
mechanically ventilated patients that increases mobility; reduces agitation, use of sedative medications, 
and delirium; and exhibits high satisfaction and acceptability among hospi[INVESTIGATOR_33717], family members, and 
patients.  Older mechanically ventilated patients are often immobilized with wrist restraints to prevent 
self-extubation and are sedated to reduce agitation caused by [CONTACT_100059] 
(breathing) tube. This sedation and immobility lead  to complications, including delirium and muscle 
weakness, that are independently associated with long term cognitive impairment, reduced physical 
functioning, and mortality. Specifically, the incidence and duration of delirium in the ICU are strongly and 
independently associated with long -term cognitive impairment that is similar to Alzheimer’s Disease and 
Related Dementias.  
 
Healthy Design is developi[INVESTIGATOR_100023]/nasal e ndotracheal and feeding tubes or intravenous lines. Because it permits 
mobility, ExersidesTM may reduce agitation and the need for sedatives. In preliminary pi[INVESTIGATOR_48124], 
ExersidesTM has demonstrated very encouraging results. The objectives of this STTR F ast-Track project 
are to optimize  ExersidesTM and evaluate it in a randomized controlled trial (RCT) in older critically ill 
patients at high risk for  delirium and associated long -term cognitive impairment. The multidisciplinary 
investigator team has exper tise in critical care, extensive experience in conducting ICU RCTs, and a 
history of successful collaboration.   
 
During Phase I , a prospective study will be performed in 8 older mechanically ventilated  patients to 
demonstrate that 1) the revised ExersidesTM prototype is safe and 2) the RCT proposed in Phase II  is 
feasible. The milestones to proceed to Phase II are to demonstrate that: 1) the revised ExersidesTM 
restraint  has mean incidence rate <5% across 7 pre -specified safety criteria in mechanically vent ilated 
 
2 
 older patients  who require restraint; and 2) the RCT in phase II is feasible by [CONTACT_100060] [ADDRESS_110234] 90% of all proposed outcome measures.  
 
In Phase II, a multi -site within -patient cros sover RCT in older mechanically ventilated patients requiring  
restraint will be conducted to test the following outcomes in ExersidesTM versus traditional wrist restraint: 
1) Mobility assessed by [CONTACT_55629] (primary outcome); 2) Agitation, delirium, and me dication use 
(secondary  outcomes); and 3) Satisfaction with and acceptability/perceptions of the device (secondary 
outcomes).   Successful completion of this project will result in an ExersidesTM restraint that is ready for 
final optim ization in  preparation  for commerciali zation, and is suitable for larger clinical studies to 
demonstrate effectiveness reducing  long-term cognitive impairment in older ICU patients.  
 
 
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES  
 
Purpose:  The importance of the research and the potential knowledg e to be gained should be explained in detail.  Give background 
information.  
Background and Significance  
Every day, >27,000 patients are restrained in US hospi[INVESTIGATOR_100024] 
(ICUs) accounting for 56% of all restraint  days, and older patients being 8 times more likely to be 
restrained than younger patients.1  Hence, physical restraint is a major issue in ICUs, especially for 
older adults.  Restraints are used in an attempt to reduce dangerous self -removal of endotracheal tubes, 
feedin g tubes, and intravenous (IV) catheters.[ADDRESS_110235] major 
limitations. Especially in older patients, restraints ar e associated with increased agitation and delirium, 
often leading to increased use of sedative medications, with associated complications including: 
immobility, muscle weakness, pressure ulcers, falls, prolonged mechanical ventilation duration, 
nosocomial infections, increased healthcare costs, and increased mortality.1  Of particular note, older 
patients and those with Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias are at particular risk of delirium in 
the ICU.[ADDRESS_110236] scores similar to patients with 
Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Dementias.1  Moreover,  in older adults , delirium is significantly 
associated with incident dementia (odds ratio (OR) = 8.7) in those without pre -existing cognitive 
impairment3 and with accelerated cog nitive decline1 in those with pre -existing dementia, with worsening 
dementia severity (OR = 3.1) and global function (OR = 2.8).[ADDRESS_110237] is 
responsive to PAS -17-065 given that the ExersidesTM restraint is designed to increase mobility/activity 
and reduce sedation, delirium, and sedative medication use, thereby [CONTACT_100061] -term 
cognitive impairment in older critically ill patients.  
  
By 2030, more than 74 million Americans will be >[ADDRESS_110238] restraints. There is a paucity of randomized controlled trials 
(RCTs) evaluating physical restraint devices, and a consequent ial international call for such research, as 
per the recent Intensive Care Delirium Research Agenda , co-authored by [INVESTIGATOR_124]. Needham (multiple PI) and 
leading international delirium researchers.1  Moreover, the Association of Critical Care Nurses, 
American Thoracic Society, So ciety of Critical Care Medicine, and American College of Critical Care 
Medicine, as well as the Joint Commission and Centers for Medicare and Medicaid (CMS), have 
strongly voiced this public health need by [CONTACT_100062] ‘least restr aint 
necessary’ in clinical practice.[ADDRESS_110239] restraints 
patients may press their hands (in the mitts) together around a tube or line for self -removal.  Arm boards 
and elbow immobilizers are limit ed by [CONTACT_100063] -
remove the restraint on the opposing arm.  
 
Healthy Design Ltd. Co. is developi[INVESTIGATOR_100025] 
“ExersidesTM” restraint, a novel, adjustable arm 
restraint for  invasive or non -invasive  mecha nically 
ventilated patients.6-[ADDRESS_110240] and mitt restraints, ExersidesTM permits arm 
movement but does not allow the hands to reach 
endotracheal and feeding tubes (Figure 1). This 
novel restraint provides the least restrictive 
restraint possible at any time in a patient’s varying 
ICU course and permits maximum mobilit y levels 
commensurate with patient physical and cognitive 
condition. It is adjustable for patient size and to 
readily allow varying levels of restraint by [CONTACT_100064]. This multi -level restraint will empower 
nurses to minimize restraint AND sedation 
simultaneously, rather than relying on sedation to 
help patients tolerate the restraint. Thus, ExersidesTM will meet current 'least restraint necessary' 
regulations and 'best practice' recommendations.   
 
Preliminary Studies and Data  
1.  A prototype of the no vel ExersidesTM restraint was designed to prevent self -extubation while 
minimizing immobility, agitation, and sedation.   
Supported, in part, by a sub -award from R24HD065703 , the 
prototype (shown in Figure 2) was designed to allow complete 
rotational capaci ty of the shoulder joint, with comfort flexion at 
the elbow, while providing a squeezable ergonomic hand grip. 
The straps that secure the hand at the grip are designed to 
avoid the anterior wrist to permit use of a radial arterial 
catheter, when clinically  indicated, and render the posterior 
aspect of the hand accessible for peripheral IVs, if clinically 
indicated. The device also allows easy access to the arm for 
blood pressure cuffs and IVs. ExersidesTM telescopes to 
adjust to the variable arm length of e ach patient and has a 
soft outer shell for cushioning. The wrist straps do not bind 
circumferentially, as with traditional wrist restraints, to help 
prevent possible compromise in vascular circulation. Two 
attachments at the distal arm offer a resistance b and tie and a 
non-flexible tie that can be affixed to a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_33798], if desired. 
Configurations for adjustable levels of restraint are: 1) no tie  for a calm patient, 2) resistance tie  
(intermediate level of restraint) for a patient with flailing arms OR f or resistance exercise as might be 
supervised by a physical therapi[INVESTIGATOR_100026], and 3) rigid tie  for temporary tighter restraint for an agitated 
or aggressive patient or as a temporary restraint during a procedure when the arm must be immobilized.   
 
2.  An  evaluation in healthy subjects demonstrated that the first ExersidesTM prototype was 
feasible to use and comfortable for subjects.   The prototype was tested in 6 registered nurse (RN) Figure 1. ExersidesTM restraint prototypes in use .              
A: Healthy volunteer able to move arm from the shoulder 
but the restrained hand is unable to self -extubate or 
remove the device. Adjustable levels of restraint possible 
using resistance or rigid (white) straps.  B: The 
ExersidesTM restraint ( both arms) in use by [CONTACT_100065].  
   
              A                                       B                                   
Figure 2. Healthy volunteer wearing 
the ExersidesTM restraint.   Adjustable 
white straps (lower left) attach to bed 
and can be titrated to patient needs.  
 

 
4 
 volunteers who, following consent, were videotaped and acted in both th eir staff role (bedside RN) and 
simulated patient role (performed in a hospi[INVESTIGATOR_33798]). In the patient role, volunteers were instructed to act 
as: 1) a calm and cooperative patient, 2) a confused patient with moving arms, and 3) an agitated 
patient. Results,  summarized in Table 1, demonstrate 
high satisfaction.  
3.  A pi[INVESTIGATOR_100027].    An IRB -approved pi[INVESTIGATOR_100028], where [ADDRESS_110241] 
restraints (n=5 in each group, 64 ±7 years old, 30% 
women). On day #3 of intubation, all patients were 
continuously videotaped for 4 consecutive hours while 
wearing their assigned device.  All 5 patients in the 
ExersidesTM group  tolerated the device with no adverse 
events (defined as no self -extubation, feeding tube or 
IV dislodgement, self -removal of restraint, skin 
breakdown or bodily trauma to patient or nurse).  
Activity and agitation were qualitatively assessed by [CONTACT_100066], demonstrating that 
patients were active and awake while using ExersidesTM, with rare agitation observed in the ExersidesTM 
group.  Sedation medication dosing (propofol in all patients) was measured immediately before and then 
during th e 4-hour period (Table 2).  Propofol use, sedation score, time spent moving, and time spent 
interacting were all generally improved with ExersidesTM. 
 
Themes derived from qu alitative feedback from patients, nurses, and occupational therapi[INVESTIGATOR_100029] 3. In the Phase I portion of this STTR, we will revise the device based on existing feedback 
(Tables 1 and 3) and provide expanded data on safety and feasibility in an indep endent academic 
medical center (UVM site).  
 
 
 
 
4.  Continuous actigraphy is feasible to provide an objective,  quantitative measure of 
mobility/activity in critically ill patients.  We published data on feasibility of [ADDRESS_110242] actigraphy 
monitoring, using the same sensor device proposed herein, in ICU patients. Overall, 35 of 48 (73%) 
eligible subjects/proxies  provided consent. Thirty four of 35 (97%) completed 48 -hour actigraphy 
assessment,1  and 10 of these 34 (29%) received mechanical ventilation. In the RCT in STTR Phase II, 
we will assess the effect of ExersidesTM on activity, quantified using wrist actigraphs over 4 -hour 
periods: 9am to 1pm, and 1pm to 5pm.  The actigraphs report an activity count per [ADDRESS_110243]’s primary endpoint is the total activity count (from 30 second epochs) within a 4 -hour 
period. Among the mechanically ventilated patients in our published study, median (25th, 75th percentile) 
4-hour total activity counts for all observed 4 -hour periods were 2654 (1158, 7495), with 1pm to 5pm Table 1. Healthy volunteer survey (N=6) 
demonstrating high satisfaction with the 
ExersidesTM restraint  
 Strongly Agree 
or Agree  Neutral/Disagree/  
Strongly disagree  
From perspective of simulated PATIE NT 
Comfortable  5 1 
Safe 6 0 
Effective  6 0 
Preferable  6 0 
More humane  6 0 
From perspective of simulated STAFF  
Easy to don/doff  [ADDRESS_110244] restraints required less sedation  
and spent more time moving, and interacting during 4 -hour study period  
 Pre-study:  
Propofol dose  
(mcg/kg/hour)  During study:  
Propofol dose  
(mcg/kg/hour)  During study: 
SAS*  Time spent moving 
(hours) during 4 -
hour period  Time spent interacting 
(minutes) during 4-
hour period  
Traditional wrist restraints (n=5)     26±18  20±12  3.2±0.4  0±0 2.2±4.4  
ExersidesTM restraint (n=5)  28±8  11±10  4±0.7  2.6±1.6  66±74  
*Sedation -Agitation Scale; 1=comatose, 4=calm and cooperative, 7=dangerously agitated  
Table 3:  Feedback on prototype from patients, nurses, and occupational therapi[INVESTIGATOR_100030]  
 
5 
 having lower median activity counts: 2404 (1253, [ZIP_CODE]) vs. 9am -1pm: 2771 (849, 6830). These activity 
count s in ICU patients  are very low compared with reference values of 4 -hour daytime activity counts of 
~9,600 to ~48,900 in elderly nursing home patients ,1 demonstrating the need for greater activity/mobility 
in this patient population, as per the objective of this proposal.  
In our pi[INVESTIGATOR_799] (see #3 above), 3 patients wore actigraphs ([ADDRESS_110245] restraint group and 1 
in ExersidesTM group); thus, demonstrating that wearing actigraphs with ExersidesTM is feasible, as 
expected based on our existing expertise with ac tigraphy.  
 
6.  Usual care restraint and sedation practices at study sites:  All [ADDRESS_110246] (Aim 3) 
use only traditional soft wrist restraints.  As per Joint Commission guidelines, a physician order is 
required for use of restraints, with rene wal of order at least once every 24 hours.  Additionally, all 3 sites 
use guideline recommended practices1 for management of sedation/agitation and delirium/cognitive 
impairment in their ICUs, that include aiming for patients’ wakefulness via use of short -acting analgesic s 
(e.g. fentanyl), short -acting continuous sedation (e.g. propofol) when needed, and minimized use of 
benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651].  
 
 
References . Include references to prior human or animal research and references that are relevant to the design and conduct of the st udy. 
REFERENCES CITED  
 
1 !!! INVALID CITATION !!!  
2 Kruger C, Mayer H, Haastert B, et al. Use of physical restraints in acute hospi[INVESTIGATOR_100031]: a multi -
centre cross -sectional study. Int J Nurs Stud 2013; 50:[ADDRESS_110247] -
old: a population -based cohort study. Brain 2012; 135:2809 -2816  
4 US Census Bureau, 2014 National Population Projections Tables (Rev. May 9, 2017); Table 3: 
Projecti ons of the Population by [CONTACT_100067]: 2015 to 
2060. https:// www.census.gov/data/tables/2014/demo/popproj/[ADDRESS_110248] 30, 2017.  
5 Martin B, Mathisen L. Use of physical restraints in adult critical care: a bicultural study. Am J Crit Care 
2005; 14:[ADDRESS_110249]. No. 62/205,298. [ADDRESS_110250]. No. 15/237,325. [ADDRESS_110251] 15.  
8 Pavini, M, inventor. Pavini, M, assignee.  Medical prot ective and exercise restraint systems and 
methods.  Int’l. Appl. No. PCT/US2016/047090. [ADDRESS_110252] 15.  
9 Carville K, Lewin G, Newall N, et al. STAR: a consensus for skin tear classification. Primary Intention 
2007; 15:18 -28 
10 The National Pressure Ulcer  Advisory Panel (NPUAP) 2016 Staging Consensus Conference on 
Pressure Injury Stages. http://www.npuap.org/resources/educational -and-clinical -
resources/npuap -pressure -injury -stages/ . Accessed August 31, 2017.  
[ADDRESS_110253] AB, Moskowitz RW, et al. Studies of Illness in the Aged. The Index of Adl: A 
Standardized Measure of Biological and Psychosocial Function. Jama 1963; 185:914 -919 
12 Rockwood K , Song X, MacKnight C, et al. A global clinical measure of fitness and frailty in elderly 
people. CMAJ 2005; 173:489 -495 
13 Charlson ME, Pompei P, Ales KL, et al. A new method of classifying prognostic comorbidity in 
longitudinal studies: development and v alidation. J Chronic Dis 1987; 40:373 -383 
14 Knaus WA, Draper EA, Wagner DP, et al. APACHE II: a severity of disease classification system. 
Crit Care Med 1985; 13:818 -829 
15 Vincent JL, Moreno R, Takala J, et al. The SOFA (Sepsis -related Organ Failure Asse ssment) score 
to describe organ dysfunction/failure. On behalf of the Working Group on Sepsis -Related 
Problems of the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine. Intensive Care Med 1996; 
22:707 -710 
 
6 
 16 Demers L, Weiss -Lambrou R, Ska B. Development of the Q uebec User Evaluation of Satisfaction 
with assistive Technology (QUEST). Assist Technol 1996; 8:3 -13 
17 Demers L, Monette M, Lapi[INVESTIGATOR_11958] Y, et al. Reliability, validity, and applicability of the Quebec User 
Evaluation of Satisfaction with assistive Technology  (QUEST 2.0) for adults with multiple 
sclerosis. Disabil Rehabil 2002; 24:21 -30 
18 Patton MQ. Qualitative Research & Evaluation Methods: Integrating Theory and Practice. 4th ed. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2015;  
19 Harris PA, Taylor R, Thielke R , et al. Research electronic data capture (REDCap) --a metadata -driven 
methodology and workflow process for providing translational research informatics support. J 
Biomed Inform 2009; 42:[ADDRESS_110254]. Patient Recruitmen t Rate in Multicentered 
Randomized Trials in Critical Care. Crit Care Med 2016; 44:e588 -589 
 
 
 
Objectives:   Clearly state the primary and secondary objective(s) of the study.  
Phase I Specific Aims:  
1. To revise the ExersidesTM prototype based on feedbac k obtained from standardized patients in the 
UVM simulation center.  
2. To demonstrate that the revised ExersidesTM restraint is safe, and that conducting the proposed RCT 
(for STTR Phase II) is feasible, by [CONTACT_746] a prospective evaluation in [ADDRESS_110255] restraint, including pi[INVESTIGATOR_100032] : (A) Demonstrate that the revised ExersidesTM prototype is safe in 
older mechanically ventilated patients who require restraint (i.e., has mean incidence < 20% across pre -
defined safety criteria, including: skin breakdown and laceration, reportable injuries to patients and 
clinicians, self -removal of the restraint, and damage to ICU bed or equipment), and (B) Demonstrate 
feasibility of the RCT planned for STTR Phase II, including enrollment of 8 ICU patients and completion 
of >90% of all outcomes/measures.  
 
Phase II Specific Aims : 
3. To conduct a multi -site, within -patient cros sover RCT in older mechanically ventilated patients 
requiring restraint to test the following hypotheses regarding ExersidesTM vs. traditional wrist restraints:  
a. ExersidesTM allows greater upper extremity activity , as measured by [CONTACT_55629] (primary 
outcome)  
b. ExersidesTM reduces delirium, agitation, and use of sedatives , analgesics and 
antipsychotics  
c. ExersidesTM has high satisfaction, assessed via both quantitative and qualitative 
evaluations, among ICU clinicians, families and patients.  
  
 
7 
 METHODS A ND PROCEDURES  
 
Study Design, Procedures, and Statistical Analysis Plan  (all included here for Phase I and then Phase II) :  
PHASE I (small cohort study to assess feasibility and safety)  
Aim 1: To revise the ExersidesTM prototype based on pre -existing use r feedback  
 For this Aim, we and the company (Healthy Design, Ltd) will utilize the UVM Simulation Center to test 
the current device in [ADDRESS_110256] protrusions and adding padding, as well as ensuring that securing 
straps are appropriately positioned, wide and padded . 
 
Aim 2: To demonstrate safety of the ExersidesTM restraint and the feasibility of  conducting an RCT (Aim 
3, STTR Phase II) by [CONTACT_746] a pi[INVESTIGATOR_100033] 8 older ICU patients.  
 Study Site:  UVM, a large regional hospi[INVESTIGATOR_100034], is located close to 
Healthy Design, with Drs. Pavini  and Stapleton having a pre -existing collaborative working relationship.  
 Patients (n=8): We will conduct a study of 8 elderly ventilated ICU patients requiring restraint per an 
active physician order.   See inclusion and exclusion criteria below in Table 4 . 
 
            Table 4:  Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria for Study Entry into STTR Phase I and Phase II Studies  
Inclusion Criteria  Exclusion Criteria  Rationale for Exclusion  
1. >[ADDRESS_110257] restraints  
3. Requiring  invasive or non -
invasive  mechanical ventilation 
with actual or expected total 
duration of >48 hours  
4. Expected ICU stay >3 days after 
enrollment (to permit adequate 
exposure to proposed 
intervention)  
5. Not deeply sedated (Richmond 
Agitation Sedation Scale [RASS ] 
score > -2)1 1. Upper extremity impairments  that prevent use of 
novel restraint device (e.g. amputation, arm injury)  Unable to receive proposed intervention  
2. Limited mobility of either upper extremity prior to 
admission (e.g. frozen shoulder, severe arthritis)   
 
Inaccurat e data for primary outcome 
assessment during RCT (i.e. actigraphy)  
 
 3. Pre-existing primary systemic neuromuscular 
disease (e.g. Guillain -Barre)  
4. Neuromuscular blocker infusion (eligible once 
infusion discontinued if other inclusion criteria met)  
5. Pre-existing  severe  cognitive impairment or 
language barrier prohibiting outcome assessment  Unable to perform outcome assessments  
6. Expected death or withdrawal of life -sustaining 
treatments within 6 days from enrollment  Patients unlikely to complete proposed 
outcome assessment protocol  
7. Incarcerated  Vulnerable population; ethical issues  
8. Severe skin breakdown on either upper extremity  Unable to receive proposed intervention  
 
 Consent:  As most eligible patients will be unable to make decisions, written inform ed consent will most 
often  occur via legally authorized representatives (LARs) with participant re -consent upon regaining 
capacity.  See below under section on Consent.  
 
 Description of restraint intervention:  All [ADDRESS_110258] restraints on both arms from 1pm -5pm. On 
Day 2, they will wear the restraints on bo th arms in the opposite order. During each 4 -hour period, 
subjects will be observed by [CONTACT_100068], with validated and reliable hourly assessments 
of sedation/agitation (RASS) status,1 and validated and reliable delirium assessment (CAM -ICU) at the 
start an d stop of each period (see Aim 3, Outcome 2 for description of RASS and CAM).1 Subjects will 
wear actigraphs on both wrists to measure mobility/activity continuously.   A digital video camera will be 
set up at the foot of the patient’s bed to continuously record his/her mo vements during the study 
sessions.  Overnight between Days 1 and 2, subjects will resume traditional restraints, per MD order. 
Intervention ends on Day 2. Satisfaction/acceptability/perceptions of device will be assessed in nurses, 
family members, physician s, and patients as per RCT protocol (see Aim 3, Outcome 3).  
 
 Phase I Outcomes : 
 
8 
 1. Demonstrate that revised prototype  is safe, with < 20% mean incidence across 7 safety criteria in 
the 8 subjects enrolled.  Safety criteria in STTR Phase I will include: 1) clini cian or patient 
laceration (Grade 2b or higher, per STAR laceration grading criteria9) from any sharp edges of 
device, 2) development of pressure ulcer from device of Stage 3 or greater per 2016 National 
Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel Pressure Injury Stages,10 3) reportable injury (per local institutional 
standards) of patient  by [INVESTIGATOR_16897], 4) reportable injury (per local institutional standards) to clinician  by 
[INVESTIGATOR_16897], 5) self -removal of devi ce, 6) damage to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_100035] -functional, and 7) 
damage to ICU equipment (e.g. ventilator) rendering it non -functional..  
2. Demonstrate that conducting the proposed RCT in Aim 3 is feasible, by [CONTACT_100069]/recruitment rate 
and pi[INVESTIGATOR_100036]/outcomes for the RCT, via the following tasks:  
 Consent/Recruitment :  8 patients consented and enrolled within  <7 months  
 Outcomes/measures :  At least 90% of all o utcomes planned for  the RCT in Aim 3 (STTR  
Phase II ) will be measured in the 8 patients:  1) actigraphy counts, 2) RASS sedation/agitation 
score,1 3) CAM -ICU delirium score,1 4) medication use, 5) satisfaction/  
acceptability/perceptions of novel restraint.   Incidence of self -extubation will also be reported 
in addition to the following measures of efficacy : 1) patient -reported satisfaction measures  
including  comfortable, safe, effectiv e, preferable and more humane ; and 2)  staff-reported 
satisfaction measures  including  easy to don/doff, easy to change level, safe for staff, effective, 
preferable and more humane.   See Aim [ADDRESS_110259] measures.  
 
 Data collection/management, quality assurance & analysis:  See Aim 3.  
 Sample size:  N=8 was based on feasible enrollment from the single study site during the 9 -month 
Phase I period (i.e., ~1 patient/month). Literature suggests that there is no advantage to including more 
than [ADDRESS_110260] N=3 
per cohort.1 Thus, N=[ADDRESS_110261] in Aim 3.  
 Phase I Study follow -up. The engineer will prepa re a report on the outcomes of all assessments 
based upon  STTR Phase I , and will decide (in consultation with the project leadership team) which 
device improvements/modifications will be required before use of device in Aim 3 (STTR Phase II).  
 
PHASE II ([ADDRESS_110262] restraints)  
Aim 3:  To conduct a multi -site, within -patient randomized crossover trial in older critically ill mechanically 
ventilated patients who require restraint, to compare the ExersidesTM restraint vs. traditional wrist restraints.  
 
Overview and Study Design Phase II.  The objective of the Phase II project is to conduct an RCT to measure 
3 outcomes:  
1. Mobility/activity evaluated by [CONTACT_55629] (primary outcome)  
2. Agitation, delirium, medication use  (sedative, analgesic, and antipsychotic) , and incidence of self -
extubation  (secondary outcomes)  
3. Satisfaction with, and acceptability/perceptions of, the device by [CONTACT_4676], family, and clinicians 
(secondary outcomes)  
 
 Study Sites:  We will recruit patients from 3 hospi[INVESTIGATOR_600]: UVM, JHU and UCLA .         
These sites were selected due to successful prior collaborations,  experience in ICU RCT recruitment,  
similar sedation practice (Prelim Data 6),  experience in ICU mobility/ac tigraphy, and similar “usual care” 
(Prelim Data 6). A study overview is in Figure 3.  
 
9 
  
 Data Coordinating:   Data 
coordination will occur through 
integrated efforts between Healthy 
Design and all [ADDRESS_110263], 
monitoring, and analysis. An 
employed data coo rdinator will 
create a study database in RedCAP 
and will manage data from all 3 enrolling sites. Data coordination, cleaning, and subsequent analyses 
will be overseen by [CONTACT_6283]. Colantuoni (PhD biostatistics faculty/ co -I) with Drs. Stapleton, Needham, and 
Pavini. [CONTACT_100103] will oversee RCT conduct, including regulatory/ NIH reports. And employed study 
monitor will conduct site monitoring visits during the RCT.  
 
 Study Leadership of RCT:  To address leadership and communication issues, an Executive 
Committee  (“EC”: Drs. Stapleton, Needham, and Pavini, along with [CONTACT_100104] [Project Manager, 
UVM]) will meet twice monthly by [CONTACT_100070]. For issues that require broader input, 
the RCT also will have a Steering Committee that includes the EC plus  Drs. Kamdar (UCLA site PI), 
Colantuoni (Biostatistician), Pandian (Nurse co -investigator), Neufeld (aging/delirium co -investigator) 
that will meet monthly or as needed.  Each site -PI [INVESTIGATOR_100037], along with site 
research staff supporte d by [INVESTIGATOR_11826] -patient capi[INVESTIGATOR_100038]. All investigators will co -author 
publications, with author order mutually agreed upon in advance.   
 
 Patients (n=54):  Eligibility criteria are identical to the cohort study in Aim 2 (Table 5).  
 Consent:  As in the study i n Aim 2 (STTR Phase I), consent will most often occur via LARs  with 
participant re -consent upon regaining capacity.  See below under section on Consent.  
 Randomization:  After consent, patients will be randomized (1:1) to Group A vs B (Fig. 4) via UVM’s 
web-based system (24 hrs/day), with variable -sized blocks of 2 or 4, stratified by [CONTACT_3725].  
 Blinding:  Due to the nature of res traint devices, we cannot blind patients, families, or ICU clinicians. To 
minimize bias, the primary outcome (actigraphy) will be analyze d by [CONTACT_100071] (Dr. McGinness) and key co -interventions will be standardized with 
planned analyses to evaluate balance between groups (see Statistical Analysis Plan).  
 Standard ICU co -interventions for al l patients:  Important aspects of routine care will be standardized 
for BOTH study groups based on existing protocols at all sites, including: 1) turning by [CONTACT_100072] 2 hr 
while in bed; 2) sedation/delirium management as per published practice guidelines (se e Preliminary 
Data #6); 3) daily spontaneous breathing trials and ventilator weaning protocols, and 4) nutrition as per 
registered dietician consultation. These co -interventions are recorded electronically to easily facilitate 
the study monitoring plan.  
 On-study data collection:  Demographic, laboratory, physiological, and rehabilitation data will be 
collected (see Tables 5 and 6). 
 
Table 5:  Patient Variables -- Collected at Enrollment  
Patient Variables – collected at enrollment/baseline  Collection Method  Measurement Scale  
Demographic data (e.g. age, sex, race, marital status)  Chart review  Continuous/Binary/Categorical  
Height & weight; body mass index  Chart review  Continuous  
Comorbidities: Charlsona & Functional Indicesb Chart review  Ordinal  
Baseline f unction: Katz Activities of Daily Living,11 and 
Clinical Frailty Scale12  Proxy interview (see Outcomes 
below)  Continuous/Ordinal  
ICU admission diagnosis (e.g. sepsis, renal failure)  Chart review  Categorical  
Severity of illness: APACHE IId Chart review  Continuous  
Alzheimer’s disease and related dementia : IQCODE -SF 
surveye ; Delirium Risk Score  Chart review;  Categorical  

 
[ADDRESS_110264] intervention:  
 Study design : An innovative crossover design will  allow  each  patient to serve as their own control 
(Figure 4), enabling us to assess both dev ices early in the study period  while minimizing confounding 
by [CONTACT_100073], followed by a longer 4 -day assessment with 
each patient wearing one device that will allow us to measure outcomes better assessed over  days 
(rather than hours).  Subjects will be 1:1 randomized to either Group A or B, with both groups receiving 
both novel 
and traditional 
restraints.  On 
Days 1 and 2, 
subjects will 
wear each 
device for 4 
hours (9am -
1pm and 1pm -
5pm), during 
which time they  will be observed by [CONTACT_100074], with validated and reliable hourly  
assessments of sedation/agitation (RASS score).   A digital video camera will be set up at the foot of the 
patient’s bed to continuously record his/her movements during the study sessions.   Overnight between 
study Days [ADDRESS_110265] restraints, as per MD order.   No sensor or 
video data will be recorded during overnight periods when study staff are not available.  Starting on Day 
3 mo rning, subjects who continue to require restraints (per MD order) will be placed in either traditional 
or novel restraints device, as per their original randomization (i.e. the device worn for first 4 -hr study 
period on Day 1) for up to 4 more days (i.e. u ntil earliest of restraints no longer needed, death, or ICU 
discharge). This novel within -patient crossover design allows for increased precision with fewer 
subjects (see Sample Size) because it controls for confounding effects of patient -specific characte ristics 
via each patient serving as their own control when comparing outcomes (i.e. arm activity) of the novel 
vs. traditional restraint during Days 1 and 2, along with reduced bias due to randomized allocation of 
initial study group (novel vs. traditional ). Moreover, this design permits more prolonged comparison of 
novel vs. traditional device (over Days 3 to 6) to measure secondary outcomes (e.g., agitation, delirium, 
and medication use) that are more accurately evaluated over longer periods of evaluation . The 
randomization feature of this study design also controls for potential temporal differences in movement 
(e.g., patient more awake/mobile from 9am -1pm vs. 1pm -5pm). Patient eligibility criteria also help 
ensure that the study occurs when patients requ ire restraint and are readily assessed for the primary 
and secondary outcome measures.  
 
 Recurrence of clinical need for restraint and/or ICU readmit:  If a patient ceases to need restraint 
during the 6 -day study period, but then is deemed to need restraint  again, the randomly allocated 
intervention will resume (up to 6 -day maximum), with study ending upon ICU discharge (without re -
starting if ICU re -admit).   aCharlson Index: a score for in -patients derived from 19 comorbidities; an increased score reflecting increased 1 -year mortality.13   
bFunctional Comorbidity Index: an 18 -diagnosis scale for ICU patients  predicting 1 -year SF -36 physical function ;.1   
  
dAPACHE II:  Severity index using age, medical conditions, & acute physiology. Scores reflect increased short -term mortality.14 
eIQCODE -SF (Short Form of Informant Questionnaire of Cognitive Decline in the  Elderly) is a validated proxy -based measure of baseline cognitive 
impairment commonly used in studies of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_100039]1 
Table 6:  ICU -Related Variables – Collected at Enrollment and DAILY  During ICU Stay  
ICU Variables – collected at enrollment a nd daily  during ICU stay  Collection Method  Measurement Scale  
SOFAa organ failure score (with lab, medication and physiological data)  Chart review  Continuous  
Nutrition received (calories/protein)  Chart review  Continuous and categorical  
Exercise/rehab rec eived as part of routine clinical care (type, duration)  Chart review  Continuous and categorical  
Compliance with proposed intervention regimen  CRF review  Continuous and categorical  
aSOFA: A validated composite score of 6 organ systems used to assess the severity of ICU organ dysfunction. 15 

 
11 
  Training and quality assurance:   Training on study procedures (e.g. placement of restraints, data 
collection) will occur via Healthy Design staff traveling to each site before study start and in Year [ADDRESS_110266] data quality control proce dures, including 
ongoing review of quality metrics, missing data, and data outliers.  
 
 
STTR Phase II Outcomes ( see Table 7 ). 
Outcome 1:  Mobility evaluated by [CONTACT_55629].  
 Primary outcome – Mobility assessed by [CONTACT_55629] (Table 7). Upper extremity mobilit y will be 
evaluated by [CONTACT_55629]. The Philips Respi[INVESTIGATOR_100040]® actigraph is a commercially -available 
actigraphy device weighing [ADDRESS_110267] published on feasibility of using this device in ICU 
patients .1  We hypothesize that ExersidesTM will allow greater upper extremity mobility , as measured 
by [CONTACT_55629].   Movement rec orded on the sensors will be compared with the video recordings to 
determine if the movement was purposeful or caused by [CONTACT_100075].  
Outcome 2:  Agitation, delirium, and medication use will be assessed as secondary outcomes.  
 Agitation:   Agitation will be me asured via RASS (Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale) score1 assessed 
by [CONTACT_100076] 60 minutes during the four 4 -hour periods (Days 1 and 2) when subjects are 
using novel and traditional restraints, and then every 4 hours during Days 3 -6 when subjects are using 
their randomly assigned device. RASS is a validated and reliable ordinal measure of sedation/agitation 
status in the ICU ranging from -5 to +4.1  All study personnel will be trained in measuring RASS score. 
We hypothesize that ExersidesTM will reduce delirium, agitation, an d use of sedatives , analgesics 
and antipsychotics.  
 Delirium:   Delirium will be measured via CAM -ICU (Confusion Assessment Method for the ICU) at its  
maximum appropriate frequency of every 4 -hours during Days 1 -2, and then every 12 hours during 
Days 3 -6.  The CAM -ICU score is a validated and re liable binary measure of delirium status in the ICU.1  
All personnel will be trained in measuring CAM -ICU. Our group has extensive experience with CAM -
ICU.1  
 Sedative, analgesic, and antipsychotic medication use: Throughout the 6 -day study period, use and 
dose  of medications will be asse ssed by [CONTACT_14716].  Medications in these categories include, but are 
not limited to, opi[INVESTIGATOR_858], benzodiazepi[INVESTIGATOR_1651], typi[INVESTIGATOR_75086], propofol, and 
dexmedetomidine.  Table 7:  Primary & Secondary Outcomes  of Efficacy RCT in Aim 3  
Outcome   Instrument  Scale  Assessment Timing  
Primary Outcome     
1 Upper extremity mobility  Actigraphy (total activity 
counts per 4 hours)  Continuous  Continuously throughout study  
Secondary Outcomes     
2 Sedative, analgesic, and antipsychotic 
medication dose and use  Chart review  Continuous  Baseline and then daily  
Agitation  RASS score1 
 
Video recording  Ordinal  
 
Continuous  Baseline, every 60 min days 1 -2, 
then every 4 hours days 3 -6 
All study sessions  
Delirium  CAM -ICU score1 Binary  Baseline, every 4 hours days 1 -2, 
then every 12 hours days 3 -6 
3 Satisfaction with novel restraint (nurses, 
family, physicians, and patients when able)  QUEST 2.0 score16 Ordinal  Survey at conclusion  of study 
period  
Perceptions of novel restraint (nurses, 
family, physicians, and patients when able)  Semi -structured 
interviews  and response 
to specific satisfaction 
measures  in Table 1.  Qualitative  Daily for bedside nurses and 
conclusion of study period  for 
others  
 
12 
 Outcome 3:  Satisfaction with and acceptability/perceptions of the device   
Satisfaction and acceptability will be assessed by [CONTACT_100077] (QUEST 2.0) survey and by [CONTACT_31576] -structured interviews. We hypothesize that ExersidesTM will 
demonstrate high satisfaction, assessed bot h quantitatively and qualitatively, among ICU clinicians, families 
and patients.  
 
 Satisfaction : The QUEST 2.0 is a valid, reliable, and widely used 12 -question survey assessing 
satisfaction with technological devices.1  It is scored from 1 -5, with >3.[ADDRESS_110268] 2.0 has 2 subscales (satisfaction with device and with services).  Satisfaction with the 
ExersidesTM restraint will be assessed using the device subscale, which has good test -retest stability  
(ICC 0.82).17   
 
 Acceptability/perceptions : Daily for nurses, and at the conclusion each subject’s study period for 
family members, physicians, and patients, device users will undergo semi -structured interviews ( Table 
9) to assess perceived barriers and facilitators of using the novel device.  Responses will be recorded 
digitally and will 
be subject to 
open coding and 
analysis with 
grounded 
theory.[ADDRESS_110269]  
 A REDCap web -based database will be used for  research data using unique identifiers for subjects and 
staff.19  Data collection will be protocolized, with staff trained on those protocols, and regularly 
monitored by [CONTACT_100078] ([CONTACT_100105]) and via site monitoring visits (see Aim 3C). 
Moreover, m issing or inconsistent d ata will be detected at data entry. Early, random audits will be 
performed shortly after start of study and every 4 months thereafter, such that a total of ~10% of all 
records will be audited by [CONTACT_100079].   Additionally, Steering Commit tee meetings 
will each occur twice monthly (Aim 3D).  
 
Statistical Considerations for RCT  
 Sample size :  Sample size was determined for the primary outcome, arm activity, as assessed by 
[CONTACT_100080] 1 and 2 (defined as total activity counts per 4 -hour period: 9am -1pm and 1pm -
5pm).  Although Phase II is 2 4 months long, there are only 18 months for recruitment, as we need 3 
months for startup and 3 months for close out (Table 10).  Across the [ADDRESS_110270] to recruit 
1 patient per site per month during the 18 -months, yielding a total N=54.  Exper ience enrolling ICU 
patients in RCTs at each site.1 suggests that 1 patient/month/site is feasible and mirrors empi[INVESTIGATOR_12484], 
with our analysis of 33,106 patients from 23 RCTs, demonstrating median (IQR) enrollment of 0.90 
(0.50 –1.79) patients/month per site.20   
 
Assuming N=54, we calculated the treatment effect (i.e. the relative change in the median total activity) 
that can be detected with 80% power and 5% Type I e rror rate. We used the following assumptions 
(these data were informed by [CONTACT_100081] 3 -center study):  (1) 9am -1pm median total activity = 3000, (2) 1pm -5pm median total 
activity =  2700, (3) variance of Log(total activity) set conservatively to 2.5 and 6.0 for 9am -1pm and 
1pm-5pm periods, respectively, (4) Log(total activity) has 0.85 correlation within a patient over time, and 
(5) no cross -over effect of the restraints.  Using N=10 ,000 simulation, the 54 -patient sample size can Table 8:  Open -ended questions for semi -structured interviews about  novel restraint  
1. What did you like about the ExersidesTM restraint? And what do you NOT like about it?  
2. What did you find makes the ExersidesTM restraint is easy to use?  
And what makes it difficult to use?  
3. If you could change the ExersidesTM restraint, wh at would you change?  
4. Do you think that some patient movements were related to agitation instead of “normal” mobility? 
(Y/N)  If yes, how can you tell the difference? How were those movements different between 
devices?  
5. Any final thoughts or comments about t he ExersidesTM restraint and usual restraint devices?  
 
[ADDRESS_110271] a 56% relative increase in median total activity comparing the novel vs. traditional restraint 
(median of 3000 vs. 4674).   
 Statistical Analysis Plan   
a) Summary for all Aims :  All analyses will follow  the intention -to-treat (ITT) principle.   A 2-tailed 
p-value <0.05 will be statistically significant.  As described in the Study Design (Section 3K), the within -
patient crossover design removes patient -specific effects from evaluation of the treatment effe ct.  
Potential pi[INVESTIGATOR_100041], carryover effects, and patient dropout.  To avoid 
order effects, we randomize whether patients start the trial with the novel vs. traditional restraint (Figure 
4).  Carryover effects (i.e. one p art of the study affecting subsequent parts) and drop out considerations 
are discussed further below.  
 
During the first 2 Days, the primary endpoint (activity) is measured for each period on each day, such 
that each patient will contribute 4 longitudinal m easurements.  This primary endpoint is measured as 
total activity, the sum of the recorded activity counts for the corresponding period/day.  Secondary 
endpoints include agitation (normal vs. sedated/agitated as defined by [CONTACT_100082]), delirium (positive vs. 
negative for delirium based on CAM -ICU, among patients who are not comatose [RASS -4, -5]) and 
medication use (quantified by [CONTACT_100083] 
(Outcome 2) using standard equivalency conversions for drugs within  each class, as done in our prior 
research.1  Analysis will include summary statistics (mean, median, standard deviation and quantiles) of 
the key co -interventions (see Aim 3I above) and the RCT endpoints (Table 8), separately for each 
period over the [ADDRESS_110272] of the novel restraint, a linear model will be fit for the Log(total activity) as a 
function of main terms for treatment (Group A vs. B), time period (1pm -5pm vs. 9am -1pm), and 
treatment order (BA/AB vs. AB/BA).  The natural logarithm is applied to the primary endpoint to reduce 
right skew in the distribution of total activity, with the exponentiated regression coefficient for the main 
term for treatment (A vs. B) in the linear regression model representing the re lative difference in median 
total activity comparing the novel vs. traditional restraint, which will quantify the treatment effect. The 
linear model will be fit using weighted least squares to account for the correlation in the primary 
endpoint within a pa tient over time; the correlation structure will be specified as unstructured and allow 
for the possibility that the variance of the primary endpoint may be different in each period/day.  The 
same linear models will be applied to the continuous secondary en dpoints (e.g. medication dose).  For 
the binary secondary endpoints, the effect of the novel vs. traditional restraint will be quantified using a 
longitudinal logistic regression model as a function of the same covariates (treatment, period, and 
treatment order).  The longitudinal logistic regression model will be fit using generalized estimating 
equations allowing for an unstructured within -patient correlation structure.  Activity, agitation, delirium 
and medication use will continue to be measured up to I CU discharge, death or Day 6.  Starting on Day 
3, the endpoints will be expressed as every [ADDRESS_110273] for multiple comparisons, but will consider the number of 
comparisons when interpreting results.  
 
Subgroup analysis will be performed in eligible patients with baseline history of Alzheimer’s 
disease and related dementia . To evaluate the potential effect of time -varying patient factors (not 
strictly controlled via a within -patient crossover design – e.g. organ failure status (Table 7)) on the 
primar y results, sensitivity analysis of the above regression results will be conducted by [CONTACT_100084].  To evaluate for any sex -specific effect in this study , sex will be 
included in the regression model as a co -variate and a s a statistical interaction term with the 
main term for treatment (A vs. B) to fully address NIH requirements.  
 
 
14 
 b)  Minimizing missing data : Our primary outcome is assessed during the first [ADDRESS_110274] with participants/families and ICU nurses to increase likelihood of obtaining data.  Missing data 
will be described for all variables, and patient characteristics will be compared between those with vs. 
without mi ssing outcomes.[ADDRESS_110275] <5 -10% missing data due to death or other patient loss, and any missing 
will not be associated with treatment allocation; thus, no imputation will be performed and we would 
enroll up to 60 total patients, if needed, to compensate for missing data to obtain the primary outcome 
on N=54 patients.  
 
c)  Data safety monitoring board (DSMB) meetings :  The DSMB (see Data Safety document) will 
meet before the  RCT (in STTR Phase II) begins, and after half of the patients have been enrolled into 
the RCT to review safety and recruitment data only.  As this is a small RCT, there will be neither interim 
analyses to evaluate efficacy nor stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_100042].  
 
 
 
 
For research involving survey, questionnaires, etc.:   Describe the setting and the mode of administering the instrument and the provisions for 
maintaining privacy and confidentiality.  Include the duration, intervals of administration, a nd overall length of participation. (describe and attach 
all instruments)  
 Not applicable   
During both the Phase I cohort study and Phase II RCT, we will conduct qualitative assessment of the 
ExersidesTM restraint.  Family members and clinicians (e.g., n urses and physicians) caring for patients enrolled 
into the cohort study (STTR Phase I) or into the RCT (STTR Phase II) will be asked to complete satisfaction 
questionnaires (QUEST questionnaire attached) , provide feedback on satisfaction measures (Table 1 ), and 
participate in a  brief semi -structured interview (see questions in Table 8) to assess their satisfaction with, and 
perceptions of, the ExersidesTM restraint. Family members may be the Legally Authorized Representatives 
(LARs) who provide consent for  the patient to participate in the RCT, but additional family members beyond the 
LARs also may be asked to participate, and they will be identified via observation of them visiting the 
consented participant while in the ICU. Only family members >18 years o f age will be included. Family 
members will undergo verbal  consent, and no identifiable information will be obtained from them.   Consent 
from participating medical personnel (nurses, physicians) will be inferred by [CONTACT_100085] , complete the survey and provide feedback.   
 
Completion of both the QUEST questionnaire , feedback questions,  and the semi -structured interview will occur 
in private space near the medical ICU, and we anticipate this will take approximately [ADDRESS_110276] the end of the study.  
 
 
 
Risks/Benefits:   Describe any potential or known risks.  This includes physical, psychological, social, legal or other risks.  Estimate the pr obability 
that given risk may occur, its severity and p otential reversibility.  If the study involves a placebo or washout period, the risks related to these must be 
addressed in both the protocol and consent.  Describe the planned procedures for protecting against or minimizing potential r isks and assess thei r 
likely effectiveness.  Where appropriate, discuss plans for ensuring necessary medical or professional intervention in the ev ent of adverse effects to 
the subjects.   Discuss the potential benefits of the research to the subjects and others.  Discuss why  the risks to the subjects are reasonable in 
relation to the anticipated benefits to subjects and others.  Discuss the importance of the knowledge gained or to be gained as a result of the 
proposed research and why the risks are reasonable in relation to t he knowledge that reasonably may result.  If there are no benefits state so.  
RISKS TO HUMAN SUBJECTS  
Human Subjects Involvement, Characteristics, and Design  
This research includes 4 components where human subjects will be enrolled:  
(A) Testing the revised  ExersidesTM restraint device on 3 healthy subjects (STTR Phase I);  
(B) A prospective cohort study in 8 older critically ill patients (STTR Phase I) where feasibility of doing a larger 
RCT will be demonstrated;  
(C) A multi -site randomized controlled trial (RCT in STTR Phase II) in which 54 patients will be enrolled; and  
(D) Feedback from family members and from clinicians (e.g., nurses, and physicians) caring for patients 
enrolled into either the studies in (B) or (C), from above, about their satisfaction w ith, and perceptions of, the  
 
15 
 ExersidesTM restraint.  
 
Potential Risks  
There are potential risks for all participants regarding potential breach of confidentiality and invasion of privacy. 
If a critically ill patient regains decisional capacity and is approa ched about the study for re -consent (after a 
legal next of kin has already provided informed consent for the patient), he or she may experience stress 
and/or discomfort.  
Potential risks from the ExersidesTM restraint device are very low. Our own preliminar y data demonstrate safety 
in that no adverse or severe adverse events (i.e. no self -removal of endotracheal tubes, feeding tubes, 
intravenous lines, etc.) – these preliminary data are from a pi[INVESTIGATOR_100043] a single intensive care unit. Although self -removal of tubes and lines is a risk, as 
occurs with any existing currently available restraint device, we anticipate that this risk is very low due to the 
design of the ExersidesTM restraint tha t intentionally was created to further reduce this risk in comparison to 
traditional restraints. Other potential risks include skin breakdown from the ExersidesTM restraint device, and a 
theoretical increased risk of increased removal of upper extremity pe ripheral IVs, but we did not observe any of 
these events in our pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  
There are few alternative treatments to participating in this RCT. Use of the ExersidesTM restraint device is not 
standard of ICU care at any clinical center. However, this study will not alter clinical care that occurs with 
regard to other aspects of critical illness. Specifically, only patients whose physicians have already written an 
order requiring physical restraints will be considered for the study. The novel ExersidesTM restraint device will 
only be used while such an order is active, as part of routine clinical care (i.e. no patient will receive the  
ExersidesTM restraint device without a need for physical restraint as documented/ordered by [CONTACT_100086]). All study site s currently follow (and will continue to follow throughout the duration of the study) Joint 
Commission requirements for re -assessment and re -ordering restraints at least once every 24 hours. If a 
restraint is no longer required/ordered as part of routine c linical care, then use of the ExersidesTM restraint 
device will immediately stop and not re -start unless a renewal of a restraint order is done, as required by 
[CONTACT_100087]. In no way will the study have any influence over the ordering of restrai nts as part of 
clinical care in the ICU.  
 
ADEQUACY OF PROTECTION AGAINST RISKS  
Recruitment and Informed Consent  
a) Critically ill older patients recruited into cohort study (STTR Phase I) and multi -site RCT (STTR Phase II)  
All patients who meet inclusion a nd exclusion criteria will be invited to participate in this study. Using 
observation/review of the electronic medical record and daily hospi[INVESTIGATOR_100044], study staff will identify 
consecutive patients admitted to the ICU who meet the basic eligibility crite ria. After this initial screen for 
eligibility, study personnel will proceed as per local IRB requirements, including contact[CONTACT_5713]’s ICU 
physicians to confirm appropriateness for the study and obtain permission to approach the patient/legal next of 
kin for discussion of the study and to undertake the informed consent process. If the physicians agree, study 
staff will approach the patient in -person or, if the patient doesn’t have decisional capacity at the time of 
enrollment, a legal next of kin in -person (via in -person meeting). Most patients participating in this study will 
require mechanical ventilation and will therefore be receiving some amount of sedative medications at the time 
of enrollment. Hence, we anticipate that a large proportion of pa tients will lack the capacity to provide informed 
consent at the time of study eligibility and therefore, we expect that study staff will go through the process of 
informed consent and review the consent materials with the legal next of kin. Consent will b e documented, in 
writing, on an IRB -approved consent form. No minors will be considered in the proposed research; therefore, 
parental permission and child assent is not applicable to this application. All conversations with the 
patient/legal next -of-kin re garding the study will be held in a private setting; study staff will allow for patients’ 
desire to have family present and/or to confer with family, and to make participation decisions according to his 
or her own time. Once patients who did not have decis ional capacity at the time of initial consent  regain that 
capacity, they will be re -consented for ongoing participation in the study.  
b) Family members, nurses and physicians caring for patients enrolled into the STTR Phase I or Phase II 
studies. All famil y members of patients participating in the cohort study (STTR Phase I) or the RCT (STTR 
Phase II) will be invited to provide information about their satisfaction with, and assessment/perceptions of, the 
 
16 
 ExersidesTM restraint. Only family members >[ADDRESS_110277] (42 USC 299a - 
1(c)). As previously described, fetuses, neonates, minors, and prisoners are not part of this study. Pregnant 
women will a lso not be included as only people > [ADDRESS_110278] the opportunity to exclu de a patient who, in the physician’s judgment, would not be an 
appropriate participant. Reasons for exclusion include (but are not limited to): legal or risk management 
concerns; psychological illness or morbidity; and cognitive limitations. A patient's de cisional capacity will be 
determined by [CONTACT_100088], in a similar manner, by [CONTACT_16133], as part of the informed consent process. For all 
participa nts, it will be emphasized that participation is voluntary, that all steps involved with participation are 
voluntary, and that they are allowed to decline to complete any activity or to answer any question they are 
asked. For all participants, it will be e mphasized that they may withdraw from the study or any study 
procedures at any time without any loss of rights or benefits to which they are otherwise entitled and without 
losing status or standing within the institution. Healthy volunteers will receive $[ADDRESS_110279] of parking as 
compensation for their time (which is estimated as up to 3 hours). Critically ill patients and their family member 
will not receive compensation or tokens of appreciation provided for participation to minimize potential coerci on 
or the appearance of coercion.  
As mentioned above, risks of the ExersidesTM restraint are very low. Nevertheless, we have taken the  
following steps and safeguards in the study protocol to minimize such risks and protect against them:  
1. Data will be kep t secure and confidential  
2. Treating physicians will be allowed to exclude patients from the study  
Additionally, we will submit a plan for monitoring of adverse events to the study’s Data and Safety Monitoring  
Board (DSMB). Serious adverse events that mig ht bear any relationship to the intervention will be reported to 
the local IRB as well as the University of Vermont Human Subjects Committee (parent site) and the DSMB, 
which may elect to restrict or cease enrollment. See Data and Safety Monitoring Plan. F urthermore, a 
medical/site monitoring plan is in place whereby a Study Monitor will visit each site at least twice during the 
study to assess protocol compliance and conduct source verification. During the site visit, case report forms will 
be reviewed for  quality control.  
Finally, data presentations will include only group data and will be presented in a way that ensures individual 
participants cannot be identified. If respondents may be identified by a specific subgroup analysis due to the 
low numbers of these types of respondents (e.g., patients aged >90), these subgroup data will not be 
presented in isolation in any format .  There is a small risk of breach of confidentiality with the addition of video 
recording of subjects while in the novel and wrist re straints.  We will take steps to minimize this risk by [CONTACT_100089].  A sign will 
 
17 
 be posted on the door to alert anyone entering the room that a camera is in use.  The  recordings will be 
removed from the video camera / storage card as soon as possible, and downloaded to a secure server.  We 
will encrypt the recordings for storage during the study, and require two -factor authentication for access.  The 
footage will be re viewed by [CONTACT_100090] a timely manner and the extracted data will be identified 
only by [CONTACT_423]’s Study ID.  After the data is extracted, the video recordings will be destroyed.  
 
We recognize that in the current crossover design where sub jects wear the device bilaterally for a 4 -hour 
period on 2 consecutive days, we may encounter problems with a slow “wash out” period for sedative 
medications given before the start of a 4 -hour period and thus reducing mobility during the observation period . 
This issue will be minimized because all study sites use short -acting, as -needed, bolus dosing of medications 
(Preliminary Data 6) and subjects will wear both devices in opposite order on Days 1 and 2.  
 
POTENTIAL BENEFITS OF THE PROPOSED RESEARCH TO HUMA N SUBJECTS AND OTHERS  
a) Healthy volunteers to test revised ExersidesTM restraint  
There will be no benefit to healthy volunteers participating in this research. However, they will contribute to new 
knowledge from which future ICU patients may benefit if ou r intervention is found to improve outcomes.  
b) Critically ill older patients recruited into cohort study (STTR Phase I) and multi -site RCT (STTR Phase II)  
There may be some benefit to the critically ill participants enrolled in this research, as literatur e suggests that 
patients who participate in clinical trials overall have improved outcomes compared to patients who do not 
participate.2,[ADDRESS_110280] of a novel restraint device i n older ICU patients. If 
this intervention is ultimately shown to be beneficial in future trials, it will substantially expand the 
armamentarium of the critical care clinician. Given the potential benefit that may result from this therapy in 
treating a pop ulation of elderly patients with high mortality and morbidity rate, the limited risks are reasonable.  
c) Family members, nurses and physicians caring for patients enrolled into STTR Phase I or STTR Phase II 
studies  
The patient surrogate involved in the con sent process may benefit from interaction with the research team who 
can provide explanations and answer questions regarding the patient’s critical illness and issues related to 
restraint, as well as the patient’s functional status during and after hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1916].  
When providing satisfaction and acceptability information, family members, nurses, and physicians will not 
have any direct benefit from participating in this research. However, future ICU patients may benefit if our 
intervention is found to impr ove outcomes.  
Contact [CONTACT_4002]/PI: [INVESTIGATOR_100045], Renee D  
Protection of Human Subjects Pg.[ADDRESS_110281] in therapy 
for older critically ill patients; thus the minimal risks to subjects are reasonable. Even if the intervention is not  
beneficial, this study is designed to provide important information that will guide fu ture interventions.  
 
PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS REFERENCES  
1. Truong AD, Kho ME, Brower RG, Feldman DR, Colantuoni E, Needham DM. Effects of neuromuscular  
electrical stimulation on cytokines in peripheral blood for healthy participants: a prospective, si ngle-blinded  
Study. Clin Physiol Funct Imaging 2017;37:[ADDRESS_110282] RJ. Are randomized clinical trials good for us (in the short term)?  
Evidence for a “trial effect.” J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541] 2001;54:217 -224. 
3. Peppercorn JM, Wee ks JC, Cook EF, Joffe S. Comparison of outcomes in cancer patients treated within  
and outside clinical trials: conceptual framework and structured review. Lancet 2004;363:263 –270.  
 
18 
 Therapeutic Alternatives:  List the therapeutic alternatives that are reaso nably available that may be of benefit to the potential subject and include 
in the consent form as well.  
 Not Applicable  
There are few alternative treatments to participating in this RCT.  The standard of care at all participating 
centers is a traditiona l soft wrist restraint. Use of the ExersidesTM restraint device is not standard of ICU care at 
any clinical center. However, this study will not alter clinical care that occurs with regard to other aspects of 
critical illness. Specifically, only patients w hose physicians have already written an order requiring physical 
restraints will be considered for the study.   
Data Safety and Monitoring:   The specific design of a Data and Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMP) for a protocol may vary extensively depending on 
the potential risks, size, and complexity of the research study.  For a minimal risk study, a DSMP could be as simple as a desc ription of the Principal 
Investigator’s plan for monitoring the data and performance of safety reviews or it could be as complex as  the initiation of an external, independent 
Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB). The UVM/UVM Medical Center process for review of adverse events should be included i n the DSMP.   
 
DATA SAFETY MONITORING PLAN  
The  STTR Phase I Cohort Study will be moni tored locally by [CONTACT_100091], efficacy of the study intervention, benefit/risk, recruitment of participants, adequacy of 
measured and collected data , and adherence to the protocol.   At the conclusion of the  Phase I cohort study, 
we will convene a Data and  Safety Monitoring Board (DSMB) that will oversee the RCT in STTR Phase II. 
Below, we outline the responsibilities, membership, and organization of the DSMB:  
 
1. Responsibility: As per NIH policy, the respon sibility of the DSMB will be to advise and make  
recommendations regarding participant safety; efficacy of the study intervention; benefit/risk ratio of  
procedures and participant burden; selection, retention, and recruitment of participants; adherence to  protocol 
requirements; data and statistical analysis plan; adequacy of measured and collected data; and  possible 
amendments to the study protocol and consent forms. As this proposal includes a small clinical  trial, the main 
charge of the DSMB will to focus on safety, and there will be no stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_100046].  
 
2. Membership: We will convene 4 independent voting members (3 members will constitute a quorum) who  are 
not study investigators, and have no financial, scientific, or other conflict  of interest with the trial. All  members 
will provide written documentation of competing interests. We will include expertise in the  following fields: [ADDRESS_110283] areas involved in the research (clinical experts in critical care  medicine, mo bility 
and/or delirium/cognitive impairment), 1 from biostatistics, and 1 from clinical  investigation/ trials. The group will 
designate a chair and an executive secretary from the group  membership; the chair will be responsible for 
overseeing meetings, dev elopi[INVESTIGATOR_100047], generating  reports, and being the contact [CONTACT_100092]. 
Because committee members will likely be located at  various sites, the committee meetings may be conducted 
by [CONTACT_577].  
 
3. Organization: The group will meet during the c ourse of the trial as follows  
a. Meeting coordination: All meetings will occur in 3 parts:  
i.  An open meeting with principal investigators, project coordinators, and statistician to review 
accrual  
and outcomes as per below.  
ii.  A partially closed meeting  with the DSMB and study statistician only to review the study 
outcomes  
per below.  
iii.  A closed session for DSMB members only to discuss oversight issues, emerging results,  
comments, and recommendations, which will be discussed until consensus among memb ers. The  
chair would reserve the right to break a tie, if needed.  
  
b. RCT in STTR Phase II  
i. Initial meeting for RCT  
1. Protocol, consent, and data quality review: The DSMB will meet again before start of 
the RCT in Phase II. They will review data from P hase I. They will also review the entire 
IRB-approved RCT protocol with regard to participant safety, recruitment, randomization, 
intervention, data management, quality control, and statistical analysis. Additionally, they 
 
[ADDRESS_110284] operating procedures for data management and control.  
2. Safety review: The DSMB will review information for recruitment, subject retention, 
protocol adherence, intervention effects, gender and mino rity inclusion, and participant 
safety. The DSMB will review, discuss, and approve the plan for identifying, assessing, 
and transmitting serious adverse event (SAE) and adverse (AE) information to the 
DSMB.  
3. The DSMB will also approve the DSMB Charter an d review any conflicts of interest 
that have  bene disclosed.  
4. Recommendations: Voting in closed session, the DSMB can recommend that the trial 
continue with no modifications, continue with modifications, or stop for safety concerns. 
The chair or designa te will summarize major points of discussion, decisions, actions, and 
reasons, and additional information needed for future meetings. The report will be 
provided to study’s Principal Investigators for submission to the study sites’ IRBs.  
ii. Interim meetin gs: 
Meetings will occur after 1/2 (n=27) of the total participant sample (n=54) have completed all 
study procedures. Ad hoc meetings can be requested by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_100048]. The DSMB will evaluate all of the items  outlined above in the safety 
review (3b(ii)). Recommendations from the DSMB will also be summarized as outlined above  
(3b(iii)).   During this interim meeting, t he DSMB will review data for recruitment, randomization, 
subject retention, protocol adherence,  intervention effects, gender and minority inclusion, and 
participant safety . The DSMB will receive cumulative data, including safety events that are 
reported to the IRB (as described below) and major clinical outcome variables prepared by [CONTACT_100093]. They may perform its own statistical analysis of these data and can request 
additional data if necessary. All data will initially be provided to the DSMB without indication of 
treatment group allocation.  
 
Safety monitoring also will occur via th e PIs and co -Is being involved in the conduct of the clinical trials  
including supervising the screening for patient eligibility. The PIs will have knowledge of any adverse events  
that may arise and will report them according to IRB and NIH/NIA guidelines and to the description provided  
below. All potential participants will be provided contact [CONTACT_100094] (University of 
Vermont, Johns Hopkins University, University of [LOCATION_004]) to register complaints or other problems. The 
DSMB will  modify or stop the study if any such complaints represent a legitimate concern about the study 
procedures or methods. The design of the proposed studies and the proposed ExersidesTM restraint 
intervention are not complex and have very low potential risk t o the patient. Our preliminary data demonstrate 
that the ExersidesTM restraint is safe, as we experienced no adverse events in the pi[INVESTIGATOR_100049]. The physical restraint device proposed for this trial is a Class I m edical 
device under US Food & Drug Administration regulation 21 C.F.R. § 880.[ADDRESS_110285] to general controls and 
is exempt from Federal Drug Administration (FDA) approval. The relatively low risks will be further minimized 
as described in the above Human Subjects section entitled “Protection Against Risks.”  
Confidentiality of participants’ data will be protected by [CONTACT_100095] -information removed 
from databases before analysis. Electronic data storage will be password protected with  daily back -up and 
storage. Only research associates who directly interact with research subjects will have access to participant 
identifying information. All filing cabinets and storage facilities that contain sensitive patient information will be 
locked when not used. All computers and storage cabinets will be located within secure office locations.  
 
 
Adverse Event and Unanticipated Problem (UAP) Reporting:  Describe how events and UAPs will be evaluated and reported to the 
IRB.  All protocols should spe cify that, in the absence of more stringent reporting requirements, the guidelines established in the 
Committees on Human Research “Adverse Event and Unanticipated Problems Reporting Policy” will be followed.  The UVM/UVM 
Medical Center process for review of adverse events and UAPs to subjects or others should be included in the DSMP.   
 
1. Events of Interest  
The novel restraint device being tested in the FREEDOM Trial is considered so low -risk that it is exempt 
 
[ADDRESS_110286] is on 
study (through day [ADDRESS_110287]).  These data will be recorded in the 
electronic database.  
 
 
2. Adverse Event (AE) Reporting  
Given the high acuity of diseases and morbidity related to critical illness in the pati ent population under 
study (over age 60 years old receiving  invasive or non -invasive  mechanical ventilation and requiring 
restraint), it is difficult to identify an adverse event (AE) within the constellation of symptoms related to the 
normal evolution of critical illness.  Therefore, expected AEs (e.g. abnormal laboratory values, aberrant 
physiology such as fever or tachycardia or hypotension, etc.) consistent with the underlying 
pathophysiology or progression of underlying illness will neither be collecte d nor reported.   Only AEs that 
are both unexpected and felt to be related (to any degree) to the novel restraint device will be collected and 
reported, the majority of which will be considered “events of interest” as above.   The investigator will use 
his/her judgment to determine whether an AE is considered to be definitely related, probably related, 
possibly related, unlikely related, or not related (see table below in 5.a.).  These unexpected and related (to 
any degree) AEs will be documented in the part icipant medical record and/or study file.  It is the 
responsibility of the investigator to review all documentation (e.g. hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1088], laboratory 
results, diagnostic reports, etc.) regarding each event.  This reporting process is outlined below . 
 
 
3. Serious Adverse Event (SAE) Reporting  
Similar to AEs, given the high acuity of diseases and morbidity related to critical illness in the patient 
population under study (over age 65 years old receiving  invasive or non -invasive  mechanical ventilation 
and requiring restraint), it is difficult to identify an SAE within the constellation of symptoms related to the 
normal evolution of critical illness.  Only ‘unexpected’ SAEs (inconsistent with underlying pathophysiology 
or progression of underlying disease) will be collected and reported.   Expected SAEs will not be reported 
(see description below).  The investigator will use his/her judgment in determining whether an event is 
considered to be reportable per guidelines.  SAEs will be documented in the particip ant medical record 
and/or study file.  It is the responsibility of the investigator to review all documentation (e.g. hospi[INVESTIGATOR_41100], laboratory results, diagnostic reports, etc.) regarding each event.  This reporting process is 
outlined below.  
 
3.A.  DEFINITION OF SERIOUS ADVERSE EVENTS (SAE S) 
An event will be considered an SAE if it meets any one or more of the following criteria:   
A. Results in death 
B. Is life -threatening - an event where  a participant  is at risk of death at the time of the event. I t 
does not refer to an event that hypothetically might have caused death if it was more severe. 
C. Prolongation of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059] - any substantial e xtension of an inpatient  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_100050]/required in  relati on to participant’s co ndition prior to the SAE , as 
determined by [CONTACT_31598]. 
D. Results in Disability or Incapacity - is defined as a substantial  disruption of a person's ability to 
conduct normal life functions. 
E. Led to fetal distress, fetal death  or a congenital abnormality or birth defect 
F. Important medical event - are those that may not be immediately life-threatening, but may 
jeopardize the participant  and may require intervention to prevent one of the other serious 
outcomes listed above. 
 
3.B.  EXPEC TED SAE S 
As the patient population under study are hospi[INVESTIGATOR_100051], care must be taken to 
determine if an event is outside of what would be expected given the degree and nature of the critical 
 
21 
 illness prior to the serious advers e event.  In the population under study, some examples of potential 
expected  SAEs include:  
 Abnormalities in oxygenation and/or ventilation expected for the degree of injuries sustained.  
 Fluctuations in hemodynamic measures expected for the degree of injur ies sustained.  
 Agitation and/or pain responses expected for the degree of injuries sustained.  
 Complications directly related to sustained injuries.  
 Use of medications, blood products, support devices and other therapi[INVESTIGATOR_100052].  
 
3.c.  Expected Deaths  
Importantly, as approximately 15 -25% of participants will die from their critical illness, we anticipate that 
deaths in this study will be expected and occur as a result of the patients’ underlying illness, with 
associate d mortality data recorded in the CRF.  Please note that reporting an expected death  as an SAE 
via the electronic database report form is not required.  However, it is left to each individual site to 
determine whether it meets local requirements for reporti ng to the IRB.  Unexpected deaths  should be 
reported as described below.  
 
3.D.  UNEXPECTED SAE S 
All unexpected SAEs must be reported to the PIs and Project Manager using the appropriate form as 
outlined below.  
 
3.e.  Definition of Unexpected SAE  
Any SAE o ccurring in a subject participating in this Trial where the nature, severity, or frequency of the 
event is not consistent with the expected natural progression of any underlying disease, disorder, or 
condition of the subject(s) experiencing the adverse eve nt and the subject’s predisposing risk factor 
profile for the adverse event (e.g. sudden death from MI in a person with ARDS and sepsis without 
known heart disease).  
 
4. Reporting Period  
Participants should be monitored for related AEs (to any degree) and une xpected SAEs from the time of 
randomization until the day after the on -study period is complete (study day [ADDRESS_110288] as 
participants will be on study for maximum of 6 days, or 24 hours after removal of restraint device under 
study, whichever is earlier).   
 
 
5. Reporting Timelines  
Related AEs (to any degree – definitely, probably, possibly, or unlikely) and unexpected SAEs should be 
reported to the PIs and Project Manager ([CONTACT_100106], [CONTACT_100107], and [CONTACT_100104]) within 24h of 
knowledge of the occ urrence of the event .  The site is expected to notify the PIs or Project Manager by 
[CONTACT_100096], 
as well as any follow -up reports.  
 
5.a.  Initial Report  
If the inves tigator does not have all information regarding an unexpected SAE, he/she will not wait to 
receive additional information before notifying the PIs and Project Manager of the event and completing 
the appropriate report.   
 
Initial reports, at a minimum, sho uld include the following information:  
 Date (if available, time) of event onset  
 Individual reporting the event (i.e. investigator, sub -investigator)  
 Assessment of causality (i.e. relationship of event to participation in the study)  
 As much information reg arding the event as possible (i.e. if the event is still ongoing and the 
participant is still undergoing investigations and/or treatments, any preliminary information)  
 
22 
  
Assessment of Causality  
The investigator is responsible for assessing the relationship of all unexpected SAEs to study 
participation.  The following categories should be used to make the causality determination.   
Definitely related  Suggests that a temporal sequence of this SAE is associated with 
study participation, and there is no doubt th at the event is 
associated with participation in this study.  
Probably related  Suggests that a reasonable temporal sequence of this SAE with 
study participation exists and the association of the event with 
participation in the study seems likely.  
Possibly  related  Suggests that the association of this SAE with study participation is 
unknown and the event is not reasonably supported by [CONTACT_100097].  
Unlikely related  A serious adverse event that is more likely due to other causes 
than study participation . 
Not related  A serious adverse event that is clearly due to extraneous causes 
(disease, environment, etc.) and does not meet the criteria for a 
study participation relationship listed under possibly, probably, or 
definitely related.  
 
There may be instan ces when an event has occurred and the investigator has minimal information at 
hand to include in the initial SAE report to the central study team.  In these cases, it is important that the 
investigator make an assessment using their best judgement or opin ion at the time of the initial report.  
The investigator would then reassess when the necessary information becomes available and may opt 
to update their causality assessment.  
 
5.b.  Follow -up 
After the initial report, the investigator is required to monit or and treat the participant until the event is 
resolved, stabilizes, or otherwise explained.  New or updated information will be recorded until the event 
information is considered complete.  
 
5.c.  Expedited Reporting  
Safety events that fulfill the followi ng criteria require specific expedited reporting timelines to the DSMB 
And NIA:  Unexpected SAE and definitely related, probably related, possibly related, or unlikely related 
to study participation.  
 
Once the site submits the event report to the PIs and P roject Manager, the SC will review the report and 
determine whether it meets the criteria for expedited reporting.  If the unexpected SAE is considered 
definitely related, probably related, possibly related, or unlikely related to study participation, the study 
leadership will generate an expedited event report that will be submitted to the DSMB and the NIA within 
3 working days of receiving the site’s report.  
 
5.c.  General Event Reporting to the Safety Officer and the DSMB  
Any safety event that is an unex pected SAE and related (to any degree) to study participation will be 
reported to the DSMB and to the Safety Officer in expedited fashion, as described above in 5.c.  
 
 
 
Withdrawal Procedures:   Define the precise criteria for withdrawing subjects from the study.   Include a description of study requirements for when 
a subject withdraws him or herself from the study (if applicable).  
Once patients who did not have decisional capacity at the time of initial consent regain that capacity, they will 
be re -consen ted for ongoing participation in the study. A patient's decisional capacity will be determined by [CONTACT_100098], in 
 
23 
 a similar manner, by [CONTACT_16133], as part of the informed consent process. For all participants, it will be 
emphasized that participation is voluntary, that all steps involved with participation are voluntary, and that they 
are allowed to decline to complete any activity or to answer any q uestion they are asked. For all participants, it 
will be emphasized that they may withdraw from the study or any study procedures at any time without any loss 
of rights or benefits to which they are otherwise entitled and without losing status or standing within the 
institution.  
Sources of Materials:   Identify sources of research material obtained from individually identifiable human subjects in the form of specimens, record s 
or data.  Indicate whether the material or data will be obtained specifically for  research purposes or whether use will be made of existing specimens, 
records or data.  
Sources of Materials  
Via electronic and physical safeguards, all data will be secure in accordance with the Office of Management 
and Budget, and accessible only to thos e directly involved with this project. Throughout the study, research 
staff will have access to individually identifiable information available in the medical record. Patient identifying 
information only will be known to the research team members who are r equired to directly interact with the 
participant. All research staff who are not directly involved with patient evaluation (e.g. Data Manager and 
Analyst) will not have access to the linkage between the unique ID number and participant -identifying 
informa tion. 
a) Critically ill older patients recruited into cohort study in STTR Phase I and multi -site RCT in STTR  
Phase II : Screening data to identify eligible critically ill older patients will be viewed from the medical 
record. Data collected for these stud ies will come from patient or proxy interviews, chart review, clinical 
assessment and physical examination (using validated and reliable measurement instruments). At 
enrollment and during their ICU stay, research personnel will collect data, such as comorb id conditions, 
demographic information, physical functioning, severity of illness, and organ failure data. Research staff 
will also assess agitation/sedation, delirium, sedative medications received as part of clinical care, with 
these assessments done in person via direct observation/interaction or by [CONTACT_61706].  
Additionally, we will also collect information from satisfaction questionnaires and semi -structured 
interviews, which will be done in person.  
b) Family members, nurses and physicians ca ring for patients enrolled into Phase I or Phase II studies  
: Information collected from satisfaction questionnaires and semi -structured interviews will be done in 
person.  
 
 
DRUG AND DEVICE INFO RMATION   
 
 
Investigators are encouraged to consult the UVM  Medical Center Investigational Pharmacy Drug Service (847 -4863) prior to finalizing study 
drug/substance procedures.  
 
Drug (s)  X Not applicable  
Drug name – generic followed by [CONTACT_100099]. Availability – Source and pharmacology; vial or product sizes and 
supplier.  If a placebo will be used, identify its contents and source. (attach investigational drug brochure)  
 
Preparation:  Reconstitution instructions; preparation of a sterile product, compounded dosage form; mixing guidelin es, including fluid and volume 
required.  Identify who will prepare.  
 
Storage and stability – for both intact and mixed products.   
 
Administration – Describe acceptable routes and methods of administration and any associated risks of administration.  
 
Toxicity – Accurate but concise listings of major toxicities.  Rare toxicities, which may be severe, should be included by [CONTACT_100100].  Also 
adverse interactions with other drugs used in the protocol regimen as well as specific foods should be n oted.  Address significant drug or drug/food 
interactions in the consent form as well.  List all with above details.  
 
Is it FDA approved: (include FDA IND Number)  
1.  in the dosage form specified?  If no, provide justification for proposed use and sourc e of the study drug in that form.  
 
2.  for the route of administration specified?  If no, provide justification for route and describe the method to accomplish.  
 
 
24 
 3.  for the intended action?  
 
 
Device (s)   Not applicable  
Device name [CONTACT_100102] (attach investigational device brochure)  
ExersidesTM Restraint  
Is it FDA approved: (include FDA IDE Number)  
1.  for indication specified? If no, provide justification for proposed use and source of the device.  
The device is 510k exempt and IDE exempt.  
Risk assessment (non -significant/significant risk) - PI [INVESTIGATOR_100053] a device based upon the use of the device with human 
subjects in a research environment.   
Risk assessment is deemed to be non -significant and potential risks from  the ExersidesTM restraint device are 
considered to be very low. Our own preliminary data demonstrate safety in that no adverse or severe adverse 
events (i.e. no self -removal of endotracheal tubes, feeding tubes, intravenous lines, etc.) – these preliminar y 
data are from a pi[INVESTIGATOR_100054] a single intensive 
care unit. Although self -removal of tubes and lines is a risk, as occurs with any existing currently available 
restraint device, we antic ipate that this risk is very low due to the design of the ExersidesTM restraint that 
intentionally was created to further reduce this risk in comparison to traditional restraints. Other potential risks 
include skin breakdown from the ExersidesTM restraint device, and a theoretical increased risk of increased 
removal of upper extremity peripheral IVs, but we did not observe any of these events in our pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  
 
 
 
SUBJECT CHARACTERISTICS, IDENTIFICATION AND RECRUI TMENT  
 
Subject Selection:   Provide rat ionale for subject selection in terms of the scientific objectives and proposed study design.  
Critically ill older patients recruited into cohort study in STTR Phase I  and multisite  
RCT in STTR Phase II  Eligible patients will be those who are 60 years o f age or older, requiring  invasive or 
non-invasive  mechanical ventilation with actual or expected duration of mechanical ventilation >48 hours, 
cared for in an ICU with an expected ICU length of stay of >3 days after enrollment, and who are not deeply 
seda ted (i.e. have a Richmond Agitation Sedation Scale (RASS) score > -2). No individuals [ADDRESS_110289] a wide range of health status , including potentially ranging from no prior comorbid disease and high 
prior health status to patients with many comorbidities and low prior health status.  
Patients will be excluded if they meet any of the following criteria:  
1. Upper extremity impairment s that prevent use of novel restraint device (e.g. amputation, arm injury)  
2. Severe skin breakdown preventing securing of ExersidesTM restraint  
3. Limited mobility of either upper extremity prior to admission (e.g. frozen shoulder, severe arthritis)  
4. Pr e-existing primary systemic neuromuscular disease (e.g. Guillain Barre)  
5. Neuromuscular blocker infusion (eligible once infusion discontinued if other inclusion criteria met)  
6. Pre -existing severe cognitive impairment or language barrier prohibiting outc ome assessment  
7. Expected death or withdrawal of life -sustaining treatments within [ADDRESS_110290]’s goal of studying intubated senior pat ients requiring restraint.  
 
Vulnerable Populations:   Explain the rationale for involvement of special classes of subjects, if any.  Discuss what procedures or practices will be 
used in the protocol to minimize their susceptibility to undue influences and unnecessary risk (physical, psychological, etc.).   
X Not applicable   
 
 
Number of Subjects:   What is the anticipated number of subjects to be enrolled at UVM/UVM Medical Center and in the case of a multi -center study, 
with UVM/UVM Medical Center as the l ead, the total number of subjects for the entire study.  
Phase I study: 8;       Phase II study: 54  
 
 
25 
 Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria:   Eligibility and ineligibility criteria should be specific. Describe how eligibility will be determined and by [CONTACT_20898].  
Change s to the eligibility criteria at a later phase of the research have the potential to invalidate the research.  
Table 5: Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria for Study Entry into STTR Phase I and Phase II Studies  
Inclusion Criteria                              Exclusion Criteria                               Rationale for Exclusion  
1. >[ADDRESS_110291]  restraints  
3. Requiring  invasive or non -invasive  
mechanical  ventilation with actual 
or expected total duration of >48 
hours  
4. Expe cted ICU stay >3 days after 
enrollment (to permit adequate 
exposure to proposed intervention)  
5. Not deeply sedated (Richmond 
Agitation Sedation Scale [RASS] 
score > -2)186 1. Upper extremity impairments that prevent use of novel 
restraint device (e.g. amputa tion, arm injury)  Unable to receive proposed intervention  
2. Limited mobility of either upper extremity prior to  
admission (e.g. frozen shoulder, severe arthritis)   
Inaccurate data for primary outcome 
assessment during RCT (i.e. actigraphy)  3. Pre -existing primary systemic neuromuscular disease 
(e.g. Guillain Barre)  
4. Neuromuscular blocker infusion (eligible once infusion 
discontinued if other inclusion criteria met)  
5. Pre -existing severe  cognitive impairment or  
language barrier prohibiting outc ome assessment  Unable to perform outcome  assessments  
6. Expected death or withdrawal of life -sustaining trea tments 
within 6 days from enrollment  Patients unlikely to complete proposed 
outcome assessment protocol  
7. Incarcerated  Vulnerable population; e thical issues  
8. Severe skin breakdown on either upper extremity       Unable to receive proposed  intervention   
Using the electronic medical record and daily ICU rounds, study staff will identify consecutive patients admitted 
to the ICU who meet eligib ility criteria. After this initial screen for eligibility, study personnel will contact [CONTACT_4677]’s ICU physician to confirm appropriateness for the study.  The PI [INVESTIGATOR_100055] a patient is eligible for 
the study prior to enrollment and this will be  documented on a case report form.  
Inclusion of Minorities and Women:   Describe  efforts to include minorities and women.  If either minorities or women are excluded, include a 
justification for the exclusion.  
INCLUSION OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES  
Targeted/ planned distribution and rationale:  
Persons of either sex and of all race and ethnicity categories, who meet the eligibility criteria, will be eligible to 
enroll in the clinical study. The eligibility criteria do not exclude any specific sex, race or ethni c category. More 
specifically, no individual will be excluded from this study based on sex or race/ethnicity. Based on past similar 
studies at all study sites, we estimate the proportion of women among patients in the proposed study will be 
approximately 4 0-50% and reflects the population of critically ill patients. We anticipate that minority 
representation of the patient sample will reflect the demographics in the regions where each of the 3 study 
sites is located (Vermont/Upstate [LOCATION_001]; Baltimore, Mar yland; and Los Angeles, [LOCATION_004]) (see Table 1).  
 
Please see our Planned Enrollment Table for details. Overall, we estimate that approximately 35% of the  
study population will be comprised of racial or ethnic minorities. Based on existing data, we do not  expect 
differences in our outcomes due to minority status but we are collecting sex/gender and race/ethnicity data and 
will include them as covariates in our multivariate analyses if needed.  
 
Table1: Race/ethnicity in Vermont, Washington, and South Caroli na (%)*  
Race/Ethnicity  Vermont  Baltimore,  
MD Los Angeles,  
CA Total for Critically Ill Patients  
Enrolled in this Research  
White/Caucasian  94.9 29.6 71.0 65.2 
Black/African -American  1.3 63.7 9.1 24.7 
Native American/Alaskan Native  0.4 0.4 1.5 0.8 
Asian  1.8 2.3 15.1 6.4 
Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander  <0.1 <0.1 0.4 0.1 
Two or more races  1.9 2.1 3.0 2.3 
Hispanic (separate data category)  1.9 4.2 48.5 18.2 
* https:// www.census.gov/q uickfacts/fact/table/US/PST045216  
Inclusion of Children:  Describe efforts to include children.  Inclusion is required unless a clear and compelling rationale shows that inclusion is 
inappropriate with respect to the health of the subjects or that inclusi on is inappropriate for the purpose of the study.  If children are included, the 
description of the plan should include a rationale for selecting or excluding a specific age range of children.  When include d, the plan must also 
describe the expertise of th e investigative team in working with children, the appropriateness of the available facilities to accommodate children, and 
the inclusion of a sufficient number of children to contribute to a meaningful analysis relative to the purpose of the study.   If ch ildren are excluded  
then provide appropriate justification. Provide target accrual for this population.  
INCLUSION OF CHILDREN  
 
26 
 The Program Announcement (PAS -17-065) to which this proposal is responding to is to “conduct research 
leading to the development of innovative products and/or services that may advance progress in preventing 
and treating Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Alzheimer's -disease -related dementias (ADRD).” Hence, we are 
specifically including only patients ≥65 years old in the proposed study, as previously discussed with a program 
officer at the National Institute on Aging. This population (i.e. adult >65 years old) is suitable to the topic of this 
study since the prevalence of restraint use and the risk of ICU -associated delirium and long -term cognitive 
impairment are much higher in older than in younger patients (see Significance section within the proposal). 
Study subjects will therefore not include children, as defined by [CONTACT_4289], since the target area of investigation 
involves older critically ill adults. Children have unique age -related mobility and cognitive development issues 
that would need separate study from the proposed research. Moreover, the developi[INVESTIGATOR_100056].  
For protocols including the use of an investigational drug, indicate whether women of childbearing potential have been includ ed and, if not, include 
appro priate justification.  
N/A 
If HIV testing is included specifically for research purposes explain how the test results will be protected against unauthor ized disclosure.  Include if 
the subjects are to be informed of the test results.  If yes, include the process and provision for counseling.  If no, a rationale for not informing the 
subjects should be included.   
X Not applicable   
 
Recrui tment:  Describe plans for identifying and recrui tment of subjects.  All recrui tment materials (flyers, ads, letters,  etc) need to be IRB approved 
prior to use.   
Using the electronic medical record and daily ICU rounds, study staff will identify consecutive patients admitted 
to the ICU who meet eligibility criteria. After this initial screen for eligibility, study pers onnel will contact [CONTACT_4677]’s ICU physician to confirm appropriateness for the study and permission to contact [CONTACT_4676]/proxy for 
discussion of study and informed consent process in compliance with local IRB procedures. If the physicians 
agree, study sta ff will contact [CONTACT_89410] -person; if the patient does not have decision -making capacity at the 
time of enrollment, a legal next of kin in -person will be approached for informed consent. If patients regain 
capacity, patients will be asked to re -consent  for continued participation.  
 
 
FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS  
 
Expense to Subject:  If the investigation involves the possibility of added expense to the subject (longer hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], extra studies, etc.) 
indicate in detail how this will be handled. In ca ses where the FDA has authorized the drug or device company to charge the patient for the 
experimental drug or device, a copy of the authorization letter from the FDA or sponsor must accompany the application. Final approval 
will not be granted until the I RB receives this documentation.  
 
There are very limited circumstances under which study participants may be responsible (either directly or via their insuranc e) for covering 
some study -related expenses. If the study participant or their insurer(s) will be billed for any portion of the research study, provide a 
justification as to why this is appropriate and acceptable. For example, if the study involves trea tment that is documented standard of care 
and not investigational, state so. In these cases, the prot ocol and the consent should clearly define what is standard of care and what is 
research.  
There is no charge to patients.  
Payment for participation:  Describe all plans to pay subjects, either in cash, a gift or gift certificate. Please note that all pay ments must be 
prorated throughout the life of the study. The IRB will not approve a study where there is only a lump sum payment at the end  of the study 
because this can be considered coercive. The amount of payment must be justified. Clarify if subjects w ill be reimbursed for travel or other 
expenses.  
X Not applicable   
 
Collaborating Sites .  When research involving human subjects will take place at collaborating sites or other performance sites when 
UVM/UVM Medical Center is the lead site, the principal  investigator [INVESTIGATOR_100057] a list of the collaborating sites and their 
Federalwide Assurance numbers when applicable.  (agreements may be necessary)  
 Not applicable   
Johns Hopkins University, FWA00005834  
University of [LOCATION_004] Los Angel es, FWA00004642  
Rutland Regional Medical Center, FWA00003554  
  
 
27 
  
INFORMED CONSENT  
 
Consent Procedures :  Describe the consent procedures to be followed, including the circumstances under which consent will be obtained, 
who will seek it, and the methods of  documenting consent.  Specify the form(s) that will be used e.g. consent (if multiple forms explain and 
place identifier on each form), assent form and/or HIPAA authorization (if PHI is included).  These form(s) must accompany th e protocol as 
an appendix or attachment.   
 
Note :  Only those individuals authorized to solicit consent may sign the consent form confirming that the prospective subject was  provided 
the necessary information and that any questions asked were answered.  
As most eligible patients wi ll be unable to make decisions, written informed consent will most often occur 
via legally authorized representatives (LARs) with participant re -consent upon regaining capacity.  
All patients who meet inclusion and exclusion criteria will be invited to par ticipate in this study. Using  
observation/review of the electronic medical record and daily hospi[INVESTIGATOR_100044], study staff will identify  
consecutive patients admitted to the ICU who meet the basic eligibility criteria. In order to conduct the  
screening, the research team will obtain: 1) an IRB waiver of consent for screening; 2) an IRB waiver  
of HIPAA authorization; and 3) all necessary institutional confidentiality agreements. After this initial  
screen for eligibility, study personnel will proceed as per loc al IRB requirements, including contact[CONTACT_100101]’s ICU physicians to confirm appropriateness for the study and obtain permission to approach 
the patient/legal next of kin for discussion of the study and to undertake the informed consent process. If 
the physicians agree, study staff will approach the patient in -person or, if the patient doesn’t have 
decisional capacity at the time of enrollment, a legal next of kin in -person (via in -person meeting).  
Most patients participating in this study will require  mechanical ventilation and will therefore be receiving 
some amount of sedative medications at the time of enrollment. Hence, we anticipate that a large 
proportion of patients will lack the capacity to provide informed consent at the time of study eligibil ity and 
therefore, we expect that study staff will go through the process of informed consent and review the 
consent materials with the legal next of kin. Consent will be documented, in writing, on an IRB -approved 
consent form. No minors will be considered  in the proposed research; therefore, parental permission and 
child assent is not applicable to this application. All conversations with the patient/legal next -of-kin 
regarding the study will be held in a private setting; study staff will allow for patient s’ desire to have family 
present and/or to confer with family, and to make participation decisions according to his or her own time. 
Once patients who did not have decisional capacity at the time of initial consent regain that capacity, they 
will be re -consented for ongoing participation in the study.  
 
Family members may be the Legally Authorized Representatives (LARs) who provide consent for the 
patient to participate in the RCT, but additional family members beyond the LARs also may be asked to 
participat e, and they will be identified via observation of them visiting the consented participant while in 
the ICU. Only family members >[ADDRESS_110292] (study (C) from above) also will be asked to complete the satisfaction questionnaire 
and semi structured interview with their enrollment and consent in accordance with institutional IRB 
policy.   
Information Withheld From Subjects:  Will any information about the research purpose and design be withheld from potential or 
participating subjects?  If so, explain and justify the non -disclosure and describe plans for post -study debriefing .   
X Not applicable   
 
 
 
Attach full grant application, including budget information and/or any contract or draft contract 
associated with this application.  
 
All materials must be submitted electronically to the IRB via InfoEd. Proper security access is nee ded to 
make electronic submissions. Visit the InfoEd Resource Materials  page for more information.  
 