 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STUDY TITLE: Emotion Coaching Skills as an Augmentation to Family Based Therapy for 
Adolescents with Anorexia Nervosa or Atypi[INVESTIGATOR_20031]: [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
DOCUMENT DATE: 8-31-2020  
 
  
 
 
 
CINCINNATI CHILDREN’S HOSPI[INVESTIGATOR_20032] :  Emotion Coaching Skills as an Augmentation to Family Based Therapy for 
Adolescents with Anorexia Nervosa or Atypi[INVESTIGATOR_20033] :  Claire M. Aarnio -Peterson,  Ph.D.  
 
1.  ABSTRACT  
Pediatric anorexia nervosa (AN) affects 400,[ADDRESS_18866] mortality 
rate of any psychiatric condition (11.5%), with half of all deaths due to suicide.  Atypi[INVESTIGATOR_20034] (AAN) is also associated with similar poor outcomes despi[INVESTIGATOR_20035] a normal 
weight. Since AAN is a new diagnosis for DSM -5, most of the outcome stud ies have only 
included AN. Early intervention in adolescents is lifesaving, making pediatric AN treatment an 
important public health concern. The goal of pediatric AN treatment is to restore the adolescent 
back to a healthy weight and reverse the dangerous  effects of malnutrition. Family based 
therapy (FBT) is the gold standard of treatment for pediatric AN; however, 50% of patients do 
not respond. The consequences of treatment non-response are dire, underscoring the 
importance of improving t reatment via augmentations to addre ss non -response. One barrier to 
treatment response in pediatric AN is expressed emotion (EE), which is defined as a family’s 
response to an ill patient that is characterized by [CONTACT_20052], critical comments, and emotional 
overinvolvement . Several studies have highlighted that families with high EE undergoing 
treatment for their adolescent with AN have poorer outcomes, including higher drop -out rates, 
lack of weight restoration, and less improvement in eating disorder symptoms. Conversely,  
parental warmth, a facet of EE, is associated with good  outcomes in FBT. Recent parenting 
interventions focused on emotion coaching (EC) to address high EE have demonstrated 
success as adjuncts to evidence -based treatments in other pediatric populations ( e.g., PTSD, 
ADHD) but have not been applied to pediatric AN. Given the detrimental effects that high EE 
has on the re -feeding process and the benefits of parental warmth, emotion coaching  has the 
potential to reduce high EE, increase parental warmth, and i mprove weight restoration in 
adolescents with AN. The aim of this R34 pi[INVESTIGATOR_20036] (1R34MH115897 -01A1) is to 
conduct a randomized controlled clinical trial of 50 adolescents and their parents to compare 
FBT+EC parent group (n=25) versus FBT+support (n=25).  This study would have a large 
impact on pediatric AN with the potential to improve  weight restoration outcomes by a ugmenting 
FBT for families high in EE.  
 
2.  PURPOSE OF STUDY  
The purpose of this study is to  establish the feasibility, acceptability , and preliminary efficacy of 
an emotion coaching skills group for parents as an adjunct to FBT for anorexia nervosa or 
atypi[INVESTIGATOR_20037].  
 
3.  BACKGROUND  
Anorexia Nervosa (AN) is associated with a host of physical and psychological problems 
and has the highest mortality rate of any psychiatric condition.1 The prevalence of AN is 
~1%, disproportionately  affecting girls and young women, with boys and young men comprising 
about 10% of cases.2 The average age of onset is 15 -19 years; however, incidence is 
 
increasing in young adolescents, making this a critical developmental period to study.2 Mortality 
rates range from 5.2 -11.5%, with about half of deaths caused by [CONTACT_20053].[ADDRESS_18867] promising evidence -based treatment for pediatric AN5-9, but 25 -50% 
of patients do not respond to this intervention.  In the course of AN, the neurob iological 
changes that occur secondary to malnutrition make it difficult for the adolescent to feed 
themselves, often rendering individual treatment ineffective. FBT applies a family systems 
approach and challenges the practical factors that maintain AN (e .g., allowing the adolescent to 
make their own food choices), focuses on reducing parental self -blame, and views parents as 
necessary to the success of treatment. A family meal session is utilized as an ecologically valid 
method to assess family behavior and interaction about eating at treatment entry. In the current 
project, we will conduct a family meal session at treatment entry (baseline), [ADDRESS_18868] notes who is plating and serving the food, how an d what the adolescent is 
eating, and how families address disordered eating at the meal (e.g., food refusal, hiding food in 
clothing, pushing food around plate) in order to assess family dynamics as well as food intake. 
Following this assessment, FBT compr ises 3 phases. In Phase I, p arents assume control over 
re-feeding their adolescent to weight restoration; in Phase II, control over eating is shifted back 
to the adolescent once weight is restored; Phase III goals include supporting adolescent 
autonomy and  developi[INVESTIGATOR_007]/maintaining appropriate parent -adolescent boundaries.  The primary 
interventions in FBT are behaviorally focused: setting concrete goals for caloric intake and 
weight gain, coaching parents on how to support each other and their child through re -feeding, 
and reducing other AN -related activities, such as excessive exercise. The shift in family 
dynamics that occurs during Phase I (re -feeding) often creates significant conflict between the 
adolescent and parents. In some families, this conflict can instigate or exacerbate unhelpful 
parenting practices such as hostility and/or critical comments directed toward the adolescent. 
Although FBT is the most promising evidence -based treatment for pediatric AN, 25 -50% of 
patients do not remit. One obstacle to positive treatment outcomes is that FBT does not 
explicitly provide parents with tools to navigate the conflict that is inherently created in the family 
system during FBT. Additional intervention is needed to provide parents with concrete skills so 
that pa rents and adolescents communicate effectively, weight restoration can be successful, 
and the cycle of AN can be broken rather than reinforced.   
 
Expressed emotion has been identified as a significant and intervenable mechanism 
predicting outcomes in pediat ric AN. Early and effective intervention can prevent costly 
residential treatment and mortality for the pediatric AN population. Although several factors have 
been identified as non -specific predictors for treatment success, many are non -modifiable for 
treatment (e.g., length of illness, prior hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], age).10 However, evidence is 
accumulating that expressed emotion in the family is an important factor in AN treatment. 
Expressed emotion (EE) is a n umbrella term defined as caregivers’ negative attitudes and 
behaviors towards an ill family member .11 EE comprises five factors: critical comments, hostility, 
emotional overinvolvement, warmth, and positi ve remarks,12 and these are typi[INVESTIGATOR_20038] (FMSS).  Research on EE was originally 
rooted in the schizophrenia literature, where high EE, characterized by [CONTACT_20054], hostility, and 
 
emotional over -involv ement, is associated with higher rates of schizophrenia relapse.13 EE is 
also an important mechanism negatively impacting clinical outcomes in individuals with AN. 5 
High EE is operationalized as 1 or more critical comments, 1 or more emotional 
overinvolvement statements and/or behaviors, or both. 14Whereas the EE literature in 
schizophrenia showed a relationship between [ADDRESS_18869] negative implications for patients with AN. 15 Eleven 
empi[INVESTIGATOR_20039] -analysis demonstrate the significant role of high parental EE 
(e.g., criticism, hostility, emotional over -involvement) in poor treatment outcomes for pediatric 
AN patients, explaining as much as 34% of variance in weig ht restoration.5 Further, lower 
parental EE (fewer critical comments, hostility, and emotional overinvolvement) at the baseline 
family meal session (treatment entry) is associated with early weight gain.16  
Parental warmth, a facet of EE, is significantly negatively associated with critical 
comments;17 however, it is not often assessed in treatment outcome studies. Notably, high 
parental warmth also predicts weight restoration and improved psychological fun ctioning.18,19 For 
purposes of the current study and consistent with Caspi [INVESTIGATOR_20040], we operationalize 
parental warmth by a parent’s tone of voice, spontaneity, sympathy, and/or empathy for the 
child.[ADDRESS_18870] difficulty responding supportively to 
their child’s anxiety or who are overly critical can disrupt or undermine the p rocess of exposure -
based treatments.20,21 These findings appear to extend to the treatment of AN via FBT. For 
example, high levels of EE, including criticism or distress about their child’s negative emotions, 
often interferes with successful weight gain during FBT.[ADDRESS_18871] examining FBT 
versus individual therapy for pediatric  AN, adolescents and their families with poor outcomes 
(i.e., below 15% expected body weight) had significantly higher EE at baseline than adolescents 
with optimal outcomes (i.e., at or above 85% expected body weight).24 While there were no 
differences in initial levels of EE between the optimal and poor outcomes groups for that trial, 
levels of EE increased from baseline to end of treatment in the poor out comes group regardless 
of treatment type (i.e., FBT versus individual). This suggests that even if FBT therapi[INVESTIGATOR_20041], families high in EE lack the skills necessary to do so. Further, the current treatment does 
not provide extensive guidance to therapi[INVESTIGATOR_20042]. To date, the only 
accommodation to address high levels of EE in families is to conduct FBT sessions via parallel 
individual therapy ( i.e., adolescent and parents seen separately).[ADDRESS_18872] 
demonstra ted the relationship between high EE (i.e., critical comments, hostility, and emotional 
overinvolvement) and weight restoration in AN, two studies did not support EE as a mechanism 
for weight restoration. Notably, one of these studies still highlighted tha t high baseline EE was 
associated with treatment dropout and high baseline paternal criticism predicted less 
improvement in eating disorder symptoms post -treatment.26 The other study identified parental  
warmth, a facet of EE, as a significant mechanism of weight restoration.18 These data 
underscore the need to address high EE and parental warmth as significant mechanisms, 
particularly during eating -related interactions, to optimize the treatment for pedi atric AN.  
 
 
Interventions to reduce EE and improve parental warmth show promising outcomes 
in the family -based treatment of other psychiatric diseases. Emotion coaching (EC) 
interventions are designed to reduce high EE and increase parental warmth by [CONTACT_20055]’s emotions in a way that facilitates socioemotional development and 
emotional security, building on developmental theory of emotion socialization. The specific skill 
sets that are taught to parents in EC interventions , which is the focus of the current proposal, 
include active listening (e.g., eye contact, reflection, helpful questions), emotional support (e.g., 
validating emotions, expressing affection and acceptance), and emotion coaching (e.g., labeling 
emotions, id entifying appropriate copi[INVESTIGATOR_4262]). EC parenting interventions have been 
implemented to augment evidence -based, behaviorally focused interventions targeting child 
trauma,27 ADHD,28,29 and adolescent substance use prevention.30 Similar to FBT, these broader 
parenting intervent ions largely emphasize behavioral approaches, where the focus of treatment 
is on parents’ responses to child behavior, utilizing reinforcement and contingency management 
principles. T he goal of EC interventions is to complement behavioral treatment approac hes, with 
specific focus on the child’s emotional experience and emotion -related behavior, such that 
parents’ attention to and validation of their child’s emotional experience supports coaching of 
socially appropriate emotional expression.  By [CONTACT_20056], 
indicators of high EE (i.e., hostility, critical comments) would decrease, while parental warmth 
would increase. Notably, EC interventions have been conducted in families of adolescents with 
internalizing and externalizing di sorders, resulting in lower rates of EE, increased warmth,31,[ADDRESS_18873], and less internalizing and externalizing symptoms.33 A recent study 
demonstrated efficacy of a parent EC intervention in reducing internalizing symptoms (e.g., 
anxiety), in youth transitioning to secondary school (M change = -4.24, SE = .91, 95% CI: -6.29, -
2.69).31 Since behavioral interventions, such as FBT, can be at odds with EC interventions (e.g., 
seeking compliance vs. supporting emotions in difficult circumstances),  a feasibility trial is 
needed to effectively integrate these two approaches. We aim to target the mechanisms of high 
EE and parental warmth, through our EC -augmented FBT intervention in order to improve 
weight restoration in pediatric AN.  
 
The proposed in tervention aims to address a significant gap in the pediatric AN 
treatment outcome literature by [CONTACT_20057]: High EE and parental warmth. We will select 
families with high EE, a primary barrier to effective FBT, and provide them with augmented 
treatment to facilitate weight restoration. We are focusing on the patients/families at elevated 
risk (i.e., high EE) at baseline so that the intervention is most likely to be effective an d targets 
families who need it the most. This contribution is significant because high EE is a well -
established mechanism of treatment not previously targeted in the treatment of pediatric AN. 
FBT addresses the primary task of empowering parents to restore  their adolescent back to a 
 
healthy weight. However, remission rates for FBT for pediatric AN are suboptimal at 50%. 
Although the FBT treatment manual does briefly review EE and emphasizes minimizing blame 
on the patient, it does not rigorously and extensi vely target reducing parental criticism, hostility, 
and emotional overinvolvement (high EE) that inhibit weight restoration, or increasing parental 
warmth that might facilitate weight restoration. Thus, the proposed augmentation aims to 
improve the effecti veness of FBT by [CONTACT_20058], previously neglected areas of intervention, and optimize weight restoration 
outcomes in pediatric AN (see Figure 1).  If successful, this augmentation to target the identi fied 
mechanisms of high EE and warmth would significantly improve weight restoration outcomes.  
 
4.  STUDY DESIGN  
 We will conduct a pi[INVESTIGATOR_4248] 50 
adolescents and their parents to 
compare FBT + EC parent group 
condition (n = 25) versus FBT + 
support group condition (n = 25). 
FBT will be identical in both the 
treatment and control condition (see 
Figure 1). The treatm ent group will 
receive 10 EC parent group sessions 
while the  attention control group will 
receive 10 psychoeducation parent 
support group sessions  (See Table 
1). These EC parent group and support parent group sessions will occur separately from FBT. 
Partic ipants in both conditions will receive active intervention over a 6 -month period (total of 20 
FBT sessions; 10 EC or parent support group sessions) and EE, parental warmth, and weight 
restoration will be assessed at 1, [ADDRESS_18874] face -to-face therapy sessions due to COVID -19, all FBT and EC sessions will 
be provided via telehealth. FBT sessions will be conducted using “Jabber” a HIPAA compliant 
telemedicine interface currently used by [CONTACT_20059]. EC sessions will be conducted via 
Zoom for Healthcare. Zoom for Healthcare allows for multiple members to be part of a group 
session in a HIPAA compliant setting. Going forward, if restrictions are lifted, FBT sessions will 
likely return to face -to-face visit types consistent with BMCP standard of care. However, for 
consistency, we will continue to conduct both EC groups and Support groups via Zoom for 
Healthcare for the entirety of the study.  
Table 1. 
Description 
of 
Intervention 
Sessions  
Session  FBT  Control: FBT + Parent 
Support Group  Treatment: FBT + EC Parent Group  
Phase I  
1  Introduce FBT and 
engage family in 
therapy, obtain history 
of how AN is affecting 
the family, obtain 
preliminary information  
Medical issues (low 
heart rate, labs, 
constipation)  Review parental emotional awareness 
and emotion regulation, function of 
emotions, and family emotional climate  
Parents in charge of weight restoration  
Parents transition control over eating  
  back to adolescent  
 
Discuss adolescent developmental 
issues  
Figure 1. FBT 
Phase I  
(Sessions 1 -10) 
Phase II  
(Sessions 11 -16) 
Phase III  
(Session s 17-20) 
 
 
about how the family 
functions and how this 
may promote or impede 
weight restoration  
2  Weigh teen, discuss/ 
support parent’s efforts 
at weight restoration, 
distinguish the teen 
from the AN, modify 
family criticism of teen, 
review progress   
Understanding the 
different levels of care 
in ED treatment  Parent emotional awareness and 
emotion regu lation*  
*Core EC skills to be reviewed at the 
beginning of each group  
3  Same as Session 2   
Taking time off from 
work to support my 
child Review parental emotional awareness 
and emotion regulation skills: 
mindfulness, adaptive copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], problem 
solving, relaxation  
4  Same as Session 2   
Medical procedures 
when having an eating 
disorder (e.g., dental 
and wisdom teeth 
removal)  Review parental emotional awareness 
and emotion regulation skills.  
Active Listening: Identify ways that 
parents can increase engagement in 
communication with teen  
5  Same as Session 2   
Amenorrhea and 
determining expected 
body weight  Review parental emotional awareness 
and emotion regulation skills. Emotion 
Coaching: He lp the teen label and 
understand their feelings  
6  Same as Session 2   
Medications  Review parental emotional awareness 
and emotion regulation skills. Emotion 
Coaching: Ask the teen emotion -
focused questions, reinforcing 
effective copi[INVESTIGATOR_007], extending 
understanding of feelings  
7  Same as Session 2   
Working with the school 
on my child’s ED   Parent emotional awareness and 
emotion regulation  
8  Same as Session 2   
How do I navigate my 
child being influenced 
by [CONTACT_20060]. Emotion 
Support: Identify 
invalidating/unsupportive 
communication patterns  
[ADDRESS_18875] 
time for other 
children/demands at 
home  Review parental emotional aw areness 
and emotion regulation.  
Emotion Support: Identify and 
practicing validating communication  
10  Same as Session 2   
Parent Q and A/wrap 
up/summary  Review parental emotional awareness 
and emotion regulation.  
Triggers: Identify copi[INVESTIGATOR_20043]  
11-[ADDRESS_18876] parents in 
negotiating the shift of 
control over eating 
back to the teen  FBT components only  FBT components only; no group  
Phase III  
17-20  Discuss teen 
developmental issues  FBT components only  FBT components only; no group  
 
Methodology  
Screening for High EE Using the Five Minute Speech Sample (FMSS) .14 The FMSS is an 
empi[INVESTIGATOR_20044], we will screen families for baseline 
levels of EE. The FMSS is derived from responses audio recorded by [CONTACT_20061].  The FMSS has  demonstrated 6 -8 
week stability and concurrent validity with a semi -structured interview assessing affective 
attitudes (i.e., Camberwell Family Interview).14 Since FBT is an intensive intervention for 
families, we anticipate that EE has the potential to i ncrease after FBT has begun. Thus, we will 
offer two potential time points for participants to qualify on the FMSS for the study: at diagnosis 
prior to starting FBT, and again halfway through Phase I of FBT (session 5). A participant that is 
a screen fail at diagnosis will be asked if they would like to be contact[CONTACT_20062], (after session 5 of FBT) and they will be screened again with the FMSS. Any 
individual who screen fails the FMSS for the second time will be removed from our re cruitment 
list and cannot participate in the study. However, individuals who screen fail at diagnosis but 
pass at the [ADDRESS_18877] Design.  
 
Treatment Condit ion. For the treatment condition, i n addition to FBT, participants  will 
receive 10 additional, weekly, parent group sessions (each session is 90 minutes), within a [ADDRESS_18878] by 
[CONTACT_20063] a child’s emotion (e.g., 
anxiety) while not condoning a behavior 
(e.g., food refusal).  
Control Condition.  For the control 
condition, participants will receive a 10 -
week parent support group in addition to 
weekly FBT.  These sessions will occur 
via Zoom for Healthcare by [CONTACT_20064]. The session content 
is outlined in Table 1.  
 
5.   DURATION   
Participants will be in the study for a 
total of 6 months and an additional 6 
months is required for data 
management and analyses.  
 
6.  SELECTION & RECRUITMENT OF 
PARTICIPANTS  
Study Participants  
Study participants will include [ADDRESS_18879] outpatient psychotherapy visit . Given the recent face to face 
restrictions due to COVID -19, we will recruit patients via phone and/or email once their 
physician has introdu ced them to the study and they are interested in participating.  
 
Inclusion criteria  
 Age 12-17 years  
 Diagnosis of AN or AAN  
 Have 1 or more critical comments on the Five -Minute Speech Sample (FMSS)  
 Primary caregiver consent and adolescent assent to participate in study  
 Primary caregiver must have at least 50% of meals with participant for FBT  
Exclusion criteria  
 No critical comments on the FMSS  
 Diagnosis of significant developmental disorder (e.g. Autism)  
Assessed for 
eligibility 
(n=153) Enrollment
Randomly allocated
(anticipated n=50)
•Baseline assessmentRefusal to 
Participate 
(n=38)
Control 
(FBT+support ; n=25)
•10 sessions  (3 
months)
•1 Month AssessmentTreatment 
(FBT+EC; n=25)
•10 sessions  (3 
months)
•1 Month AssessmentAllocation
3 Months 3 Month Assessment
Control ( FBT+Support
Parent Group)
•Phase 2 (Sessions 11 -16)
•Phase 3 (Sessions 17 -20)Treatment (FBT+EC 
Parent Group)
•Phase 2 (Sessions 11 -16)
•Phase 3 (Sessions 17 -20)
[ADDRESS_18880] DESIGN
Ineligible (n=65)
1 Month
 
 Inability to read and speak English due to the questionnaires and intervention 
only been developed in English  
 significant medical co -morbidity affecting their weight including Crohn’s Disease 
or Cystic Fibrosis  
 
 
 
Recruitment Procedures  
Potential participants and their caregivers meeting eligibili ty criteria will be identified by a trained 
research assistant in collaboration with the members of the Eating Disorders Team. We will be 
requesting a review of health information to identify potential participants via EPIC clinic 
schedules. The research staff will review clinic schedules  of medical attendings within the 
division of Adolescent Medicine  to identify patients who are most likely to be eligible for the 
study based on known inclusion/exclusion criteria (e.g., age and diagnosis). This will reduc e 
participant burden as we will not approach non -eligible patients. Once the physician gives 
approval, a recruitment letter will be sent to potential research participants notifying them of the 
study within [ADDRESS_18881] lifted, we will return to face -to-face recr uitment. A thorough overview of the 
study will be provided, including study procedures, benefits, and risks. All questions will be 
addressed, and an information sheet will be given. In order to determine eligibility, the Five -
Minute Speech Sample (FMSS) wi ll be administered with a plan that the research coordinator 
will inform families of their eligibility within [ADDRESS_18882] an opportunity to be screen again after session 5 of FBT 
(approximately one month later).  If eligible, the research coordinator will s peak with the family 
over the phone to schedule a baseline visit, complete e - consent from the caregiver or guardian , 
and e-assent from adolescents. Copi[INVESTIGATOR_20045]/assent forms will be emailed  to 
participants .  
Table 2 . Type of Measure and Informant  
Screening  
Baseline  
Session 
1-20 
1-Month  
3-Month  
6-Month  
Information Sheet  Information for families before eligibility is determined  P,A      
Five Minute Speech Sample34 
(Primary Outcome Measure)  Research staff reads a brief prompt and then audio records 
a parent describing their child for [ADDRESS_18883] created for study (Fidelity ≥ 90% of 
elements delivered, based on video coding    TD    
EC Acceptability and Feasibility 
Questionnaire  Measures parent and adolescent satisfaction with aspects of 
treatment    P,A
* P,A P,A P,A 
Treatment Adherence:  Attendance  Total number of sessions attended (adherence> 4 sessions)    I    
 
 Families will then be instructed to complet e baseline assessment questionnaires  online through 
RedCap. The baseline visit will be conducted via Zoom for Healthcare. Families will complete a 
family meal which will be recorded and later coded, and interviews.  All families will be mailed  an 
audio recor der to record future EC intervention homework at this time.  Families will opt in for 
text message appointment reminders.  
 Treatment Adherence: Homework 
Completion  Full, partial, and no completion rated (adherence ≥ 90 % 
homework completed)    I    
Eating Disorder Examination35 Structured clinical interview of adolescent eating disorder 
symptoms   A  A A A 
Schedule for Affective Disorders 
and Schizophrenia for School 
Aged Children (6 -18 years)[ADDRESS_18884]  Adolescent report of muscularity -oriented food intake   A  A A A 
Strengths and Difficulties 
Questionnaire - Parent Report37 Parent report of adolescent problem behaviors, anxiety, and 
depression   P  P P P 
Brief Symptom Inventory38 Parent -report of symptoms of psychopathology and distress   P  P P P 
Emotion Regulation 
Questionnaire  (ERQ )[ADDRESS_18885] 
Scale41 Parent -report of caregiving burden of eating disorders with 4 
subscales: nutrition, guilt, dysregulated behavior, and social 
isolation   P  P P P 
Parent Vs. Anorexia Scale42 Parent -report of their level of self -efficacy in the context of 
FBT treatment for AN   P  P P P 
Emotions as a Child Scale43 Adolescents  report on their parent’s typi[INVESTIGATOR_20046] , including unsupp ortive and supportive 
reactions   A  A A A 
Family Meal Observational 
Assessment  Parents and adolescents engage in a video recorded family 
meal  session  involving conversation about the present meal 
and meals in the last week involving happi[INVESTIGATOR_008], sadness, 
anger, and fear. Recordings coded for parent coaching of 
adolescent emotions in response to meal s.  I,A,B
C,P  I,A,
BC,
P I,A,
BC,
P I,A,
BC,
P 
Weekly Homework Task  Parents are asked to practice their EC skills daily by [CONTACT_7661] 
a 5-10 minute “de -briefing” of following select meals. 
Recordings coded for parent coaching of adolescent 
emotions in response to meal s   BC    
Encouragement of Behavioral 
Freedom44 Adolescent report of parental encouragement of behavioral 
freedom   A  A A A 
Multidimensional Assessment of 
Parenting Scale45  Parent report of parenting behaviors including  proactive 
parenting, positive reinforcement, warmth, supportiveness, 
hostility, lax control, and physical control.    P  P P P 
Background Questionnaire  Parent report of family demographics   P  P P P 
Acceptability of Intervention 
Measure  Interventionist report of acceptability   I I* I I I 
Intervention Appropriateness 
Measure  Interventionist ratings of intervention appropriateness   I I* I I I 
Feasibility of Intervention 
Measure  Interventionist rating of feasibility of  intervention   I I* I I I 
Note. A = Adolescent, P = Parent  I = Interventionist, BC = Blind Coder, TD = Treatment 
development t eam, *only administered after session [ADDRESS_18886] -treatment assessment (see Table 2).  
 
Measures:  At each time point, caregivers will complete self -report measures of satisfaction 
with the intervention, parenting behaviors, psychological functioning, levels of EE, levels of 
warmth, and strategies for managing adolescent negative  emotions (60 minutes to complete; 
see Table 2 ). Adolescents will be assessed for their level of AN or AAN symptoms using the 
gold standard for AN assessment;  the EDE.  Adolescents  will also report on parenting behaviors 
and thei r own psychological functioning. These questionnaires best assess the constructs of 
interest and have good reliability and validity in pediatric  AN population. The mechanisms of 
treatment outcome that we are testing are high EE and parental warmth, which w ill be assessed 
by [CONTACT_20065]. Our outcome is adolescent weight restoration 
(≥ 95% expected body weight [EBW] ). Based on prior literature, demographic, medical, and 
behavioral covariates including socioeconomic status, adol escent behavioral functioning, 
caregiver burden, and caregiver psychological and emotional functioning will be assessed in the 
current proposal.  
 
9. DATA ANALYSIS / METHODS  
 
Exploratory Aim: Examine whether the FBT+EC parent group intervention reduces 
EE, increases parental warmth, and improves weight restoration in the RCT. H1a. We will 
have preliminary evidence that families in the FBT+EC group will have l ower levels of EE a nd 
higher parental warmth  than families in the FBT+support group at [ADDRESS_18887] preliminary evidence that EE and parental 
warmth are correlated with weight restoration  at 1, 3, and 6 months. H 1c: We will have 
preliminary evidence that adolescents in the FBT+EC group will demonstrate i mprovements in 
weight restoration compared to children in the FBT+ parent support group at 1, 3, and 6 months.  
 
 
Exploratory Analyses: All analyses will be carried out with missing data assumed to be missing 
at random and handled via maximum likelihood estimation with auxiliary correlates68 within 
Mplus (Version 8) on the full sample (N=50). Bivariate correlations will first be calculated among 
EE, parental warmth, and w eight restoration (measured continuously as mean percentage of 
EBW ) at 1, 3, and 6 months (H 1b). To test whether families in the FBT+EC group will have 
lower levels of EE and higher parental warmth (H 1a) as well as greater improvements in weight 
restoratio n (H1c) than families in the FBT+support group, [ADDRESS_18888] our hypotheses for each outcome. Baseline measures of EE, parental warmth, 
parental psychopathology, length of illness, and % EBW  will be included in the models as  control 
covariates.  
 
Power: Although a pi[INVESTIGATOR_4251], Monte Carlo simulation power calculations showed that, assuming 
N=50, power will be >.80 for between group difference effects of d > 1 for all outcomes (EE, 
parental warmth, weight restoration), assuming  both standardization of analysis variables and 
baseline covariates (EE, parental warmth, parental psychopath ology, length of illness, and 
%EBW), which will explain ( R2 = .35) 35% of response variable noise variance.  
. 
 
10. FACILITIES AND PERFORMANCE SITES  
Recruitment  and all study assessments will be conducted at CCHMC. Due to face -to-face 
restrictions related to COVID -19, our initial efforts of study recruitment and study visits will be 
conducted over the phone and/or via Zoom for Healthcare which is HIPAA compliant. Data 
management will occur at CCHMC. Slack will be used as a data management tool between 
investigators at CCHMC and UGA. No protected health information will be shared over Slack. 
All study videos will be coded by [CONTACT_15957] -Investigator Anne Shaffer at University of Georgia.  Video 
recorded sessions will be transferred onto OneDrive, a secure drive on the CCHMC network. 
[CONTACT_20073]’s laboratory at UGA has the capacity to transfer digital video and audio to secure 
computers and DVD burners for secure physical storage of video data, supported by 
[CONTACT_20066].  Secure wireless connectivity is available. A dedicated 
electronics shop is provided by [CONTACT_20067] a full time information technology (IT) support person dedicated to this 
department. The combination of these information technologies contributes to the potential for 
success by [CONTACT_20068].   
 
11. POTENTIAL BENEFITS  
Participants in this study may benefit from improved family communication and eating disorder 
symptoms. The study is anticipated to support preliminary efficacy of an EC parent skills group 
as an adjunct to FBT. This could lead to improvements in several outcomes for patients who 
receive the EC intervention , including reductions in expressed emotion, and improvements in 
weight restoration. These data could support continued research to refine and adapt EC 
interventions  for adolescents with AN and AAN and their families.   
 
12. POTENTIAL RISKS, DISCOMFORTS, INCONVENIENCES, & PRECAUTIONS  
This is a minimal risk study, a risk that is no greater than that encountered in routine behavioral 
assessment and clinical care. There are no medical risks to study partici pation.  All the 
questionnaires, measures , and interviews  have been used in research, including our own, 
without any reported negative effects; however, it is possible that a small group may feel 
uncomfortable respondin g to questions  or being observed during a family meal interaction.  
 
 
Several precautions will be taken to minimize the risk, discomforts and inconveniences 
associated with this study protocol. In the unlikely event that adolescents and their families feel 
uncomfortable answering questions , they are free to skip questions or questionnaires. Families 
may prefer to not be videotaped for their assessments and they are free to opt out of recording. 
Since the EC intervention is a group, all efforts to maintain con fidentiality will be made but 
cannot be guaranteed in a group setting. All participants will learn about the group and the 
importance of maintaining confidential information inside of the group setting. Outside 
relationships will be discouraged. Families m ay also be inconvenienced by [CONTACT_20069] . If the adolescent or caregiver is particularly distressed, 
appropriate treatment and or referrals can be made by [CONTACT_978], who is a licensed clinical 
psychologist. Notably, because a trained therapi[INVESTIGATOR_20047], there is 
the possibility that confidential information will be discussed. All sessions will be audio recorded 
to ensure treatment fidelity and will be erased after review by [CONTACT_20070]. See section 
14 and 15 regarding how this will be handled.  
 
If any adverse reactions or complications occur as a result of this study, we will report them per 
CCHMC policy.  
  
13. RISK/BENEFIT ANALYSIS  
There is minimal risk associated with stu dy participation. Knowledge gained in this study has the 
potential to improve the treatment of pediatric AN and AAN by [CONTACT_20071],  which would improve weight restoration  
outcomes in this popul ation.   
  
14. DATA SAFETY AND MONITORING  
We expect this study to be no more than minimal risk to participants. The research team will 
monitor for safety and adverse events at each study visit. Specifically, intervention session 
content will be discussed in weekly supervision by t he interventionist with [CONTACT_20073], study Co -
I. The interventionist and research study coordinator will also complete protocol checklists for 
treatment integrity and fidelity. The research study coordinator will review questionna ires for 
completion and review of items related to significant distress or suicidal ideation. We have 
procedures in place to ensure that the research coordinator checks these items immediately 
after completion of the measure and if the items indicate risk,  a clinical psychologist either with 
the eating disorder team or the PI [INVESTIGATOR_20048].  
 If desired, a dministration of the assessment measures and participation will be discontinued 
at parent or patient request. The st udy team will provide referrals as appropriate for treatment 
needs resulting from significant adverse events or psychological issues that exceed the scope 
and/o r intensity of the intervention. Adverse events will be reported to the CCHMC Institutional 
Review Board (IRB) during continuing review, while serious adverse events will be reported to 
the IRB within [ADDRESS_18889] 
(IRB) procedures and guidelines. Raw hard data will be stored in locked areas in the Division of 
Behavioral Medicine and Clinical Psychology and only authorized staff will have access to the 
computer files. Access to original data and study materials will be limited to the investigative 
team. All raw data, including questionnaires and computer files containing data will have 
confidentiality protected with the use of uni que assigned study identifier codes; computer files 
will be password protected. A master file linking the identifying patient information with the study 
ID code will be secured in a password protected file. This master file will be destroyed upon 
 
completio n of the study. Data will be retained until final data analyses are completed; all de -
identified data will then be shredded and destroyed.  Neither names nor identifying information 
will appear in any publication based on this research.  All audio files will  be password protected 
and then deleted after they have been reviewed by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_20049].   
 
Confidentiality will be retained throughout the study related to intervention content, with one 
exception. If the participant provides information abo ut something that might put the participant 
or another person in danger, we are obligated to report this as mandated reporters. This will be 
shared in the consent/assent form.   
 
All study personnel have been trained in data safety and monitoring, privacy and confidentiality, 
minimizing risks related to loss of privacy and confidentiality.  We will closely monitor 
performance of our research personnel to ensure the strictest standards.  Study personnel will 
screen questionnaires for completeness and participa nts will be encouraged to complete 
missing items. If there are any elevations on risk -items, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_20050] a licensed psychologist or a master’s level licensed 
therapi[INVESTIGATOR_541]. Data from each questionnaire will be entered into a Redcap database  and then 
analyzed with SAS , Mplus,  or SPSS . 
 
Because this research study involves payment for participation, we are required by [CONTACT_20072] (IRS) rules to collect and use participant’s social security number (SSN) or 
taxpayer identification number (TIN) in order to track the amount of money that we pay them. 
Unless they have given specific permission for another use of their SSN or TIN related to this 
research study, we will only use the ir SSN or TIN to keep track of how much money we pay 
them and their SSN or TIN will not be used as part of this research study.  
 
16. COST OF PARTICIPATION  
There are no costs for participation in this research study. Participants will be responsible for the  
usual costs of medical care.  
 
17. PAYMENT FOR PARTICIPATION  
Participants will complete [ADDRESS_18890] -treatment 
assessments. Adolescents can earn $100 and caregivers $100 for their participation ($25 at 
each of the 4 -assessments). Families can choose to have separate ClinCards or can be paid on 
one ClinCard together. If they miss one of the [ADDRESS_18891] (ClinCard) and they 
will receive a handout that will explain how to use this card. We will provide them with a card, 
and we will load money onto their card after completion of the baseline visit and after completion 
of the post treatment visit.  
 
18. REFERENCES  
1. Arcelus J, Mitchell AJ, Wales J, Nielsen S. Mortality rates in patients with 
anorexia nervosa and other eating disorders. A meta -analysis of 36 studies. Arch 
Gen Psychiatry. Jul 2011;68(7):724 -731. 
2. Smink FR, van Hoeken D, Hoek HW. Epi[INVESTIGATOR_623], course, and outcome of 
eating disorders. Curr Opin Psychiatry. Nov 2013;26(6):543 -548. 
 
3. Keshaviah A, Edkins K, Hastings ER, et al. Re -examining premature mortality in 
anorexia nervosa: a meta -analysis redux.  Compr Psychiatry. Nov 
2014;55(8):1773 -1784.  
4. Westmoreland P, Krantz MJ, Mehler PS. Medical Complications of Anorexia 
Nervosa and Bulimia. Am J Med. Jan 2016;129(1):30 -37. 
5.        Le Grange D, Eisler I, Dare C, Russell GF. Evaluation of family treatmen ts in 
adolescent anorexia nervosa: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799]. International Journal of Eating 
Disorders. 1992;12(4):347 -357. 
6. Lock J, Agras WS, Bryson S, Kraemer HC. A comparison of short - and long -term 
family therapy for adolescent anorexia nervosa. J Am Acad Child  Adolesc 
Psychiatry. Jul 2005;44(7):[ADDRESS_18892] 
2010;67(10):1025 -1032.  
8. Robin AL, Siegel PT, Koepke T, Moye AW, Tice S. Family therapy versus 
individual therapy for adolescent females with anorexia nervosa. J Dev Behav 
Pediatr. Apr 1994;15(2):111 -116. 
9. Russell GF, Szmukler G I, Dare C, Eisler I. An evaluation of family therapy in 
anorexia nervosa and bulimia nervosa. Arch Gen Psychiatry. Dec 
1987;44(12):1047 -1056.  
10. Le Grange D, Lock J, Agras WS, et al. Moderators and mediators of remission in 
family -based treatment and adol escent focused therapy for anorexia nervosa. 
Behav Res Ther. Feb 2012;50(2):85 -92. 
11. Brown GW, Birley JL, Wing JK. Influence of family life on the course of 
schizophrenic disorders: a replication. Br J Psychiatry. Sep 1972;121(562):241 -
258. 
12. Vaughn C,  Leff J. The measurement of expressed emotion in the families of 
psychiatric patients. Br J Soc Clin Psychol. Jun 1976;15(2):157 -165. 
13. Parker G, Hadzi -Pavlovic D. Expressed emotion as a predictor of schizophrenic 
relapse: an analysis of aggregated data.  Psychol Med. Nov 1990;20(4):961 -965. 
14. Magana AB, Goldstein JM, Karno M, Miklowitz DJ, Jenkins J, Falloon IR. A brief 
method for assessing expressed emotion in relatives of psychiatric patients. 
Psychiatry Res. Mar 1986;17(3):[ADDRESS_18893]. Jul 1996;20(1):[ADDRESS_18894] early response in family -based treatment for anorexia 
nervosa? Behaviour research and therapy. 2013;51(11):762 -766. 
17. Caspi A, Moffitt TE, Morgan J, et al. Maternal expressed emotion predicts 
children' s antisocial behavior problems: using monozygotic -twin differences to 
identify environmental effects on behavioral development. Developmental 
psychology. Mar 2004;40(2):149 -161. 
 
18. Le Grange D, Hoste RR, Lock J, Bryson SW. Parental expressed emotion of 
adolescents with anorexia nervosa: outcome in family -based treatment. Int J Eat 
Disord. Dec 2011;44(8):[ADDRESS_18895]. Apr 2000;27(3):288 -296. 
20. Taboas WR, McKay D, Whiteside SP, Storch EA. Parental involvement in youth 
anxiety treatment: conceptual bases, controversies, and recommendations for 
intervention. J Anxiety Disord. Mar 2015;30:16 -18. 
21. Wei C, Kendall PC. Parental involvement: contribution to childhood anxiety and 
its treatment. Clin Child Fam Psychol Rev. Dec 2014;17(4):[ADDRESS_18896] Rev. Jan 2018;26(1):46 -52. 
 
23. Kaye WH, Fudge JL, Paulus M. New insights into symptoms and neurocircuit 
function of anorexia nervosa. Nat Rev Neurosci. Aug 2009;10(8):573 -584. 
24. Eisler I , Dare C, Hodes M, Russell G, Dodge E, Le Grange D. Family therapy for 
adolescent anorexia nervosa: the results of a controlled comparison of two family 
interventions. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Sep 2000;41(6):727 -736. 
25. Hughes E, Sawyer, S., Accurso, E ., Singh, S., & Le Grange, D. . Predictors of 
early response in conjoint and separated models of family -based treatment for 
adoelscent anorexia nervosa. Behavior Research and Therapy. under review.  
26.      Rienecke RD, Accurso EC, Lock J, Le Grange D. Exp ressed Emotion, Family 
Functioning, and Treatment Outcome for Adolescents with Anorexia Nervosa. 
Eur Eat Disord Rev. Jan 2016;24(1):43 -51. 
27. Schultz D, Jaycox LH, Ayer L, et al. Improving Outcomes for Children Exposed to 
Violence. 2017.  
28. Chronis -Tuscano A, Lewis -Morrarty E, Woods KE, O’Brien KA, Mazursky -
Horowitz H, Thomas SR. Parent –Child Interaction Therapy With Emotion 
Coaching for Preschoolers With Attention -Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder. 
Cognitive and Behavioral Practice. 2// 2016;23 (1):62 -78. 
29. Herbert SD, Harvey EA, Roberts JL, Wichowski K, Lugo -Candelas CI. A 
randomized controlled trial of a parent training and emotion socialization program 
for families of hyperactive preschool -aged children. Behav Ther. Jun 
2013;44(2):302 -316. 
 
30. Coatsworth JD, Duncan LG, Greenberg MT, Nix RL. Changing Parent's 
Mindfulness, Child Management Skills and Relationship Quality With Their 
Youth: Results From a Randomized Pi[INVESTIGATOR_20051]. J Child Fam Stud. 
Apr 01 2010;19(2):[ADDRESS_18897] SS, Kehoe CE, Harley AE. Tuning in to teens: Improving parental 
responses to anger and reducing youth externalizing behavior problems. J 
Adolesc. Jul 2015;42:[ADDRESS_18898] SS, Wilson KR, Harley AE, Prior MR, Kehoe C. Tuning in to Kids: 
improving emotion socialization practices in parents of preschool children --
findings from a community trial. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. Dec 
2010;51(12):[ADDRESS_18899] SS, Harley AE. Tuning in to Teens: Improving Parent 
Emotion Socializati on to Reduce Youth Internalizing Difficulties. Social 
Development. May 2014;23(2):[ADDRESS_18900] 1991;39(1):25 -31. 
35. Fairburn CG CI. The eating disorder examination. In: Fairburn CG, Wilson GT, 
eds. Binge Eating: Nature, Assessment, and Treatment. [LOCATION_001], NY: Guilford 
Press. 1993;12th ed.  
36. Kaufman J, Birmaher B, Brent D, et al. Sch edule for Affective Disorders and 
Schizophrenia for School -Age Children -Present and Lifetime Version (K -SADS -
PL): initial reliability and validity data. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry. Jul 
1997;36(7):980 -988. 
37.  Goodman R . Psychometric properties of the strengths and difficulties 
questionnaire.  Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent 
Psychiatry . Nov 2001; 40(11 ):1337 -1345.  
38.  Derogatis L. Brief symptom inventory: Adminstering, scoring and procedures 
manual (3 rd ed.). . National Computer Systems. 1993.  
39.  Ioannidis CA, Siegling AB. Criterion and incremental validity of the emotion 
regulation questionnaire. Frontiers in Psychology . Mar  2015;( 11):6:247.  
40. Simons JS, Gaher RM. The Distress Tolerance Scale: Development and 
validation of a self -report measure. Motivation and Emotion. Jun 2005;29(2):[ADDRESS_18901] Scale (EDSIS) for carers of people with 
eating disorders. Health Qual Life Outcomes. Apr 21 2008;6:28.  
42.  Rhodes P, Baillie A, Brown J, Madden S. Parental efficacy in the rip family -based 
treatment of anorexia: Preliminary development of the parents versus anorexia 
scale (PVA). European Eating Disorders Review. Nov-Dec 2005;13(6):399 -405. 
43. Guo J, Mrug S, Knight DC. Factor structure of the Emotions as a Child Scale in 
late adolescence and emerging adulthood. Psychological Assessment.  Sep 
2017 ;29(9):1082.  
44.  Parker G, Tupling H, Brown LB. A parental bonding instrument. British Journal of 
Medical Psychology . Mar 1979;52(1):1 -0. 
45.  Parent J, Forehand R. The Multidimensional Assessment of Parenting Scale 
(MAPS): development and psychometric properties. Journal of Child and Family 
Studies . Aug 2017;26(8):2136 -2151. 
 
 
 
 