PROTOCOL  
 
TITLE:  USING LATENT VARIABLES AND DIRECTLY OBSERVED TREATMENT TO  
IMPROVE THE DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF DEPRESSION AMONG  
HEMODIALYSIS PATIENTS 
 Date:  October 3, [ADDRESS_404829] Number : [STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
ABSTRACT  
 
Depression is present in about 20 -30% of hemodialysis patients and is associated with 
morbidity and mortality .  However, depression is inadequately diagnosed and treated among 
dialysis patients.  This is due in part to the overlap between depressive symptoms (e.g. appetite 
change, trouble sleepi[INVESTIGATOR_007], feeling tired) and symptoms related to per sistent metabolic 
derangements in hemodialysis patients (e.g. nausea, nocturnal cramps, feeling washed out after 
treatment).  The overlap between depressive symptoms and dialysis -related complications 
makes it difficult to diagnose and therefore to treat depression.  In addition, prescription of 
antidepressant medication may increase an already high pi[INVESTIGATOR_327796].  Moreover, the evidence base to guide depression treatment among hemodialysis 
patients is limited.  In our previous work, we developed methods to use latent variables and 
structural equation modeling to isolate depressive symptoms.  Other investigators have 
demonstrated that directly observed treatment enhances the effectiveness of tuberculosis and 
HIV treatment.  
 
We now propose a cross -sectional study (Phase 1) followed by a randomized controlled trial 
(Phase 2) at 17 dialysis facilities.  The cross -sectional study will involve assessments of 
depressive symptoms (using the PHQ -9 screening instrument) as well as dialysis -related 
complications (KDQOL) in about 1083 patients.  We will then use structural equation modeling 
to develop and validate a hemodialysis -specific PHQ -9 (hdPHQ -9) that will isolate depressive 
symptoms.  The trial will involve 216 patients with confirmed depression who will be randomly assigned to (a) directly observed weekly antidepressant treatment with fluoxetine or (b) referral to their nephrologists, their primary care physicians, or nearby [CONTACT_272679].  The 
primary outcome of the trial wil l be remission of depression at [ADDRESS_404830] has the potential not only to impro ve 
the diagnosis and management of depression among hemodialysis patients but also to improve their morbidity and mortality.  Furthermore, it may serve as a model for future studies to isolate 
symptoms among overlappi[INVESTIGATOR_327797].  
 
 
Participating dialysis facilities  
 
FACILITY NAME  [CONTACT_327818] -
STANDING?  FOR 
PROFIT?  NUMBER OF 
PATIENTS  % FEMALE  % AFRICAN -
AMERICAN  
CDC Eliza Bryant  No Yes [ADDRESS_404831] our trial at the 17 facilities affiliated with the Centers for Dialysis Care 
(CDC), a greater Cleveland dialysis chain .  The median facility size is 92, 47% of patients are 
female, 48% are African- American, and 3% are Hispanic .  These facility and patient 
characteristics are roughly comparable to national  figures, except that there are more African 
American and fewer Hispanic dialysis patients in the Cleveland area compared to the United 
States as a whole.  We have previously conducted several NIH -funded randomized 
controlled trials at these facilities.43-46 
 
Study design over view and timetable  
 
  BASELINE            FINAL  
  EVALUATION             
          If high    if depression  
           PHQ -9   diagnosis  
 
 
 
 Aim A            Aim B    Aim C  
 After  a development and training period,  we propose a cross- sectional study followed by a 
randomized controlled trial.  The cross -sectional study will involve assessments of depressive 
symptoms (PHQ -9) and quality of life  for 1083 patients .  These data will be used to address 
Aim A (diagram above).  The trial will involve 216 patients with DSM5 -confirmed depression 
who will be assigned to 2 groups using envelopes for randomization.   
• Approximately 108 patients will be randomized into the intervention/fluoxetine group over 
the duration of the entire study.  Patients randomized to fluoxetine will be prescribed 2 
weeks  of short -acting fluoxetine 20 mg and will be instructed to take the prescription 
daily for 2 weeks .  After the approximately 2 weeks of daily fluoxetine is completed, 
patients will receive a filled prescription of  long- acting fluoxetine 90 mg to be taken 
weekly (o bserved during dialysis) for [ADDRESS_404832].   
 
• Approximately 108 patients will be randomized into the control/ referral group over the 
duration of the study.  Patient s randomized to referral will be informed about their 
diagnosis and asked to follow -up with their nephrologists or primary care physicians and 
will also be given a list of nearby [CONTACT_272679].  Details about their study PHQ -9 
KDQOL  DSM5 
Structured 
Interview  Fluoxetine 
vs. 
Referral  PHQ -9 
KDQOL  
DSM5 Interview  
evaluation will be shared  with their nephrologists, primary care physicians, and any 
mental health providers.  
 
• After [ADDRESS_404833] assessed 
the validity and responsiveness of the hemodialysis -specific PHQ -9 (hdPHQ -9), it would 
be premature to use this new instrument for screening or for determining response to 
treatment.  
 
Year  1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 5 5 5 5 
Quarter  1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 
DEVELOPMENT & TRAINING  
  Finalize study protocol, instruments  
  Train study personnel  
  Refine conceptual model   
x 
x 
x  
x 
x 
x  
 
                  
RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED TRIAL  
  Recruit eligible patients  
  Baseline evaluation    
  
x 
x  
x 
x  
x 
x  
x 
x  
x 
x  
x 
x  
x 
x  
x 
x  
x 
x  
x 
x  
x 
x  
x 
x  
x 
x  
x 
x  
x 
x    
  Fluoxetine vs. referral trial    x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x    
  Final evaluation     x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x   
ANALYSIS & MANUSCRIPTS                      
  Develop, validate new screening instrument                  x x   
  Impact of directly observed weekly fluoxetine  
  Responsiveness of new instrument                   x x 
x  
x 
 
 
 
 
 
Screening & Study sample  
 Patients will be screened from the previously mentioned CDC dialysis units.  Appropriate 
approval including credentialing, electronic medical record (Clarity) training and access, as well 
as the appropriate letter of support from the CDC medical director have all been secured.  Study 
team staff will access the Clarity system remotely at MetroHealth.  Staff will use the chart 
abstraction form to look for eligible participants (see study sample above). A note will be made 
in the patient’s Clarity chart deeming them “eligible” or “ineligible” based on screening.  For Aim 
A, we will restrict the study to patients age >  [ADDRESS_404834] been on dialysis for > 3 months, 
speak English, are not cognitively impaired, and are not currently being treated for depression.  
We will exclude children age < [ADDRESS_404835] dialysis complications . We will also 
exclude patients with the following comorbid conditions: Alzheimer’s, Dementia, Bipolar 
Disorder, Psychotic Disorder , Substance Use Dependence.  This will be assessed by [CONTACT_327801]’s medication list.   Eligible participants will 
be assigned a study ID.   A screening interview form will be partially completed to note the study 
ID and dialysis shift.  In this way, no Prot ected Health Information (PHI) will leave MetroHealth.  
The research assistant will take the coded screening form to the dialysis facility and log onto Clarity to confirm patient identity and initial eligibility.  The research assistant will then approach 
the patient and ask if they would be willing to answer a few brief screening questions to see if 
they qualify for a research study.  Interested participants will be asked the questions in the 
screening interview.  The screening interview will exclude non-English speaking patients  
because we are not budgeted to have study documents in both English and Spanish.  It will also  
exclude cognitively impaired patients because they will be unable to reliably report on 
depressive symptoms and dialysis complicati ons.
[ADDRESS_404836] completed their part in the study 
and will receive a $[ADDRESS_404837].  Only de -identified data (utilizing the subject ID) will be 
transported back to MetroHealth for data entry.  
  
 
Patients with a PHQ -9 score > [ADDRESS_404838] any comorbid conditions  
that would make them unable to comply with study procedures.   Patients diagnosed as 
depressed based on the MINI assessment will then be asked to participate in Phas e 2 of the 
study (the randomized controlled trial).  Willing participants will be consented and subsequently 
randomized into one of the 2 following groups:  
  
Fluoxetine (Intervention) group  
 
The study psychiatric nurse practitioner will write  a prescription for 2 weeks ( 14 days)  of short -
acting fluoxetine [ADDRESS_404839] them to 
take one capsule daily  for the next 14 days .  The nurse practitioner will meet with patients at  day 
3, end of week  1, and end of week  2 to assess adverse effects (such as insomnia, headache, 
nausea, weakness) , adherence,  and response to treatment based on interviewing the patient 
and re-administering the PHQ -9.  After consultation with Drs. Sehgal and Sajatovic , the nurse 
practitioner may encourage adherence (if patient has missed fluoxetine doses at home), or 
discontinue fluoxetine (if moderate- severe adverse effects).  After the successful completion of 
the 2 weeks of daily fluoxetine, a prescription of weekly  (90 mg) fluoxetine will be ordered by [CONTACT_327802].  The weekly fluoxetine will be 
filled and transported to the participant’s upcoming dialysis visit by [CONTACT_327803] .  The participant will be instructed by [CONTACT_327804]/ long- acting once  weekly at the dialysis facility while observed by [CONTACT_327805] 5- [ADDRESS_404840] dose of daily 20mg fluoxet ine.  If a 
patient misses the dialysis treatment that fluoxetine should be taken at, the nurse practitioner or other study team member  will remind him/her by [CONTACT_327806].  The nurse 
practitioner will then meet with patients every two weeks  for the next 10 weeks  and make 
necessary medication adjustments.    
 
Beginning with daily short acting fluoxetine and then transitioning to weekly long- acting 
fluoxetine is the recommended approach for  using long acting fluoxetine.
34,36  A recent  
systematic review concluded that 12 weeks is an appropriate period of time to determine if 
depression treatment is effective  in kidney disease patients .28  If a patient is suicidal at any time 
during the trial (e.g. based on response to the last question in the PHQ -9 or as ascertained from 
other interactions with the patient), we will immediately administer the MINI suicidality module.  
If the participant is determined to have low risk, we will notify the dialysis facility social worker or charge nurse and document in the progress note.  If the participant is determined to have 
moderate to high risk, we will call the study nurse practitioner  on study cell (216 -339-9244) or 
[CONTACT_327821]  (if needed)  then notify the dialysis facility social worker and/or charge nurse so 
they can arrange for urgent evaluation and treatment.  This will also be documented in the 
progress note.  
 
Patients who discontinue fluoxetine due to severe adverse effects will be referred to their 
nephrologists or primary care physicians  for consideration of alternative depression treatments.  
Based on studies in the general population, we estimate that about 65% of  patients will respond 
to daily fluoxetine and that 80 -90%% of responders will continue to do well with weekly 
fluoxetine (at 90 mg or, if necessary, 180 mg).
34-36,40  We further estimate that about 5% of all 
fluoxetine group patients will need to discontinue fluoxetine because of adverse effects.34-36,40  
Because of the short duration of the trial, we will not simultaneously provide other pharmacologic or non -pharmacologic treatments for depression.  Moreover, long- acting 
fluoxetine is the only treatment that allows for weekly directl y observed administration.  At the 
end of 12 weeks, participants will be given a filled prescription of 90 mg fluoxetine for 4 
additional weeks.  They will also be given a set of instructions to follow up with their 
nephrologists or primary care physicians for decisions about ongoing depression treatment.  
 
Referral  (Control)  group 
 
Patients will be informed about their diagnosis and asked to follow -up with their nephrologists or 
primary care physicians and will also be given a list of nearby [CONTACT_272679].  A written summary of their study evaluation will be shared with their nephrologists and primary care 
physicians.  A research assistant will see referral group patients at the same frequency that the 
nurse practitioner will see fluoxetine group patients (i.e. day 3 and weeks 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10).  At 
these visits, the resear ch assistant will administer the PHQ -9 and inquire about any depression 
treatment that the patients’ providers have initiated (such as specific antidepressant medications 
or cognitive behavioral therapy).  If a patient is suicidal at any time during the tr ial (e.g. based on 
response to the last question in the PHQ -9 or as ascertained from other interactions with 
patient), we will immediately administer the MINI suicidality module.  If the participant is 
determined to have low risk, we will notify the dialys is facility social worker or charge nurse and 
document in the progress note.  If the participant is determined to have moderate to high risk, 
we will call the study nurse practitioner  on study cell (216- 339-9244) or [CONTACT_327821]  (if needed)  
then notify the dialysis facility social worker and/or charge nurse so they can arrange for urgent 
evaluation and treatment.  This will also be documented in the progress note.  
   
  
 
Data elements  
 
Baseline (week 0) and final (week 12) data on patient characteristics , PHQ-9 and KDQOL will 
be obtained by a research assistant .  Patients will be interviewed during dialysis to obtain the 
data elements listed below.  In previous trials, we found that many  patients are unable to 
complete self -administered questionnaires such as the PHQ -9 because of visual problems or 
low health literacy.  Other patients are not allowed to move their dominant arm during dialysis 
treatment because tubing from the dialysis mac hine is connected to blood vessels in the arm.  
The combination of sitting next to the patient and the ambient noise in the dialysis facility allows 
for a relatively private interview.  If patients prefer, they may be interviewed in a separate room 
following completion of dialysis treatment.  It is not possible to blind study personnel to 
assessments of depression treatment, adherence, response, and adverse effects during the trial (day 3, weeks 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10).  Patients will be given a $[ADDRESS_404841] 
been either developed or utilized for the purposes of this study:  
 
 
 
 
Form Name  [CONTACT_327819] (via 
CDC medical 
record)  
Screening 
Interview  Interview with 
patient to determine final eligibility  for 
Phase [ADDRESS_404842] phase of the 
study if eligible (1083 patients)  Both Consent  After eligibility for 
study confirmed  
Enrollment 
Checklist  Checklist to ensure 
completion of all baseline tasks  Both Administrative 
Document  After baseline 
surveys are complete  
Phase 2 
consent form  To consent patients 
to second phase of 
the study if eligible 
(216 patients)  Both Consent  After Mini 
reviewed and 
diagnosis of 
depression 
assessed  
Patient 
Instructions for Daily Fluoxetine To direct 
intervention patients in first part of filling 
prescription and 
taking fluoxetine 
daily Interventio
n Patient 
Information  After 
randomization into intervention 
group  
Daily Adherence 
Form  To use to assess 
adherence to daily 
fluoxetine  Interventio
n Administrative 
Document  Visits 1, 2, 3 &  4 
(Fluoxetine)  
Patient 
Instructions for Weekly 
Fluoxetine To direct 
intervention patients 
in 2nd part of filling 
their prescription 
and taking fluoxetine 
(weekly)  Interventio
n Administrative - 
Patient Info  After daily 
fluoxetine is completed (Visit 
4) 
Advanced 
Practice Nurse 
Study Note  To track the 
patient's response to fluoxetine treatment; 
to record any 
adverse events  Interventio
n Source 
Document  Visits 1,2, 3, 4, 5, 
7,9,11,13  
Patient 
Instructions for 
Control Group  To let patients  know 
that they may be depressed and to 
seek outside help Control  Patient 
Information  After 
randomization 
into control group 
(Visit 1)  
List of Mental 
Health Providers for 
Control Group  To be used in 
tangent with Patient 
Instructions for 
Control Group  Cont rol Patient 
Information  After 
randomization 
into control group (Visit 1)  
Referral Group 
Follow Up 
Checklist  To record ongoing 
PHQ -[ADDRESS_404843] ongoing 
PHQ -9 scores and 
observations of fluoxetine 
administration  Interventio
n Source 
Document  Visit 1 -13 
Patient Letter 
for End of Study (Intervention 
Group)  To be used after 
study is over to 
direct patients to 
speak with their 
physician to 
continue treatment  Interventio
n Patient 
Information  Visit 13: after all 
follow up surveys have been 
completed  
Close -out 
Checklist  To capture 
administration of all follow up  surveys, 
instructions & 
payment  Both Data Entry Form  Visit 13  
PHQ -9 9-item questionnaire 
that asks about 
depressive 
symptoms  Both Questionnaire  Baseline, Visits 
2,3,4,5,7,9,11,13  
Dialysis 
Symptoms 
Index  Addresses 
complications in 
dialysis  Both Questionnaire  Baseline and 
Final (Week 12)  
Kidney Disease 
Quality of Life  Addresses quality of 
life and 
complications in 
dialysis  Both Questionnaire  Baseline and 
Final (Week 12)  
MINI (Mini 
International 
Neuropsychiatri
c Interview)  Gold standard for 
depression 
diagnosis  Both Structured 
Interview  Baseline and 
Final (Week 12)  
  
 
 
Patient characteristics.  Captured by “Chart Abstraction Eligibility .” Included on these 
forms are demographic variables to be obtained by [CONTACT_327807], gender, 
race/ethnicity . Medical variables will be  cause of renal failure, number of years  on dialysis, and 
possible depressive treatment and/or medications .18,59 Also, a “S creening interview ” will be done 
to ensure cognitive ability and confirm no current depression treatment.   
 
Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ -9).  The PHQ -9 is a 9 -item questionnaire that asks 
about depressive symptoms (listed in section 3.01).  In the general population, the PHQ -9 has 
good internal reliability (Cronbach’s α  of 0.89) and validity (sensitivity and specificity both 88% 
for major depression diagnosed by [CONTACT_327808] ).26  A small study of dialysis 
patients found similarly high sensitivity and specificity (both 92%).3  However, i t is not 
surprising that PHQ -9 scores correlate strongly with structured interview diagnoses of 
depression because both address the same 9 symptoms .  The main difference between 
them is that the structured interview tries to determine if symptoms may be due to another 
psychiatric condition such as bipolar disorder.  We selected the PHQ -9 (rather than other 
depression screening instruments) because it  is brief, is commonly used, and will allow us to 
build on our previous work on symptom overlap in multiple sclerosis.[ADDRESS_404844] for depression diagnosis is 
a structured diagnostic interview based on DSM5 criteria.  This semi -structured interview 
involves an introductory overview followed by [CONTACT_327809] I 
psychiatric diagnostic classes.  The output of  the interview is the presence or absence of the 
disorder s being considered.
63,64  As in our previous work, we  propose to utiliz e the Mini 
International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) as opposed to other structured interview 
instruments because t he MINI is much shorter but still reliable and valid.47,65  The MINI has 
excellent inter -rater agreement (kappa 0.84) and diagnostic accuracy (sensitivity 0.96 and 
specificity 0.88 compared to much longer diagnostic interviews).66  In addition, the diagnostic 
stability of the MINI is superior to unstructured assessments conducted by [CONTACT_15098].65  
 
Depression treatment, adherence, response, and adverse e ffects .  To be captured 
by a combination of: “Enrollment Checklist”; “Daily Adherence Form”; “Fluoxetine Group Follow 
Up Checklist”; “Control Group Follow Up Checklist”; “Progress Note.” The psychiatric nurse practitioner will meet with fluoxetine patients  at day 3 and at weeks 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 during 
the trial to assess adherence, response to treatment, and adverse effects (see section 4.05 for details).  Adherence will be assessed by [CONTACT_21173][INVESTIGATOR_327798].  This questionnaire has been used to assess adherence to 
antidepressants and is correlated with pharmacy fill records.
67,68  Patients who miss two or more 
daily doses will be categorized as nonadherent.69,70  Note that adherence will only be assessed 
in this  manner when fluoxetine patients are taking short -acting fluoxetine since administration of 
long- acting fluoxetine will be directly observed by [CONTACT_327810].    Adverse effects will 
be assessed by [CONTACT_327811].   The nurse practitioner will complete a written study note 
listing the  fluoxetine dose, adherence, response, and adverse effects.  
 
In a similar manner, the research assistant will meet wi th referral patients at day 3 and at weeks 
1, 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 during the trial.  The research assistant will inquire about any depression 
treatment that has been initiated by [CONTACT_6904]’s nephrologist, primary care physician, or other 
provider.  The r esearch assistant will complete a study note listing any  depression treatment 
including new medication or cognitive behavioral therapy . 
 
 
For detailed visit flow, please see Attachment A .   
 
 
Training and intervention fidelity  
 
Quality control and fidelity d uring the trial  will be maintained through a combination of i nitial 
trainings,  weekly meetings, monitoring of study notes , and direct observation .  Initial 
training will take place over multiple days addressing specifics related to  research ethic s, the 
study protocol, psychiatric interviewing and dialysis unit etiquette.  All staff will be CREC 
certified  and receive additional training on the importance of confidentiality, specific to research 
in a community setting.  The psychiatric interview training will be cover issues related to inter -
rater reliability, as well as how to handle various situations when dealing with depressed 
patients (specifically the topic of suicidality).  The other training will be an introduction to dialysis 
unit etiquette and safety that will include a site visit to a local unit.   As the study progresses, t he 
research assistants and nurse practitioner will meet weekly with other research team members 
to review study progress , adherence to the protocol,  and address any chal lenges in carrying out 
study tasks.  [CONTACT_327822]  will review all study notes to identify any deviations from specified 
tasks.  To further ensure intervention fidelity and consistency across research assistants, she 
will also directly observe a randomly selected 5% of research assistant interactions with 
patients.  She will use a fidelity checklist to verify that specific tasks are carried out properly.  In 
a similar manner, [CONTACT_327823] or Sajatovic will observe a randomly selected 5% of nurse 
practitioner int eractions with patients.  Any problems noted from review of study notes or from 
direct observation will be addressed at our weekly group meetings.  If a research assistant or 
the nurse practitioner is unable to complete the trial, we will identify and train a replacement.  
 
Data and safety monitoring plan  
 
We propose several methods to  ensure safety and to monitor  our intervention.  First, our 
intervention is theoretically sound and based on our prior work and that of others.  Second, we 
will refine and pre -test our approach prior to beginning the clinical trial.  Third, [CONTACT_327823] will 
meet weekly with other study personnel in order to trouble- shoot any potential areas of concern 
regarding the safety of the study protocol.  Fourth, all study personnel  will undergo rigorous  
training.  Fifth, we will closely monitor study personnel  through a combination of weekly 
meetings, monitoring of study notes, and direct observation .  Sixth, project data will be reviewed 
quarterly by [CONTACT_327812].  Any indications of potential threats to patient safety or a 
pattern of refusal by [CONTACT_327813] a careful review conducted by [CONTACT_3476].  When appropriate, 
involvement o f the patient’s nephrologist or dialysis facility medical director, reporting to our  
Institutional Review Board, reporting to End Stage  Renal Network  9 (a regional Medicare quality 
oversight organization) , and adjustment of the project protocol will occur.   Although risk to 
subjects is considered low, any adverse events will be reported to our Institutional Review 
Board and the National Institutes of Health . 
 
Confidentiality  
We will do several things to protect the participant's privacy.  First, we are assigning study IDs to 
all data so that PHI is not being regularly written down or collected throughout the study.  Also, 
we will be utilizing the lock box in order to ensure confidential transport of consent forms and 
clincard receipts.  Third, if a participant wishes to discuss the study in a more private area than the dialysis chair, we will offer to wait until their dialysis session is over and move to a private 
room in the unit.  All data at Metro will be stored on a secured drive, will be password protected and will have no PHI (other than the Key in RedCap).
  
ATTACHMENT A:  VISIT FLOW SHEET  
VISIT TYPE  TASKS  
PRE-SCREEN  • Identify CDC unit(s) to begin project at  
• Introduce study staff to CDC unit staff  
 
SCREENING  
(Part 1 -remote at 
Metro)  • Screening for that unit to take place off site by [CONTACT_464]  
• Complete Chart Abstraction Eligibility Form  
• Enter note in CDC research tab that patient was “successfully 
screened”  or a “screen fail”  
• Weekly report of potentially eligible patients will be generated at Metro through use of CDC Clarity EMR  
• Participant is assigned a study ID to be used in future visits  
 
SCREENING  
(Part 2 -at dialysis 
facility)  • Research assistants (RA) will bring coded list of eligible patients and 
blank study documents  
• RA will log into CDC Clarity to confirm patient ID (via note in 
research tab)  
• RA will begin approaching participants based on screening report  
• Screening Interview  administ ered by [CONTACT_327814] (Part 1 -
at dialysis facility)  • Eligible participants will be asked to be in the “Phase I” of the study  
• Obtain Informed consent #1; given a copy of consent, another stays 
at unit; a nother copy goes back to Metro  
ENROLLMENT (Part 2 -
at Metro)  • Consented patients’ name [CONTACT_327820]  
• Baseline info entered into master tracking spreadsheet  
BASELINE  (day 1)  Baseline surveys via patient interview  
• PHQ -9 
• KDQOL  
Score PHQ -9 at unit (other survey does not need to be scored at that time)  
• If Score is less than 10, patient receives CLINCARD, is thanked for participation  
• If Score is greater than or equal to 10, participant is told that a nurse practitioner will be back  on next dialysis day to conduct the 
MINI interview  
• If patient is suicidal based on PHQ -9 RA immediately performs the 
MINI suicidality module.  *If participant determined to have low risk the RA will notify the social worker at dialysis facility that this occurred and that it appears to be low risk; documen t in progress 
note. **If participant determined to have moderate to high risk, 
call study NP  on study cell (216 -339-9244) or Dr. S ajatovic  (if 
needed); then contact [CONTACT_327815]; then note in progress 
note  
• Surveys, Clincard receipt, and consent are t ransported back to 
Metro in lock box  
 
BASELINE  PC enters all info to date into main tracking database at Metro  
BASELINE  (part 2 -at 
dialysis facility)  Nurse practitioner conducts MINI interview (on next dialysis day)  
• MINI is scored and assessed by [INVESTIGATOR_680]  
• If NOT diagnosed as depressed, participant is given Clincard and 
thanked for their time  
• If diagnosed as depressed, participant is asked to be in Randomized 
Controlled Trial (RCT)  
• If patient consents to RCT, they are then randomized by [CONTACT_327816]  
• If patient is randomized to Fluoxetine (intervention group), the NP 
orders prescription of daily (20 mg) fluoxetine from the 
MetroHealth Research Pharmacy (2 weeks worth)  
BASELINE  (part 2 -at 
Metro)  PC or RA creates participant folder (all de -identified info)  
• Enrollment checklist  
• Blank PHQ -9 forms  
• Daily Adherence Form  
• Follow Up Checklists  
• Progress Notes  
• Participant Calendar  
• Close -Out Checklist  
VISIT 1  
FLUOXETINE  
(DAY 1)  • NP or study staff pi[INVESTIGATOR_327799]  
• NP transports prescription to dialysis unit to meet with participant  
• NP fills pi[INVESTIGATOR_327800]  
• Participant is given Daily Fluoxetine Instructions  
• Participant calendar is generated based off first dose  
VISIT 1   
REFERRAL  
(Day 1)  • Participant given referral group instruction sheet  
• Participant given list of nearby [CONTACT_327817] 2  
FLUOXETINE  
(DAY 3 of Daily)   • NP meets with participant  
• Checks for adverse events ( Progress Note ) 
• Administers Daily Adhere nce Form  
• Administers PHQ9  
• If patient is suicidal based on PHQ -9, NP immediately performs the 
MINI suicidality module.  *If participant determined to have low risk the NP will notify the social worker at dialysis facility that this occurred and that it appears to be low risk; document in progress 
note. **If participant determined to have moderate to high risk, 
contact [CONTACT_327815]; then note in progress note  
• Clincard payment  
• PHQ9, Daily Adherence Form & study note back to Metro before next check i n 
• Chart relevant info in CDC Clarity EMR  
VISIT 2  
REFERRAL  
(DAY3)  • RA meets with participant  
• Administers Control Group Follow Up Checklist  and inquires re: any 
depressive treatment (medication or cognitive therapy)  
• Administer PHQ9   
• If patient is suicidal b ased on PHQ -9, RA immediately performs the 
MINI suicidality module.  *If participant determined to have low 
risk the RA will notify the social worker at dialysis facility that this 
occurred and that it appears to be low risk; document in progress 
note. **I f participant determined to have moderate to high risk, 
call study nurse practitioner  on study cell (216 -339-9244) or [CONTACT_327824]  (if needed); then contact [CONTACT_327815]; then note in 
progress note  
• PHQ9 & Study notes back to Metro before next check in 
VISIT 3  
FLUOXETINE  
(End WEEK 1 Daily)  • NP meets with participant ; Fluoxetine Group Follow Up Checklist  
• Checks for adverse events & response to treatment (Study note)  
• Administers Daily Adherence Form  
• Administers PHQ9  
• If patient is suicidal based on PHQ -9, NP immediately performs the 
MINI suicidality module.  *If participant determined to have low risk the NP will notify the social worker at dialysis facility that this occurred and that it appears to be low risk; document in progress 
note. **If partic ipant determined to have moderate to high risk, 
contact [CONTACT_327815]; then note in progress note  
• Clincard payment  
• PHQ9, Daily Adherence Questionnaire & study note back to Metro 
before next check in  
• Chart relevant info in CDC Clarity EMR  
VISIT 3  
REFERRAL  
(End WEEK 1)  • RA meets with participant; Completes Control Group Follow Up 
Checklist  
• Inquires re: any depressive treatment   
• Administer PHQ9  
• If patient is suicidal based on PHQ -9, RA immediately performs the 
MINI suicidality module.  *If participant determined to have low risk the RA will notify the social worker at dialysis facility that this 
occurred and that it appears to be low risk; docume nt in progress 
note. **If participant determined to have moderate to high risk, 
call study nurse practitioner  on study cell (216 -339-9244) or [CONTACT_327824]  (if needed); then contact [CONTACT_327815]; then note in 
progress note  
• PHQ9 & Study notes back to Metro before next check in  
VISIT 4  
FLUOXETINE  
(End WEEK 2 
Daily/Begin Weekly)   
• NP meets with participant  
• Completes Fluoxetine Group Follow Up Checklist  
• Checks for adverse events (Study note)  
• Administers Daily Adherence Form  
• Administers  PHQ9  
• If patient is  suicidal based on PHQ -9, NP immediately performs the 
MINI suicidality module.  *If participant determined to have low risk the NP will notify the social worker at dialysis facility that this 
occurred and that it appears to be low risk; document in progres s 
note. **If participant determined to have moderate to high risk, 
contact [CONTACT_327815]; then note in progress note  
• Clincard payment  
• PHQ9, Daily Adherence Questionnaire & study note back to Metro 
before next check in  
• Chart relevant info in CDC Clarity EMR  
VISIT 4  
REFERRAL   
(WEEK 2)  • RA meets with participant; Completes Control Group Follow Up 
Checklist  
• Inquires re: any depressive treatment   
• Administer PHQ9  
• If patient is suicidal based on PHQ -9, RA immediately performs the 
MINI suicidality module.  *If participant determined to have low 
risk the RA will notify the social worker at dialysis facility that this occurred and that it appears to be low risk; document in progress 
note. **If participant determined to have moderate to high risk, 
call study nurse practitioner  on study cell (216 -339-9244) or [CONTACT_327824]  (if needed); then contact [CONTACT_327815]; then note in 
progress note  
• PHQ9 & Study notes back to Metro before next check in  
Visit 5  
Fluoxetine  
(week 3)  • NP fills new prescription for 90 mg (weekly Fluoxetine) prior to visit  
• NP meets with participant and observes first dose of weekly 
treatment  
• Study note back to Metro  
• Chart relevant info in CDC Clarity EMR  
VISITS 7, 9, 11, 13 
FLUOXETINE  
(weeks 5, 7, 9, 11)  
 • RA observes ongoing doses of weekly fluoxetine on odd weeks (i.e. 
weeks that participant is not meeting with NP)  
• Completes Fluoxetine Group Follow Up Checklist  
VISITS 6, 8, 10, 12 
FLUOXETINE  
(Weeks 4, 6, 8, 10)  • NP observes participant administration of fluoxetine  (Fluoxetine 
Group Follow Up Checklist ) 
• Checks for adverse events & response to treatment ( APN Study 
Note)  
• Administers PHQ -9  
• If patient is suicidal based on PHQ -9, NP immediately performs the 
MINI suicidality module.  *If participant determined to have low 
risk the NP will notify the social worker at dialysis facility that this 
occurred and that it appears to be low risk; document in progress 
note. **If participant determined to have moderate to hig h risk, 
contact [CONTACT_327815]; then note in progress note  
• Clincard payment  
• PHQ9 & study note back to Metro  
• Chart relevant info in CDC Clarity EMR  
VISITS 5,7, 9, 11   
REFERRAL  
(Weeks 4, 6, 8, 10)  • RA meets with participant  
• Inquires re: any depressive tr eatment (Completes Control Group 
Follow Up Checklist ) 
• Administer PHQ9  
• If patient is suicidal based on PHQ -9, RA immediately performs the 
MINI suicidality module.  *If participant determined to have low 
risk the RA will notify the social worker at dialysis facility that this occurred and that it appears to be low risk; docume nt in progress 
note. **If participant determined to have moderate to high risk, 
call study nurse practitioner  on study cell (216 -339-9244) or [CONTACT_327824]  (if needed); then contact [CONTACT_327815]; then note in 
progress note  
• PHQ9 & Study notes back to Metro  
VISIT 1 4 
FLUOXETINE  
(WEEK 12)  • NP observes participant administration of fluoxetine (completes 
Fluoxetine Group Follow Up Checklist ) 
• Checks for adverse events & response to treatment ( APN Study 
Note ) 
• NP fills prescription (at MH Research Pharmacy) fo r 4 more weeks 
of 90 mg fluoxetine and give to patient  
• Patient is given participant instructions  
• PHQ -9, KDQOL & MINI  administered  
• Final Clincard payment  
• Complete Closeout Checklist  
• Chart relevant info in CDC Clarity EMR  
• Surveys & study note back to Metro  
 
VISIT 13  
REFERRAL  
(WEEK 12)  • RA meets with participant  
• Inquires re: any depressive treatment ( Control Group Follow Up 
Checklist ) 
• PHQ -9, KDQOL & MINI  
• If patient is suicidal based on PHQ -9, RA immediately performs the 
MINI suicidality module.  *If participant determined to have low 
risk the RA will notify the social worker at dialysis facility that this 
occurred and that it appears to be low risk; docume nt in progress 
note. **If participant determined to have moderate to high risk, 
call study nurse practitioner  on study cell (216 -339-9244) or [CONTACT_327824]  (if needed); then contact [CONTACT_327815]; then note in 
progress note  
• Complete Closeout Checklist  
• Surveys & study note back to Metro  
 
 
 
 
 
  