 
 
Asthma in Families Facing Out -of-pocket Requirements With Deductibles  
 
 
Protocol  
 
 
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
 
 
Updated August 16, 2018
 
RESEARCH STRATEGY  
 
A. BACKGROUND  
Asthma is a major cause of preventable disease burden (PCORI Methodology Standard RQ-3).  More than [ADDRESS_228426] asthma, including 8% of adults and 9% of children, with significant racial and income disparities 
in prevalence.1-3  Morbidity from asthma is substantial, causing 10.5 million healthcare visits, 479,000 hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], 
and 3,100 deaths in 2009 .1  Low income and racial/ethnic minority patients are more likely to experience adverse 
outcomes, leading to four times as many hospi[INVESTIGATOR_192331], and this 
gap has been increasing.4-7 Guidelines  recommend controller medications suc h as inhaled corticosteroids ( ICS), 
leukotriene antagonists (LTA), or combination ICS and long -acting β2-agonist s (LABA) that are proven to improve  asthma 
control an d quality of life, prevent exacerbations, and reduce need for oral corticosteroid s, emergency department ( ED) 
visits , hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], and deaths due to asthma .8-18 However, many patients do n ot use daily controller medications, 
with 14 -20% of individuals not filling prescribed controller medications once.[ADDRESS_228427] -sharing through h igh-deductible health plans (HDHPs). 
Compared with traditional plans, HDHPs have lower premiums but subject most services to annual deductibles of at 
least $1000.   HDHP membership  more than quadrupled from 2006 to 2015 and 46% of workers now have HDHPs.23  
HDHPs with associated Health Savings Accounts (HSAs) enable enrollees to use pre -tax dollars to pay for medical care .  
To qualify to include an HSA, HDHPs must have federally -regulated minimum annual deductibles (in dividual/family: 
$1300/$2600), and must include all care under the deductible except for select preventive services.24 As of early 2013, 
over 15 million people had HSA -HDHPs, with rates of uptake increasing rapi[INVESTIGATOR_375], especially among large employers.25, 26  
HDHPs are also increasingly prevalent among enrollees in the ACA’s health insurance exchanges.[ADDRESS_228428] found that higher 
out-of-pocket (OOP) costs for bronchodilators were associated with decreased use for adults and children;37, 39 our 
recent work found that higher  copayments did not lead to decreased albuterol use for children relative to those  without 
a copa yment change, but did result in higher OOP costs  (Figure 1) .40   
Families  are increasingly concerned about OOP costs that can strain family budgets and lead to intra -familial trade -
offs.  OOP costs from one family member can lead to delayed/forgone care for other  family members,[ADDRESS_228429] 
that parents prioritize their children’s health care over their own when faced with financial pressures.43, 44  Our research 
found that both adults and children are at increased risk for delayed/forgone care due to cost when faced with high 
deductibles, and that the risk is greater for healthy adults in families with chronically ill children, and for healthy child ren 
in families with chronically ill adults.[ADDRESS_228430] .59  We found that a switch 
to a HDHP was associated with  
fewer ED visits53 and 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], especially for low 
socioeconomic status (SES) 
enrollees ;[ADDRESS_228431], cervical, and colorectal 
cancer, all of which were exempt 
from the deductible;48, 54 and 
pronounced reductions in 
colonoscopy among low SES 
members .57, 58 Other early studies 
of HDHPs without HSAs 
demonstrated decreased utilization of both appropriate and inappropriate services,60-62 including prescription drugs.63-67  
HDHP plans are also associated with greater patient out -of-pocket spending for care for families with chronic 
conditions.68  Patients with asthma are at particular risk from deductible costs, as controller and rescue medications are 
expensive branded drugs, costin g $140 -$307 a month for some inhaled steroids and $[ADDRESS_228432] been associated with decreased 
adherence for medications for asthma72, 73 and other chronic conditions.72-75  In survey studies, w e found that families in 
HDHPs were more likely than those in traditional plans to report health care -related financial burden and 
delayed/forgone care due to cost for both adu lts and children.45, 46, 68, [ADDRESS_228433] -sharing is grea ter for low -income populations ,79  
who are more likely to experience delayed/forgone care due to cost in HD HPs.[ADDRESS_228434] on adherence fo r low -income 
patients.83   However, one of our studies found that both lower and higher -income populations experience reductions in 
utilization in HDHPs.45   
Increasing adoption of Preventive Drug Lists (PDLs) has the potential to preserve use of important asthma 
medications by [CONTACT_192371] -HDHPs.  Insuran ce plans increasingly seek to develop value -based health insurance 
designs (VBID) that include low or no cost -sharing for high -value services.84-87  In 2008, 19% of large employers used 
VBID strategies for medications in their health insurance offerings.88  The strategy of exempting medications from the 
deductible as part of a PDL is becoming increasingly popular among employers and health plans.89  PDLs are lists of 
medications for primary and secondary prevention (including asthma controllers and rescue medications) that are 
exempt from the deductible and available at reduced or no cost.90, [ADDRESS_228435] improvements in adherence and reductions in OOP costs,88, 92-97 no change in adverse outcomes,96 and 
attenuation of racial/ethnic disparities.[ADDRESS_228436] also found this pattern in our ongoing national study of diabetes and HDHPs ( 1U58DP02719 ).  
However, in other studies, exempting medications from the deductible or eliminating copayments did not improve or 
Figure 1. Impact on OOP costs from a co-pay increase for albuterol inhalers
$0$5$10$15$20$[ADDRESS_228437] per child dispensed Albuterol
Exposed Trend (exposed)
Controls Trend (control)
Exposed group had increased co-pays after a policy change mandating 
branded CFC-free albuterol inhalers. Control group maintained prior 
generic co-pay levels.Policy change
preserve utilization of medications,[ADDRESS_228438] of PDLs in HSA -HDHPs.   
Addressing gaps in evidence (RQ-1) on strategies to support patients in HDHPs is a priority area for PCORI .[ADDRESS_228439] looked at medication s globally or for conditions that are largely asymptomatic, such 
as hypertension.88, 92-97, 99, 102-104 Only a few such studies focus on medications for symptomatic conditions like asthma;56, 
72, 73, 85, [ADDRESS_228440] HDHP and VBID research has focused on individual adults.  
However, many people obtain insurance as a family, and over 60% of HDHP enrollees are in family plans.[ADDRESS_228441] barriers to needed asthma care (RQ-3). [ADDRESS_228442] barriers to obtaining needed asthma care  (RQ-6).  Patients with asthma desire  relevant 
information about the potential health and financial consequences of the multiple, complex insurance benefits options 
before them.  Forward -looking employers, health insurers, and policy makers who wish to minimize unintended 
consequences of HSA -HDHPs are considering nuanced VBID strategies like PDLs to improve outcomes among patients 
with chronic conditions. Our research will evaluate these two “natural experiments” – employer -mandated switches to 
HSA-HDHPs and addition of PDLs that exempt key as thma medications from cost sharing  – which increasing numbers of 
patients  are facing.  Letters  of support from the Asthma an d Allergy Foundation of America (AAFA) , the Northeast 
Business  Group on Health  (NEBGH) , and A merica’s Health Insurance Plans (AHIP)  demonstrate t he relevance of our 
proposed research to patients and stakeholders .    
C. APPROACH  
Specific Aims  
Asthma is one of the most common serious chronic diseases of adults and children in the [LOCATION_002], affecting 18.[ADDRESS_228443] -sharing for these services.  One common example is a PDL that can accompany HSA -
HDHPs, which exempts certain chronic medications from the deductible to promote adherence.  PDL’s have become 
increasingly prevalent in HSA -HDHPs offered by [CONTACT_192372], and many PDLs include asthma controller and rescue 
medic ations.   Evidence suggests only a small adherence benefit when VBID reduces out -of-pocket (OOP) costs for 
already low -cost preventive medications in traditional plans without  high deductibles.  However, under  HSA-HDHPs, 
where OOP costs are higher and the p otential reduction by a PDL much more meaningful, we lack evidence on the 
response to PDL cost -sharing reductions among asthma patients.  With the increasing prevalence of HSA -HDHPs, PDLs 
have the potential to improve controller medication adherence for bo th adults and children, which could improve 
asthma outcomes and reduce downstream costs.  Lower asthma cost burden could mitigate cost -related trade -offs for 
families in HSA -HDHPs who must balance health care and other costs within a family budget.   
In this project, we intend  to evaluate the impact of two important developments in the health insurance landscape, HSA -
HDHPs and PDLs, on medication use, clinical outcomes, and patient experiences for ad ults and children with asthma.  
We will take advantage o f a rolling cohort of over 621,000 adults and 310,000 children with asthma who receive 
employer -sponsored coverage from a large national insurer between 2004 and 2017.  We will employ a rigorous quasi -
experimental interrupted time -series (ITS) and differen ce-in-differences (DiD) design s to examine the effect of being 
switched by [CONTACT_192373]-HDHPs without PDLs to HSA-HDHPs with PDLs compared to controls who remain in 
HDHPs without PDLs .  We will compare changes in medication use and patient -centered  clinical outcomes (asthma -
related ED visits and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]) for adults and children and within families.  Qualitative interviews with patien ts 
with asthma in HDHPs will  provide more in -depth patient -reported data on health care decision making and e xperiences 
in these plans, which will inform quantitative analyses.  The overarching goal of this research is to provide needed 
evidence – including data gathered directly from patients – on whether pairing PDLs with HSA -HDHPs can mitigate cost 
barriers an d improve patient -centered outcomes for adults and children with asthma.  Our Specific Aims are:  
1. To understand health care decision making and experiences of families with asthma under  HSA-HDHPs and PDLs  
2. To examine the impact of HSA -HDHPs with and without PDLs on use of asthma controller and rescue medications, 
and on adverse clinical outcomes (asthma -related ED visits and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]), overall and for vulnerable 
subgroups ( low-income and rac ial/ethnic minority patients)  
3. To examine the extent to which the response to HSA -HDHPs and PDLs is affected by [CONTACT_192374] a or other chronic conditions  
4. To examine the impact of HSA -HDHPs with and without PDLs on out -of-pocket (OOP) costs for patients and families  
with asthma    
With input from  patients wi th asthma and other stakeholder partners , the proposed project will focus  on patient -
centered outcomes related to asthma care in new insurance designs. This research will meet a pressing need to 
understand the impact of a readily adoptable health insurance innovation that has major potential to improve asthma 
medication adherence  and outcomes. Findings will advance the goal of developi[INVESTIGATOR_192332] -value health care services and improve  clinical outcomes while avoiding burdensome costs for 
families.   
Overview  of Study P rotocol  (RQ-2)  
This project will employ both quali tative and quantitative methods , based on theoretical models adopted from Levy and 
Meltzer's model of the effect of health insurance on health outcomes,[ADDRESS_228444] used in our prior work  (CI-1,4): (1) ITS with 
comparison series design, the most rigorous quasi -experimental design for causal inference;111 (2) a population whose 
employers offer only a single health plan type, minimizing self -selection bias; (3) matching groups on the functional form 
of the baseline trend, recently shown to approximate est imates from RCTs;112 and (4) a rigorous and validated two-level 
propensity score matching approach that matches on both individual and employer baseline characteristics  and includes 
family -level characteristics.[ADDRESS_228445]: 1) patients with 
asthma switched by [CONTACT_192375] -HDHPs without  PDLs; and 2) patients switched from HSA-
HDHPs without PDL s to HSA -HDHPs with  PDLs. Patients in each group will be propensity -matched to patients with 
asthma who remain by [CONTACT_192376] .  
Conceptual Model Underlying Study H ypotheses  
The theoretical underpi[INVESTIGATOR_192333]'s conceptual model of the effect of health 
insurance on health outcomes,110 and known causal pathways linking asthma controller medication adherence to short -
term complications.8-12  In our model (Figure 2),  level of medication cost -sharing for patients with asthma is determined 
by [CONTACT_192377], as follows: 1) HSA-HDHPs without PDLs  - full cost -sharing for controller and rescue medications; 2) HSA-
HDHPs with PDLs  - no cost -sharing for controller and rescue medic ations; and 3) traditional plans  - three -tiered 
copayments for controller and rescue medications.  
We hypothesize that 
higher cost -sharing in 
HSA-HDHPs without PDLs 
leads to decreased 
adherence to controller 
medications and 
decreased rescue 
medication use (offset by 
[CONTACT_192378]).  Reductions 
in controller medication 
use can increase asthma 
exacerbations and short -
term complications such 
as ED visits and 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602].  Because 
a patient’s O OP costs 
contribute to total family 
OOP cost burden, which 
can strain family budgets 
and lead patients to avoid 
or defer care and further 
decrease medication use , 
OOP costs are an 
additional outcome of 
interest . We hypothesize 
that lower cost -sharing 
due t o PDLs, on the other 
hand, should lead to increased controller medication adherence, less need for rescue medications, fewer asthma 
complications, and lower OOP costs and family cost burden.  
Sources of D ata (IR-1) 
The project’s four -year duration will enable  us collect data from qualitative interviews on patient -reported experiences 
(Aim 1) that will inform quantitative analyses (Aims 2 -4) and will allow us to accrue an adequate sample size of patients 
who experienc e the “intervention” of switching to an HSA-HDHP with or without a PDL and have one to two years of 
follow up.   
Aim 1.   We will collect patient -reported data through in -depth qualitative interviews with patients with asthma or 
parents of children with ast hma who are enrolled in HDHPs  (with and without PDLs) or traditional plans .  Interviews will 
be conducted by [CONTACT_192379] -ended questions designed to take approximately  45 
minutes .  Interviews will be audiotaped and transcribed.  There will be two sources of data:   
1)  Interviews of health plan members in non -group and employer -sponsored plans, including those identified from 
national employer accounts from  Harvard Pi[INVESTIGATOR_192334] (HPHC) which has a partnership with the large 
national health insurer whose data will be used in Aims 2 -4.  HPHC is a large non -profit health plan  based in New 
England which  partners with the national health plan  to provide services to members living outside New 
England.   
2) Interviews of subjects recruited through the AAFA, a national non-profit organization founded in 1979 to 
control and prevent asthma and allergic conditions through patient education, public a wareness, and 
support for research (see Section F .1).   
Figure [ADDRESS_228446] of HSA-HDHPs with and without PDLs 
relative to traditional plans.  Green arrows represent patterns of medication use, with 
wider arrows representing greater use. 
Asthma 
patientHSA-HDHP with PDL
Rescue 
medication 
use
Controller 
medication 
adherence↓ Short-term 
complications
↑ Total family 
OOP 
expendituresRescue and 
controller 
medications freeAsthma 
patientTraditional planRescue 
medication 
use
Controller 
medication 
adherenceShort-term 
complications
Total family 
OOP 
expendituresCo-pays for all 
medications
Asthma 
patientHSA-HDHP without PDL
Rescue 
medication 
use
Controller 
medication 
adherence↑ Short-term 
complications
↑↑ Total family 
OOP 
expendituresDeductible 
applies to all 
medications
Aims 2 -4 will use 14 years (2004 -2017) of enrollment and benefits data, insurance claims, standardized cost data, 
geocoded census data, and credit report SES variables  from a large  U.S. commercial health plan obtained through 
Optum . We will have detailed benefit i nformation for ~80% of employer groups obtaining coverage from the health 
plan . For employers with missing deductible levels,  we have developed an imputation  algorithm that  has 97.0% 
sensitivity and 96.2% specificity  (MD -2).  The health plan links insurance claims to de -identified credit report data, 
including novel indicators of individual -level SES (household income and net worth) and imputed information on 
ethnicity based  on member surname (MD -2, see ‘Methods to monitor and address missing data’, below ). Data from this 
insurer  have been used in published health services research studies72, 114, 115 and the study team has experience 
examining a range of health care outcomes using these data.  59, 116-121  The research team’s extensive experience using 
these data will enable us to efficiently create analy tic cohorts and study variables, building upon previously developed 
methods. We will leverage existing health plan data from 2004 -2014  that the study team has used in other projects, and 
add dat a through 2017 in December 2017  (see Optum letter s). 
Descripti on of Comparators  (RQ-5)  
This project will  assess the impact of the “intervention” of being switched to an HSA-HDHP with a PDL, relative to a 
control group  that was not switched and remained in an HSA-HDHP, and of being switched to an HSA-HDHP without a 
PDL relative to a control group that was not switched and remained in a traditional plan.   Comparator groups include:  
HSA -HDHP with PDL : enrollment in an HSA-qualified HDHP with a PDL that exempts a sthma controller and rescue 
medications from the deductible, after being switched by [CONTACT_192380]-HDHP without PDL or from a 
traditional plan. There is limited data on the effectiveness of HSA -HDHPs with PDLs on asthma outcomes, despi[INVESTIGATOR_192335] 19% among HSA -HDHP enrollees based on the national health plan to be studied.  Other VBID 
programs have shown modest increases in adherence to chronic medications .88, 92-97   
HSA -HDHP without PDL :  enrollment in an HSA-qualified HDHP without a PDL, after being switched by [CONTACT_192381] 
a traditional plan.  Those who enroll in HSA -HDHPs without PDLs and do not switch will also be used as a control  group  
for those who switch from HSA -HDHPs without PDLs to HSA -HDHPs with PDLs .  Evidence in adult populations suggest a 
reduction in adherence to asthma medications for those enrolling in HSA -HDHPs without PDLs.72, 73  In 2015, the 
prevalence of HSA -HDHPS among covered workers  was 15%.23 
Traditional plan : enrollment in a plan with no or a low (<$5 00) deductible through an employer who offers only one 
plan. Fifty -four percent of covered workers have traditional plans, with a baseline proportion of days covered ( PDC) for 
asthma medications  of 46% .74    
Study P opulation  (PC-2) (See section D  below  for further detai l) 
The Aim [ADDRESS_228447] of  adults  with  asthma and parents of children  with asthma . Eligible participants 
will be those  who are currently enrolled in employer -sponsored and non -group health insurance plans ( high -deductible 
plans  with and without a PDL , or traditional plans ).  Participants will be drawn from two different populations . First, we 
will recruit members of a health plan in order to ensure representation of patients through their me mbership in  HSA-
HDHP s with and without PDLs . Second, we will  recruit additional patients with asthma and their caregivers through 
AAFA in order to ensure representation of patients who have other  health insurance carriers.  
The health plan population will be identified through  enrollment and claims data  from  HPHC  among non-group plans 
and large national employer accounts . HPHC offers HSA -HDHPs with the same standardized, federally mandat ed benefits  
as the national health plan used in Aims 2 -4, as well as a PDL containing  similar medications , including asthma controller 
and rescue medications .  Eligible p atients will include adults aged 18 -64 with a diagnosis of asthma  and/or a  child with 
asthma .  Using methods from  our previous asthma studies,19, 40, [ADDRESS_228448] 
one inp atient , ED,  or outpatient claim in the prior y ear with a diagnosis of asthma based on the following International 
Classification of Diseases, 9th edition (ICD -9) codes  (up through 2015): 493.XX  and ICD-10 codes  (2015 and after) : J45.2x, 
J45.3x, J45.4x, J45.5x, J45.90x, J45.990, J45.991, J45.998.  We will select patients who have been enrolled in an 
employer -sponsored  or non -group market  HSA-HDHP with or without a PDL, or a traditional plan without a high 
deductible , for the prio r year .  We will identify  other family members with asthma sharing the same in surance plan .  
Among those eligible in ea ch sub -group outlined in Table [ADDRESS_228449] up to 140 from each cell to 
send a recruitment mailing /email , for a total of up to 660 patients or parents invited to participate .   
The AAFA population will be recruited through posting s to AAFA’s Asthma Online Community, Educational Support 
Group, email list serv, Facebook page, newsletter s, flyers, and/or other c ommunication channels . These posts will include 
a description of preliminary eligibility criteria  (i.e. have a diagnosis of asthma or are parents of children with asthma who 
currently have a n employer -sponsored or non -group commercial plan ).  
Both the HPHC recruitment mailing /email  and AAFA recruitment messaging  will invite potential participants to complete  
a pre -screening questionnaire  to confirm eligibility, either by [CONTACT_192382], a secure web application for 
data capture. The questionnaire will assess  insurance plan type, asthma diagnoses in the family, as well as other 
sociodemographic characteristics . The study team will schedule interviews with eligible participants, selecting 
participants to ensure diversity of socioeconomi c status, race/ethnicity, geographic location and asthma severity. 
Interviews will be conducted to reach the target distribution o f sub -groups outlined  in Table [ADDRESS_228450] incentive of $50 for completed interviews.  
Table 1 : Targeted study sample for interviews  
Traditional plan  HDHP  
Total  With PDL  Without PDL  
Adult with asthma  6 6 6 18 
Parent of child with asthma  6 6 6 18 
Adult with asthma who also has  a child with asthma  6 6 6 18 
Total  18 18 18 54 
 
For Aims 2 -4, the study population will be drawn from 14 years of data from a large  U.S. commercial health plan with 
membership in  all 50 states  and annual enrollment of ~ [ADDRESS_228451] of adults 
aged 18 -64 years and children  aged 4 -17 years with asthma in a baseline year while insured in a traditional plan; all 
subjects must have continuous insurance coverage with pharmacy benefits for at least [ADDRESS_228452].  A primary purpose of the pre period is to ensure precise 
matching between groups on both the level and trend in key baseline characteristics (e.g., employer characteristics, 
demographics, utilization pattern s, etc.).  Our difference -in-difference analyses will include annual -to-annual 
comparisons (baseline to follow -up year 1, baseline to follow -up year 2, etc.).  This will allow intuitive comparisons such 
as “relative to controls, adherence among HSA -HDHP me mbers with PDLs increased by 4% in follow -up year 1 compared 
to baseline, but by [CONTACT_6492] -up year 2, adherence had increased by 11% compared to baseline.”  We have used this 
approach in a variety of studies49, 57, 58, [ADDRESS_228453] definition will include patients with intermittent asthma  as well as those with persistent 
asthma , for whom controller medications are recommended.  Subgroup analyses will focus on the subset of patients 
who meet the HEDIS definition of persistent asthma ( ≥ 1 ED or inpatient visit with asthma as the principal di agnosis , ≥4 
outpatient visits with any asthma diagnosis, or ≥4 asthma drug dispensing events in the baseline year) . 
Eligible employers are those that offer only one plan  type  in a given benefit year: 1) traditional HMO/PPO/POS plans 
(deductibles <$ 1000, co payments of <$[ADDRESS_228454] services, tiered copayments for medicines); 2) HSA -HDHPs without 
PDLs; or 3) HSA -HDHPs with PDLs.  We will select “full -replacement” employers that replace a traditional plan with an 
HSA-HDHP  without PDL, or replace an HSA -HDHP wi thout PDL with an HSA -HDHP with PDL,  for all employees at a given 
point in time; matched comparison employers will include those that keep all employees in their prior plan. Including 
only full -replacement employers is a key strategy used in multiple previ ous studies to reduce member self -selection 
bias.47-59, [ADDRESS_228455] contemporaneous enrollment in traditional plans also mandated by [CONTACT_192383]; index dates will 
be assigned to be the same as matched intervention enrollees. We will also include matched controls who  remain in 
HSA-HDHPs without PDLs.  To reduce bias due to dropout, we will censor both HDHP and control patients together when 
either one drops out, and weight the remaining population  to retain its baseline demographic and clinical profile .125  We 
estimate that there will be 621,481 adults and 310,741 children with asthma from 2004 -2017 who will meet our 
inclusion criteria: 18,000 asthma patients in HSA -HDHPs without PDLs, 4,222 in HSA -HDHPs with PDLs, and 910,000 in 
traditional plans.  
Outcomes  
Aim 1  qualitative interviews will assess  patient and family experiences a cross a number of domains related to asthma 
health care decision making and outcomes in HDHPs  (RQ-6, PC -3).  These domains have been selected based on patient 
concerns and interests exp ressed in our prior surveys, qualitative interviews , and focus groups w ith HDHP members and 
asthma patients;45, 68, 77, 126 suggestions from AAFA co-investigator Meryl Bloomrosen;  and postings from readers of [CONTACT_192435]’s asthma blog (url: http:// asth.ma ) (RQ-6).[ADDRESS_228456]’s Stakeholder Advisory Board and Patient and Family Research Council.   Given the limitations of claims data 
for understanding the perceptions and experiences of patients, these  patient -reported qualitative outcomes will provide 
complementary , in-depth insight into decision making about  health and financial outcomes that matter most to 
patients . See Appendix for the draft interview guide.  Area to be explored will include:  
1. Understanding and perceptions of insurance benefits  (understanding cost -sharing requirements, especially for 
asthma medications , awareness of having a PDL , perceptions about PDL usefulness for asthma medications)  
2. Impact of cost barriers on health care use  for asthma , especially medications  (decision making around delayin g 
or forgoing care due to cost and for which types of services, patient -defined adverse c onsequences related to 
asthma care and disease burden ) 
3. Financial burden of asthma care  (OOP  cost burden from asthma care,  other unmet medical or non -medical 
needs due to paying for asthma care , other patient -defined adverse  consequences, strategies to reduce OOP  
barriers for asthma care , experiences discussing cost barriers with providers)  
4. Intra -fami lial trade -offs (impact  on asthma care needs, other  family members’ medical and non-medical needs ) 
Interviews will also explore non -financial barriers to adherence faced by [CONTACT_192384], such as low parental 
expectations for symptom control, concer n about side effects, competing household priorities , and lack of routines for 
medication administration.[ADDRESS_228457] focus es on these patient -centered, clinically -relevant 
outcomes  (RQ-6), and will not focus on total costs to employers and the health care system.   
1. Adherence to controller medications (Aims 2 -3):  We will assess adherence to guideline -recommended asthma 
controller medications, including ICS, LTA, or ICS -LABA, which have been sho wn to reduce asthma morbidity and 
adverse outcomes.[ADDRESS_228458] to copayments in traditional plans.  We will measure : 1) PDC, the proportion of 
days that members have their medication available per month. Proportion of days covered is calculated based 
on the days’ supply in each pharmacy fill, spread over the days following the fill. Previous studies have used 
proportion of days covered as a valid measure o f adherence that is associated with better clinical outcomes  (IR-
4).19, 129 2) medication discontinuation, defined as experiencing a ga p of more than [ADDRESS_228459] 180 days of continuous treatment (i.e. with no gap in 
availability greater than 60 days).  Claims -based measures such as these have been shown to be valid measures 
of adherence (IR -4).130 
Because  PDLs are not standardized nationally, there is some variation among health plans in the specific types of 
drugs included.   From a review of several other insurers’ and employers’ PDLs, those that include asthma 
medications cover both controllers and beta agonists/rescue medications .90, 131-133  However, some  of these  PDLs 
include a few  less commonly used inhaled corticosteroids which are not included in the PDL  that we propose to 
study.  To address this variation, in addition to measuring  adherence to asthma controller medications generally , 
we will also  measure adherence to the specific controller medications i ncluded in the PDL and  adherence to the 
sub-set of controller medications that are not included i n the PDL  (Aerospan, Arnuity ellipta, Asmanex HFA, 
Aerobid, Azmacort) . 
 
2. Use of asthma rescue medicatio ns (Aims 2 -3): We will assess use of albuterol and levalbuterol inhalers, the 
primary asthma rescue medications prescribed to patients, which are subject to the dedu ctible in HSA -HDHPs 
without PDLs, free in HDHPs with PDLs, and subject to copayments in traditional plans.  All albuterol and 
levalbuterol inhalers are brand -name [CONTACT_192430] 200 puffs each.  We will exclude nebulized versions as 
these are predominant ly used by [CONTACT_192385]. As in our prior 
study,40 we will measure the standardized number of inhalers dispensed per month based on National Drug 
Code (NDC) in pharmacy claims.  Given the inter -relationship between rescue and con troller medication use, we 
will also measure the ratio of controller medications to total asthma medications, a metric for which higher 
values are associated with better asthma control and lower rates of asthma -related ED visits.134, 135  
3. Use of spacers and nebulizer machines  (Aims 2 -4): Based on input  from patients and stakeholders, and with 
additional input from questions from added questions in the qualitative interview guide in response, we will 
assess changes in the number of spacers and nebulizer machines received by [CONTACT_27457], based on claim s 
data.  We will measure changes in receipt of spacers and nebulizer machines after a switch to an HSA-HDHP vs. 
remaining in a traditional plan to see if changes in the cost -sharing for these devices leads to a decrease in 
receipt and an increase in OOP co sts to families.  
4. Asthma -related  ED visits and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602] (Aim s 2-3): As a measure of potentially avoidable short -term 
complications, we will measure asthma -related ED visits and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_192336] a primary ICD-10 
diagnosis code for asthma .   
5. OOP health care costs  (Aim 4) : We will calculate consumer price index (CPI) -adjusted OOP costs for asthma 
medicat ions and other health services, summing deductible, co -pay, and coinsurance amounts , aggregated into 
annual measures.  Financial burden due to  OOP costs will be defined as annual family OOP costs as a percent of 
family income, with cutpoints of >5% and >10% to indicate financially burdensome OOP costs.136-[ADDRESS_228460] ors an d Covariates  
Table 2 shows the main predictors and covariates 
we will use in the proposed study for  propensity 
matching to create study cohorts  (CI-1, 4-5), 
predict ing or adjusting outcomes, or  stratifying 
analyses.  Our primary predictor variables inc lude 
study period and insurance type. Study period  
indicates the one -year period before or up to three 
years after  the index date. Insurance type includes: 
1) HSA -HDHP without PDL; 2), HSA -HDHP with PDL; 
and 3) traditional plan.  
Other co -variates include  asthma severity in the 
baseline period using the HEDIS definition for 
persistent asthma (see above under Study 
Population ), and using chronic oral corticosteroid 
therapy (180+ days in the prior year) or any use of 
omalizumab in the baseline ye ar to define severe 
asthma .  To estimate co -morbidity, we will use the 
well-established Johns Hopkins Adjusted Clinical 
Groups (ACG) scores140, [ADDRESS_228461] COPD as a co -morbidity, as 
there can be overlap with COPD and asthma, and 
use of similar medications .  
A unique innovation of our study is the availability 
of data linkages  (IR-2) with  consumer data from a 
major credit reporting company linked to insurance 
claims from our data vendor, Optum. Consumer 
data elements include total household income, net 
worth, and race/ethnicity.   We will  combine self -reported race/ethnicity data from cred it card and loan applications 
with  data from Optum on  surname [CONTACT_192431]/ethnicity from census data.[ADDRESS_228462] for confounding will include sex and age; 
state /region  of residence; individual versus family plan; baseline number of outpatient visits, presen ce of an inpatient 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], and total expenditures; employer size (number of employees); and average employer baseline 
expenditures per capi[INVESTIGATOR_17399]  (CI-1, 4-5).   
Using methods from our prior family -level studies,50, [ADDRESS_228463] and used for individual -level propensity matching and analyses .  Patients 
with individual coverage will be considered a family of one.  Family -level  variables include : number of family members; 
mean age of children in the family; mean age of adults; baseline mean family ACG score; number of family members 
with asthma; and number of asthma and other medications used by [CONTACT_192386], and numbe r of ED visits and 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_192337].  
Our study population includes  health plan members working for employers that either switched to an HSA-HDHP  
without PDL or HSA -HDHP with PDL,  or remained in a traditional plan  or an HSA-HDHP withou t PDL , respectively,  for all 
employees. While this minimizes member -level selection, employer -level selection could still bias results. We will 
therefore use a validated and rigorous employer - and individual -level  propensity score classification/matching a pproach  
(CI-1, 4-5)148-151 that is superior to a single -level matching technique.113 For employer -level propensity matching , 
potential predictors of an employer HSA -HDHP switch in our propensity score models will include employer size 

category; baseline level and trend of total per capi[INVESTIGATOR_192338]; baseline l evel and trend of 
outpatient, ED, and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_192339]; median employee age; median employee ACG score; and percentage of 
employees who are women, in family plans, and living in lower SES neighborhoods (Table 2). We will perform this 
employer -level  match separately for each intervention group of interest (HSA -HDHPs with and without PDLs) in order to 
generate each comparison with the control group remaining in traditional plans  or HSA -HDHPs without PDLs . 
Intervention and control groups will be matche d based on their baseline characteristics when both were in the same 
type of plan .  We will set p<0.05 as a cutoff for including predictors and use backwards selection to choose a 
parsimonious model, testing for significant effects on remaining predictors when one is eliminated. Following methods 
in our ongoing work, we will stratify e mployers based on resulting propensity scores into quartiles. We will then perform 
individual -level propensity matching within each quartile (below) to develop a multiple control groups for each 
intervention group.  
Within employer propensity quartiles, w e will create closely matched control groups using individual -level propensity 
score matching  (CI-1, 4-5),[ADDRESS_228464] propensity score caliper (0.[ADDRESS_228465] deviation of the logit of the pooled 
baseline propensity score).152  Use of a co mparison group matched at both employer - and individual -level will generate 
study cohorts with nearly identical employer/member demographics and baseline health care trends, offering a further 
degree of control for any potential changes that may influence specific study outcomes.57, 111, 153-156 
Methods to monitor and address missing data (MD - 1-3, 5)  
We have identified the following 5 variables as exhibiting data missingness (MD -1) in our dataset for this study:  
▪ Variable 1: Geocoded poverty level  
▪ Variable 2: Geocoded education level  
▪ Variable 3: Member -level income level  
▪ Variable 4: Member -level net worth  
▪ Variable 5: Member -level deductible Level  
Missing poverty, ed ucation, income, and net worth data:  We will use 3 methods to accommodate missingness  (MD - 2-
3): (a) multiple imputation, (b) modeling missingness as a member -level characteristic, and (c) excluding members with 
missing data.  If findings differ, we will p resent results using all [ADDRESS_228466] 
the statistical analyses under the assumption of missing at rando m. The SAS procedure PROC MI will impute the missing 
variables (including individual net worth, income level, poverty level and education level) using other available variables 
such as age, gender, census block level income, poverty, education etc. Then we  will use PROC MIANALYZE to analyze 
the imputed data. We will also explore certain Bayesian imputation techniques to handle missing data in case missing is 
not at random and compare the results .  If the degree of missingness for member -level credit report data is found to be 
too great, we will still be able to use geocoded poverty and education census block -level data, for which missingness has 
been less than 1% in the study team’s prior work usi ng this data source.  
Missing Deductible Level Data:   Through our data vendor, Optum, we will have detailed benefit information for ~80% of 
employer groups obtaining coverage from the health plan.  For smaller employers (with approximately [ADDRESS_228467] oyees), we will use a benefits type variable that is not missing for smaller employers.   For larger employers with 
missing deductible levels, we will take advantage of the fact that health insurance claims data are the most accurate 
source for assessing ou t-of-pocket obligations among patients who utilize health services.   Our claims data contain an in -
network/out -of-network deductible payment field.   For patients who use expensive or frequent services, the sum of 
their yearly deductible payments will add u p to clearly identifiable exact amounts such as $500.00, $1000.00, $2000.00, 
etc.  When several members have these same amounts, it provides strong evidence that the employer offered such an 
annual deductible level.   It will also be possible to detect empl oyers that offer choices of deductible levels when multiple 
employees have deductibles at two or more levels, such as 20 employees with an annual amount of $1000.00 and 12 
employees with $500.00.   For employers with at least 10 workers, we therefore will s um each employee's in -network 
deductible payments and number of claims over the enrollment year and plan to assess other key characteristics such as 
percentage with Health Savings Accounts.   On a randomly selected half of the employer data set that contain s our 
calculated employer characteristics (such as the percentage of patients with deductible levels between $1000 -$2500) as 
well as actual deductible amounts, we will use a logistic model that predicts the 5 -level outcome of deductible 
<=$250/$250 -$499/$5 00-$999/$1000 -$2499/>$[ADDRESS_228468] common whole number deductible value, the percentage with Health Savings Accounts, the 
median deductible payment, the percentage of employees using services, the employer size, the percentage of 
employees with deductible levels between $100 -$250/$250 -$500/ $500 -$1000/ $1000 -$2500/ >$2500, etc.   This 
predictive model will output the probability that employers had deductibles in the 5 categories ( summing to 1) and we 
will assign the employer to the level that has the highest probability.   If we detect employers that have 10 or more 
employees with whole number deductible levels both above and below $500 (e.g. $250.00 and $1500.00), we will assign 
the employers' category as "choice."   If 100% of employees have Health Savings Accounts, we will also overwrite any 
previous assignment to classify the employer as a high -deductible employer.   We will test the predictive model on the 
other half of the sample  for which we have actual deductible levels.  We have previously used a similar algorithm and, at 
employers with 75 -100 workers, we found sensitivity and a specificity of over 96%  (MD -5). 
 
Analys is plan  (IR-3; HT-2) 
Aim 1 : to understand health care decision making and experiences of families with asthma under  HSA-HDHPs and PDLs . 
We will  analyze qualitative data in iterative cycles of content analysis in the manner described by [CONTACT_192387]. In the first, 
inductive phase of analysis , two coders will independently read initial transcripts multiple times in their entirety, and 
then analyze them through a process of open coding aimed at identifying broad topi[INVESTIGATOR_192340]. Through discussion 
with the larger study team, coders will id entify codes of interest, and will structure subsequent interviews to explore 
these topi[INVESTIGATOR_192341]. Over time, coders will refine codes and organize them into a codebook. When interviews 
begin to yield little new information (i.e., saturation), we  will systematically apply codes t o all transcripts using NVIVO .  
In the second, deductive phase of analysis, we will consider data code -by-code to identify areas of convergence and 
divergence by [CONTACT_134586] (e.g., perceptions of medication affordabilit y between participations with high -deductible 
versus traditional health plans). We will also consider data across codes by [CONTACT_192388] (i.e., patient,  
parent, patient and parent). We will describe emergent codes thematically, selecting  representative quotations to 
illustrate key themes. We will then re -read transcripts to test identified themes to check for “dissenting views,” or 
exceptions to overall themes, that might require additional analysis or discussion. To conduct “member check ing,” we 
will present our themes to AAFA partners, using facilitated discussion to elicit and incorporate their views in our analysis.  
Findings will inform quantitative analyses for Aims [ADDRESS_228469] identified in the interviews will be added  
to Aim 2 -4 where possible  with claims data.  Findings  related  to intrafamilial trade -offs will be used to refine analyses  for 
Aim 3, and findings related to financial burden will be used to refine analyses for Aim 4 . 
Aim 2 : to examine the impact of HSA -HDHPs with and without PDLs on use of asthma controller and rescue medications, 
and on adverse clinical outcomes (asthma -related emergency department (ED) visits and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]), overall and 
for vulnerable subgroups (low -income and racial/ethnic minority patients).   
Hypothesis (see Figure 2) : Enrollees with asthma in HSA -HDHPs without PDLs will have worse adherenc e to controller 
medications, greater need for rescue medication s, and higher rates of asthma -related ED visits and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602],  
with widening of income and racial/ethnic disparities; the addition of a PDL will improve use of controllers and rescue 
medications, reduce ED and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_14285], and lessen dispari ties. 
Analyses will compare changes in outcomes from baseline to up to three years of follow -up among 1) asthma patients 
switched to HSA -HDHPs without PDLs from traditional plans vs. matched patients whose employers remain in traditional 
plans; and 2) patients s witched to HSA -HDHPs with PDLs from traditional plans vs. matched controls remaining in HSA-
HDHPs without PDLs .  Sensitivity  analyses will compare patients switched to HSA -HDHPs with PDLs from traditional plans  
vs. those who remain in traditional plans  to examine the combined impact of both increasing the deductible and gaining 
a PDL.  We will use separate regression models to compare year -to-year changes for each intervention group relative to 
its matched control group, rather than including all patients i n a single model with multiple interaction terms.  For 
secondary analyses of enrollees in the larger set of plan types that include PDLs, we will compare enrollees  who are 
switch ed from  plans with  no PDL to plans with a PDL vs. those who remain in plans without a PDL .  These  analyses will 
match and adjust for different baseline plan types  and deductible levels.   
We will begin by [CONTACT_192389], asthma care utilization, and 
costs for asthma care. Then among the targeted study groups, we will compare baseline characteristics between study 
groups using chi -square, t -tests, and Poisson or quantile regression.[ADDRESS_228470] estimates in a more intuitive manner than 
ITS estimates.  Controlling for potential confounders, we will use generalized linear models (GLMs) to model th e 
independent effect of switching to each of the two types of HSA -HDHPs (with or without PDLs) on the likelihood of each 
outcome, assessed by [CONTACT_192390].  Data from the same  patients in 
successive years are correlated, as are data from individuals from the same family. Extended GLMs - generalized 
estimating equations (GEE) and generalized linear mixed models (GLMM) - are appropriate methods to adjust for this 
correlation158, [ADDRESS_228471] -order autocorrelation between sequ ential monthly measurements using 
the empi[INVESTIGATOR_192342]. Our analytic model will compare the odds ratio of having the primary therapy in the 
category available each day before and after the coverage switch. Our key independent variables will be:  month, period 
(before or after the benefit switch), and month after the plan switch, adjusting for the same covariates as above.  In 
addition to modeling changes in adherence to controller medications generally, we will address the variation across 
health plans in the types of controller medications included in PDLs  by [CONTACT_192391] -analyses to examine changes in 
adherence to the specific controller medications that are included in the PDL and  those  that are not included i n the PDL  
(Aerospan, Arnuit y ellipta, Asmanex HFA, Aerobid, Azmacort) .  For patients using medications that are not included in 
the PDL, we will examine the degree to which patients  change to medications that are included on the PDL.    
For analyses of rescue medication use, we will focus on albuterol  and levalbuterol inhaler users .  We will limit the time 
period of interest to [ADDRESS_228472] need for rescue m edications, we will add controller 
medication adherence as a co -variate; sub -analyses will stratify by [CONTACT_192392].  We 
will also model the ratio of controller medications to total asthma medications.  For analyses of a sthma -related ED visits 
and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], outcomes can be binary, counts, or continuous.  We will use logistic GEE models to estimate the 
effect of switching to each type of HSA -HDHP on binary outcomes such as any asthma -related  hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059]. We wil l 
use negative binomial regression to model the effect for count outcomes such as ED visits. We will select the conditional 
mean and variance functions based on the actual data, using a log link with a Gamma error distribution.160, [ADDRESS_228473] of  HSA-HDHP with and without PDL s on vulnerable populations  (RQ-4) and test for 
heterogeneity of treatment effects  among vulnerable populations  (HT-1-4), we will first perform stratified analyses, 
comparing outcomes betw een intervention and control sub groups defined by [CONTACT_192393] ( low income, minority race/ethnicity, moderate -severe asthma, presence of other chronic conditions  (including 
co-morbid diagnosis of COPD ; we will also conduct analyses limited to ages [ADDRESS_228474] of COPD co -
morbid diagnoses ), high  ACG morbidity).  We hypothesize that these vulnerable subgroups will have worse adherence, 
more frequent adverse clinical outcomes, and higher OOP costs.  We will use three -way interaction terms ( insurance 
type * study period * subgroup) to test for statistical differences between subgro ups in the impact of the change to an 
HSA-HDHP with PDL vs. remaining in a traditional plan.   Heterogeneity of treatment effect analyses for these key 
variables will be reported along with overall findings from the combined population.   Given that we will be conducting  
sub-group analyses to test for heterogeneity of treatment effect based on race/ethnicity and income using th ree-way 
interaction terms, we elected to separate the analyses of heterogeneity of treatment effect by [CONTACT_192394] 3  
(described  below) , rather than add a fourth interaction term to the analyses in Aim 2.  In Aim [ADDRESS_228475] at the over all population level.    
Aim 3 : to examine the extent to which the response to HSA -HDHPs and PDLs is affected by [CONTACT_192395].   
Hypothesis : Adults with asthma will disproportionately experience negative effects of HSA -HDHPs on adherence and 
outcomes relative to children with asthma  (HT-2), as will patients who have other family members with asthma or 
other chronic conditions; differences will be mitigated by [CONTACT_1121] a PDL.  
Aim [ADDRESS_228476] -sharing changes in HSA -HDHPs and PDLs, and on adult -
child differences in response to HSA -HDHPs and PDLs.  Analyses will use the same population, outcomes, study group 
comparisons, and modeling strategies as Aims 1 and 2 except that we will perform stratified analyses, comparing 
outcomes between intervention and control groups stratified by [CONTACT_192396]/child status  (RQ-4).  To statistically test for 
heterogeneity of treatment effect for adults vs. children (HT -1-3), we will use three -way inter action terms ( insurance 
type * study period * adult/child) to test for statistical differences between adults and children in the impact of the 
change to an HSA -HDHP with PDL vs. remaining in a n HSA -HDHP without PDL , and the change to an HSA -HDHP without 
PDL vs. remaining in a traditional  plan.  Analyses will be done at the individual level, but will include family -level 
variables listed in Table [ADDRESS_228477] both an adult and child 
with asthma insured in the same family pla n, and  will assess whether adults and children within the same family are 
differentially impacted by [CONTACT_192397]  (HT- 1-2, IR-5).   
Aim 4: to examine the impact of HSA -HDHPs with and without PDLs on out -of-pocket (OOP) costs for patients with 
asthma.   
Hypothesis : Enrollees with asthma in HSA -HDHPs without PDLs will have higher OOP cost s and increased financial 
burden as measured by [CONTACT_192398] t of income spent on OOP costs ; the addition of a PDL will diminish these adverse 
outcomes.  
Analyses w ill be similar to those of Aim 2, but for OOP cost outcomes .  Our primary analyses of changes in OOP costs will 
use a DiD analytic framework. We will foll ow the same approaches as used in analyzing ED visits and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602], 
employing two -part models/zero -inflated negative binomial models to account for zero costs. We will use GEE or GLMM 
models to examine changes in outcomes between baseline and follo w-up to model the independent effect of switching 
to each of the two types of HSA -HDHPs (with or without PDLs) on the likelihood of having financial burden ( OOP cost 
greater than 5% of income ).   
 
Hypothesized Effect Size for Intervention on Main Patient -Centered Outcome   
Based on prior studies of chronic medications, we hypothesize that we will find a decrease of 5 -9% in the PDC for 
controller medications after switching to HSA -HDHPs without PDLs relative to traditional plans,74  and an increase in the 
number of fills of 1 -4% for those who switch to HSA -HDHPs with PDLs relative to HSA-HDHPs without PDLs .100 
Sample Size and P ower   
Aim 1 : We will conduc t qualitative interviews with approximately 60  patients or parents  or patients .   
Aims 2 -4: We estimate that  there are 1,695 patients with asthma  eligible for our study  in 2004 in our dataset (12% of 
HSA-HDHP members), increasing to 2,449 by 2011 (17% of HSA -HDHP members). Projecting current trends, we expect a 
total of 22,[ADDRESS_228478] of the cohort will be  
children under age 18.  Based on detailed estimates from our health insurance partners, ~19% of HSA -HDHP members 
have a PDL. We will have an abundant number of traditional plan members, more than seven times the number in HSA -
HDHPs.  Table 3 displays powe r calculations for pairs of regression models we plan to run for three  primary outcomes: 
controller m edication adherence (PDC) (Aims 2 -3), and adverse clinical outcomes (rate of asthma -related ED visits or 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]) (Aim s 2-3), and OOP costs (Aim 4 ), both  overall and for stratified analyses by [CONTACT_192396]/child (power 
calculations for children are displayed, as they are the smaller group).  Power calculations, which assume 80% power 
and 0.05 alpha level, were performed using PASS software .163 
Table 3: Power calculations   
Contrast of Interest  Least detectable absolute difference  
Intervention Group   Control  Overall  Children  
Controller medication adherence (PDC)*    
HSA-HDHP with PDL (n=4,222)  HSA-HDHP without PDL (n=16,888)  2.0%  3.5%  
HSA-HDHP without PDL (n=18,000)  Traditional plan (n=72,000)  1.0%  1.7%  
Asthma related ED visits or hospi[INVESTIGATOR_602]**    
HSA-HDHP with PDL (n=4,222)  HSA-HDHP without PDL (n=16,888)  1.2%  2.0%  
HSA-HDHP without PDL (n=18,000)  Traditional plan (n=72,000)  0.6%  1.0%  
OOP costs***      
HSA-HDHP with PDL (n=4,222)  HSA-HDHP without PDL  (n=16,888)  $47 $80 
HSA-HDHP without PDL (n=18,000)  Traditional plan (n=72,000)  $23 $40 
*Baseline rate estimated at 46% 74    ** Baseline rate estimated at 8.4 per 100 patients with asthma164   ***Baseline OOP costs estimated at $740 
based on data from current studies in the same data set.  
Generalizability and L imitations   
This study has several limitations. We include in our sample only members offered no choice in health plan selection 
(exogenous insurance choice).  By [CONTACT_192399], we limit generalizability but minimize individual -level selection bias, the 
major threat to internal validity. Employer selection is still possible,  but we minimize this via the two -stage propensity 
score matching approach. Propensity score matching cannot control for selection on unobserved characteristics, but our 
planned approach of matching on the baseline trend of outcomes of interest approximates the estimates of randomized 
controlled trials.[ADDRESS_228479] barriers. We are able to measure many of these factors using claims (e.g. baseline disease severity, age, 
gender, income, race/ethnicity) but not others (e.g. attitudes, provider factor s, competing demands).  Claims data also 
do not allow measurement of important asthma outcomes such as symptom days, missed school/work days, or lung 
function.  The Aim [ADDRESS_228480] experience measuring in our prior asthma studies.19, 40, 122, 128, 165, 166  The use of geocoding 
and surname [CONTACT_192432]/ethnicity at the individual level, but provide excellent 
population -level estima tes when used together.143, 167-172   We will assess the degree of missingness for these fields in our 
study, but do not anticip ate that it will be problematic given  that annual missingness of geocoded SES variables in the 
study team ’s prior work using this data source has been  less than 1%  (MD -1). 
Sharing of asthma medications within a family may affect the accuracy of measurement  of an individual’s medication 
use based on claims data.  However, only 16% of children share or borrow asthma medications, usually 
bronchodilators.[ADDRESS_228481] by [CONTACT_192400] -level medication use and OOP costs.  Utilization of med ications and other health services in 
HSA-HDHPs may be affected by [CONTACT_192401] a member’s HSA, which can be used to pay deductible costs.  
Data on HSA balances is not available for all  members, however.   
Because our interest is assessing clinic ally relevant effects of an economic intervention, the proposed project does not 
examine the impact of HSA -HDHPs and PDLs on total costs to employers or the health care system.  The impact of 
HDHPs with PDLs on total costs is important to the decision maki ng of employers and payers, and while beyond the 
scope of this project, our findings will inform future studies to address this topic using datasets with premium and full 
cost data.  
Prior studies  on inhaled asthma rescue  medications  have found that utilization of these medications is relatively inelastic 
to price changes,39, 174 raising t he possibility of a “no effect” study.  In our study that showed no significant impact on 
inhaler use from an incre ase in co -payment,[ADDRESS_228482] -sharing changes 
associated with HSA -HDHPs and PDLs (ranging from $0 in PDLs to $140 -$307 for some inhaled steroids and $30 -60 for 
albuterol inhalers69-71) could have a larger imp act on medication use.    Studying the impact of HSA -HDHPs and PDLs with 
respect to asthma rescue inhalers will still be important even if our study finds no effect on inhaler utilization, as there 
are likely to be significant changes in out -of-pocket cost s for rescue inhaler medications even if use is unchanged.39, [ADDRESS_228483] of asthma medica tions can cause financial burden for families (e.g. having to borrow money or cut back on 
other necessities),[ADDRESS_228484] of HSA -HDHP s and PDLs on out -of-pocket costs for asthma rescue inhalers is 
important even if the utilization analyses produce a “no effect” study.  
D. PATIENT POPULATION  (see  Section C - Study P opulation above for further details)  
For this study of patients with asthma, w e expect the patient population s will be similar to that of commercially -insured 
populations with asthma nationally in which asthma is more prevalent among African -Americans  and among women 
overall (although more prevalent among boys for children)  (Table 4).1, [ADDRESS_228485] a child with asthma.  Potential participants will include 
adults aged 18 -64; those 65 and over will not be included because they are eligible for Medicare, which may cover the 
costs of some health care services.  These patients will represent a range of geographic locations, both genders, 
different r ace/ethnicities and levels of socioeconomic status, and asthma severity.   To ensure adequate representation 
of patients with lower incomes and lower educational attainment, we propose to oversample HPHC members who live 
in low socioeconomic status zip codes where more than 20% of households are below the poverty level or where more 
than 25% of adults did not complete high school ,[ADDRESS_228486] interviews with 
approximately  27 eligible HPHC members ( approximately 6 from each subgroup).   
 
Table 4: Estimated Final Racial/Ethnic and Gender Enrollment Table  (for interview population for Aim 1 plus 
claims -based population for Aims 2 -4) 
Race  Male (N)  Female (N)  Total (N)  
American Indian/Alaska Native  -- -- -- 
Asian  1,745  1,675  3,420  
Black/African American  4,537  7,522  12,059  
Hawaiian/Pacific Islander  -- -- -- 
White  40,138  50,032  90,170  
Multirace  2,443  3,072  5,515  
Ethnicity  Male (N)  Female (N)  Total (N)  
Hispanic (Latino/Latina)  5,235  6,457  11,692  
Non-Hispanic  43,628  55,844  99,472  
 
We will also recruit commercially -insured  patients with asthma and parents of children with asthma through AAFA.  
Through pre -screening of interested patients who respond to AAFA’s recruitment outreach, we will select approximately  
[ADDRESS_228487] ess.  In addition to recruiting 
participants from AAFA’s  Asthma Online Community, email list serv, Facebook page, and newsletters , AAFA will be able 
to conduct outreach beyond its currently engaged community members to attract interview participants via 
intermediaries such as AAFA’s Chapters and Educational Support Groups, the school community  and school nurses, and 
faith based and local community organizations with whom AAFA has established partnerships from current and prior 
projects  (e.g. a project with  CDC focusing on the safety -net adult asthma population which involved community and 
faith -based entities and Federally Qualified Health Centers).  Through our prescreening questionnaire of interested 
patients, we will be able to further ensure that patien ts selected for interviews  are representative of the asthma 
population.  If after  completing interviews with HPHC  members , we find  that particular sub-groups are not well 
represented, we will use information from  the pre -screening  questionnaire  to identify and include patients with these 
characteristics  (RQ-3-4).  Pre-screening will allow us to ensure participation of patients with a range of asthma severity 
in order to explore how differences in severity affect health care decisio n making and impact of OOP costs.  Children will 
not themselves be research participants, although their experiences will be reflected through the participation of their 
parents.  
We will overcome barriers to enrollment by [CONTACT_192402] a $[ADDRESS_228488] an HSA-HDHP with a PDL, 
since p atients from the AAFA population may not know if their plan includes a PDL.  The standardization of HSA -HDHPs 
and the similarity of HPHC’ s PDL to other insurers’ PDLs (including the one to be studied in Aims 2 -4) will enhance 
generalizability.   In inclusio n of the AAFA population will ensure a more diverse population across the country with 
commercial insurance from other carriers.  Most  patients are likely to know if they have a high -deductible plan, although 
they may not be aware if their plan is an HSA -HDHP or if it includes a PDL.  Nonetheless, they will still be able to provide 
relevant data on their experiences in a plan with a high -deductible and cost -sharing for asthma medications.   
The patient population for Aims [ADDRESS_228489] been used in multiple stu dies to  identify 
patients with asthma.19, 40, 122  The characteristics and numbers of patients whose claims data  will be analyzed are 
described above in Tables 2 and 3 . 
Our study  will specifically examine potential disparities for low-income and racial/ethnic minority populations in 
response to high levels of cost sharing in high deductible plans, based on prior evidence that these groups may be 
adversely affected  (RQ-3).51, 57, 98  We will identify patient subgroups based on income and race/ethnicity using our 
dataset’s credit report information and imputed information on ethnicity based on member surname  [CONTACT_192433] .  We will use claims -based measures emp loyed in other studies  to identify patient subgroups based on asthma 
severity, other chronic conditions, and morbidity who may be likely to be adversely affected by [CONTACT_192403] -sharing(RQ -
3).19, 40, 50, 54, 176, [ADDRESS_228490] will be conducted primarily at the Department of Population Medicine (DPM), which resides 
within the Harvard Pi[INVESTIGATOR_192343] (HPHCI), and is a department of Harvard Medical School.   
1. The research team has the capability to accomplish the goals of the proposed research.  Our multidisciplinary study 
team has a strong track record that brings together expertise in health services research, health policy, asthma  care, and 
health economics; experience studying  asthma, HDHPs, medication adherence , health care decision making , and 
financial burden  for adults, children, and families ; capability  conducting  patient  surveys, qualitative research , and 
rigorous claims -based analyses; a successful history of collaboration between study team members and with health 
plans including HPHC and the large national insurer whose  claims data will be studied ; partnership with Meryl 
Bloomrosen and AAFA ; and the input of a  Stakeholder Advisory Board  and Patient and Family Research Council  
(described below in Section F.2) .   
Alison Galbraith, MD, MPH,  Principal Investigator,  is a health services researcher and general pediatrician who has 
conducted  formative studies of the impact of new health insurance designs such as  HDHPs  and VBID -like policies  on 
health care decision making, health care utilization, health outcomes, and f inancial burden ; she has conducted some of 
the first family -level studies of health insurance and cost -sharing .45, 46, 50, 54, 68, 76-[ADDRESS_228491] of health insurance benefit design changes on use of medications and other health care services .153-156, 179-
186  Ann Chen Wu, MD, MPH,  Co-Investigator , is a general pediatrician and asthma health services researcher who has 
conducted claims and survey -based stud ies of asthma medication use , outcomes , and disparities.  Through her 
leadership of multiple studies in the Population -based Effectiveness in Asthma and Lung Disease ( PEAL ) network of 
multiple  health plan s, she has experience  developi[INVESTIGATOR_192344] -based methods to identify members with asthma, 
assess ast hma severity, and measure adherence .19, 122, [ADDRESS_228492] -winning asthma blog (url: 
http:// asth.ma ) designed for communicating with  patients  with asthma and parents  of children with asthma .   Melissa 
Gilkey, PhD,  Co-Investigator , is a behavioral scientist specializing in health communication who has expertise in 
qualitative methods, health communication theory, medical decision making, and patient engagement.187-[ADDRESS_228493] entitled, “ Training Patients 
with Asthma to Understand and Participate in Patient -Centered Outcomes Research.”    
2. The project’s research environment is well -suited for conducting the proposed study.   DPM’s unique position within 
a health plan has fostered  the study team’s experience  engaging health plan members  and health plan re presentatives 
in research .  DPM has assembled an extensive collection of dat a from a large  U.S. commercial health plan through 
Optum, and has built the infrastructure, analytic capacity, and familiarity with the data to facilitate high quality, efficie nt 
research . The HPHC environment enables the research team to identify and recruit interview participants  from across 
the country w hose benefits allow them to access services through HPHC’s partnership with the large national insurer 
whose claims data will be used in Aims [ADDRESS_228494]’s engagement plan and for  recruiting patients and parent participants .   
F. ENGAGEMENT PLAN  
1. Planning the Study  
Input from patients, families, and health plan stakeholders  has informed the planning o f the proposed project .  The 
design of the project and the issues to be addressed have been informed by [CONTACT_3476]’s existing  relationships with 
health plan partners, including HPHC and the large national insurer  whose population  will be used in Aims [ADDRESS_228495]. Wu’s blog (http://asth.ma ).[ADDRESS_228496].  AAFA is a national organization that advocates on behalf of patients with asthma through patient education, 
public awareness, and support for research.  AAFA’s work as a PCORI engagement awardee  on training asthma patients 
in research has informed the planning of the project’s engagement strategy .  Both the engagement plan and research 
strategy reflect the contributions of  Meryl Bloomrosen, Senior Vice President of Policy, Advocacy and Research at AAFA , 
who is a member of the study team and a co -investigator .  [CONTACT_192436] has been  part of discussions about the 
design of the project and has provided input about  the propos al to make it relevant to asthma patients  and their 
families .  She has suggested useful  strategies to strengthen our recruiting strategy for patient participants and advisors  
using  AAFA’s multimodal methods of outreach to asthma patients .  Her prior experi ence with recruiting  and involving 
patient and family advisors in AAFA ’s Patient and Family Advisory Council has led us to use this approach for our Patient 
and Family Research Council .   
The plan for patient  engagement was also informed by [CONTACT_192404].  In this focus group study, preliminary findings show that health plan members 
are interested in serving as research advisors, especially if they have a health conditio n that makes the topic salient .  
Members expressed the need to have clearly defined and respected roles, to receive education about the research 
process and the study, and to have the opportunity to contribute  in ways that fit with their interest s, skills , and time 
constraints.  In particular, our plan to create a Patie nt and Family Research Council was based on our finding that  some 
people  did not feel that they could make a long-term commitment  to a multi -year study  but would like opportunities to 
partici pate in research with short -term or one -time contributions  based on  their unique background, skills , and 
interests, as exemplified by [CONTACT_192405] : 
“I think people would tend to play to their strengths and also work within whatever parameters they have around 
time that's available .”   
“So if I would like to participate but I can't come here on a weeknight, I can edit a manuscript. So okay, over e -mail I 
can do that in my time when it's convenient for me and that way still participate. So I think it' s definitely important 
to give different levels of participation or engagement for individuals.”  
2. Conducting the Study  
A key foundation of our patient and stakeholder engagement strategy is our partnership with AAFA .  [CONTACT_192436] , 
who helped develop this proposal,  will serve as a co -investigator on the project for all four years.  She will attend 
monthly study team meetings in person or by [CONTACT_648] , and will contribute her experiences working with asthma patients 
and caregivers, asthma clinicians , researchers, and policy makers to address the medical and educational needs of 
patients with asthma.   Her input will allow us to refine the engagement plan post -award to incorporate  the learning and 
experience from AAFA’s  ongoing PCORI engagement award in which they will develop  trainings for  asthma patients as 
research partners.  AAFA will conduct and videotape patient trainings in [ADDRESS_228497] or on our Patient and Family Research Council  (described 
below) .  [CONTACT_192436] and AAFA staff will review the Aim [ADDRESS_228498]’ s Stakeholder Advisory Board  (PC-1, 2, 4 ).  The Board will include: 1) an adult patient 
with asthma; 2) a parent of a chi ld with asthma; 3) a representative of AHIP , the health insurance industry trade 
association ; 4) a clinician -researcher who studies an d treats patients with asthma; 5 ) a pediatrician who studies health 
policy and intergen erational family services; and 6 ) a representative from the NEBGH , an organization serving large 
employers .  We will use  AAFA ’s existing Asthma Online Community, Educational Support Group, email list serv, Facebook 
page, and print and email newsletter s to recruit the  patient and parent members of  the Board at the start of the project.  
All Board members will be given a descriptive summary of the project before the Board meets, and patient/parent 
members will be offered the opportunity to view AAFA’s online research training video.   The Board will meet with the 
study team three times  a year to provide guidance on research questions of interest, target populations, recruitment 
strategies and domains to explore in Aim [ADDRESS_228499].  During recruitment of patient/parent advisors  at the start of the project, we will offer the opportunity to 
participate in the Council to  those  interested in being involved with less of a time commitment .  Potential  Council  
members  will be asked about their  background (e.g. type of insurance plan, asthma severity , state of residence ), skills 
and interests (e.g. W ould they be interested in doing cognitive testing of the interview guide? Do they like numbers and 
wou ld like to review data tables? ), and the ir preferred  amount of time and setting  for participation  (e.g. daytime or 
evening meetings, conference calls, email only ).  Upon joining the Council, members will be given a descriptive summary 
of the project and will be invit ed to obtain training through AAFA’s online video sessions.  Based on their reported  
background  and preferences, we will target outreach to  Council members as appropriate study activities arise .  Tasks 
would include reviewing and providing input  on interview recruitment materials, interview questions, preliminary 
findings, dissemination materials, claims -based outcomes, and research questions for future research .  Members can 
choose to cycle off the Coun cil, and new  patients /parents  will be recruite d by [CONTACT_192406] .  
We are privileged to have the opportunity to work with AAFA, the Stakeholder Advisory Board, and the Patie nt and 
Family Advisory Council.  We are committed  to transparency, honesty, and trust  in these collaborations , and strive to  
foster collaborative, mutually beneficial reciprocal relationship s. We recognize  that open communication is crucial to 
bringing out the unique contributions of all partners and fostering a spi[INVESTIGATOR_192345].   Major study decisions will be 
discussed at Stakeholder Advisory Board meetings, and Board members will be apprised of any key decisions made 
outside of the Board meetings. The contribut ions of the Board and Council will be acknowledged in all  project 
manuscripts and reports, and those interested in playing a more substantial role in the conduct of the  study and 
manuscript writing will be offered the opportunity for co-authorship.   
We intend for the Stakeholder Advisory Board and Patient and Family Research Council to serve as forums for co-
learning for all partners . Study investigators will learn about the perspective of the patient and stakeholder communities 
repres ented on the Board and Council, while the Board and Council members will have the opportunity to  learn about 
the research topic  and general research processes through participation in AAFA’s web -based research training. 
Additionally , we will convene the Co uncil annually for a webinar in which the research team will provide background 
information about study topi[INVESTIGATOR_1102]  (e.g. use of asthma medications, barrier to adherence, health insurance design) and 
methods, and summarize study findings to date, while  Council members can share their experiences, feedback, and 
questions.  We also hope that bringing stakeholder representatives together on the Advisory Board will  facilitate co -
learning and relationship building between Board members who share interests but may not  have  had the opportunity 
to work together before.  
In establishing a partnership  with the Stakeholder Advisory Board and Patient and Family Research Council , the research 
team will  strive to balance the desire to involve them  in key aspects of the project with the desire to be respectful of  
their jobs, families, and other commitments  and to adequately compensate them for their efforts . Board members will 
be given a $[ADDRESS_228500] meetings each year, pre -meeting 
review of  materials . The Patient and Family Research Council provides  opportunities for patients/parents to be involved 
in the research process with a flexible, smaller ti me commitment as determined by [CONTACT_192407] . 
Patients/parents who join the Council  will be eligible for a biannual drawing for a $[ADDRESS_228501] for as long as they 
remain on the Council, and will be given a $[ADDRESS_228502] for each completed  activity .   
3. Disseminating the Study Results  (PC-4) (See also the section below on Dissemination and Implementation Potential)  
AAFA and our patient and stakeholder partners will play a central role in the d issemination of study results, and will help 
us determine which findings will be of greatest interest to patients with asthma and their families, and which channels 
will be most effective in reaching patients living with asthma.  AAFA  will use its  wide range of existing outreach channels 
(Asthma  Online Community, Educational Support Group, email  listserv, Facebook and Twitter , print and e -newsletters ) 
to provide  multi -pronged opportunities to disseminate results to patients  in understandable, meaningful ways .  
Additionally, AAFA’s Medical Scientific Council will be involved as a resource for dissemination of  findings to the clinical 
and scientific community. The project’s  Stakeholder Advisory Board will also be involved in planning di ssemination 
strategies.  The Board ’s inclusion  of representative from diverse stakeholder groups  will enable us to develop strategies 
that will effectively reach a wide range of stakeholders  and enable findings to be framed to be most relevant to each  
group’s interests .  The Patient and Family Research Council will review and provide input on dissemination materials and 
ensure that findings are communicated in understandable, salient  ways.  
 
 
DISSEMINATION AND IMPLEMENTATION POTENTIAL  
 
A. Describe the potential for disseminating and implementing the results of this research  in other settings  (PC-4).  
We will disseminate the results of the project to a broad  range of patient s, families , provider s, health plan s, policy  
makers , employer s, and researchers who share an interest in improving health care for patients with asthma and 
reducing cost barriers .  Our partnership with AAFA, our Stakeholder Advisory Board , and Patient and Family Research 
Council  will help us  prioritize findings that are important to them and others like  them, and  design effective , 
understandable,  multi -pronged disseminatio n strategies to reach out to their constituencies .  See Section F.[ADDRESS_228503] serv, Facebook page , and in notices in AAFA’s existing 
print and e -newsletter s. [CONTACT_192436] and AAFA staff, patient and family members of the Stakeholder  Advisory 
Board, and Patient and Family Research Council will review materials  to make sure the information is understandable to 
lay audiences.   
We plan to disseminate study findings through presentations at research meetings and publication s in peer -reviewed 
journals .  Preliminary findings will be presented at meetings of groups such as AcademyHealth, the American Thoracic 
Society, the Pediatric Academic Societies, the Society for General Internal Medicine, and the Health Care Systems 
Research Network .  We will submit manuscripts describing study findings to medical, health services research, and 
health policy journals such as the Journal of the American Medical Association, Health Services Research, American 
Journal of Respi[INVESTIGATOR_50165], Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology in Practice, Annals of the 
American Thoracic Society, Health Affairs, Pediatrics, and Annals of Internal Medicine .  We will develop a newsletter  
summarizing  published  results for electronic and prin t transmission to individuals and organizations suggested by [CONTACT_192408].  We will transmit published research findings to a 
wide range of patients, stakeholders, and the general public  through tra ditional news media and social media, for 
example, through the Harvard Medical School and HPHC press offices, and through [CONTACT_192437]’s award -winning asthma blog 
(http://asth.ma ) and her Twitter account (@Asthma3Ways) which has over 8,000 followers.   
Study team members will communicate findings to  providers  at national meetings of groups such as the American 
Thoracic Society, Pediatric Academic Societies, and Society of General In ternal Medicine.  We will communicate findings 
to clinicians on AAFA’s Medical Scientific Council, who can serve as conduits to the provider community and suggest 
other avenues to reach providers.   As practicing physicians, Drs. Galbraith, Wu, Wharam, Hartert, and Rosen will be able 
to communicate findings to their provider communities.  
Findings will be disseminated to  health plan, employer , and policy  communities  to inform decision making about 
impleme ntation of HSA -HDHPs and PDLs.   We will communicate study findings to colleagues at the large national health  
plan involved in the study, to HPHC , and to AHIP through Board member Kevin Fahey  to inform health plan  efforts to 
improve asthma care and  refine insurance plan design.  We will be able to communicate results to other health plans 
through  the annual meeting of the Health Care Systems Research Network , (formerly known as the HMO Research 
Network), of which HPHC is a longstanding member, so that other  health plans can learn from our study.  Through Board 
member Jeremy Nobel from NEBGH , we will disseminate findings to the community of employers who must make 
decisions about the insurance benefit designs they offer to their employees.  Through his experi ence as the Director of 
PolicyLab at Children’s Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_6684], Board member David Rubin will be able to advise the research team 
about various routes for sharing results, such as meetings with policy makers and key staff, testimony, blogs, and 
conferences.  
Study findings  have the potential to be implemented widely into existing health insurance designs . This project will 
provide crucial, patient -centered evidence about health insurance strategies already being delivered in real -life settings 
and their impact on adherence, clinical outcomes, and cost burden for asthma patients.  Given the increasing use of 
PDLs,89-[ADDRESS_228504]’s inclusion of [CONTACT_192438] and [CONTACT_192439] on 
the project Stakeholder Advisory Board will enable us to report our findings to AHIP  and NEBGH  and assist us in 
developi[INVESTIGATOR_192346].  
B. Describe possible barriers to disseminating and implementing  the results of this research  in other settings.  
One goal of the proposed study is to provide relevant data to stakeholders to find strategies to provide more affordable 
health insurance while al so ensuring that asthma patients can obtain needed medications.  Up until now, health plans 
and payers have had to decide whether to invest in strategies like PDLs with limited data on their effectiveness, so our 
study will allow them to know if this inves tment is worthwhile.  Even if our study shows that HSA -HDHPs with PDLs 
improve adherence to asthma medications and reduce adverse clinical outcomes, employers and health plans may still 
choose not to adopt such strategies if total costs in such arrangement s is not reduced.  Further research, beyond the 
scope of this PCORI award, may be needed to establish whether the additional costs to payers for medications on PDLs 
in HSA -HDHPs can be offset by [CONTACT_192409].   
Dissemination and imp lementation of our findings to other health insurers may b e a challenge for HDHPs  that differ 
from those of the large health insurer studied in this project. However, given the standardization of HSA -HDHPs, with 
federally -regulated policies about which ser vices are subject to the deductible, and the commonalities in the preventive 
medications on many large insurance carriers’ PDLs,90, 91   implementation in other health plans’  HSA-HDHPs should be 
feasible . 
Barriers to the dissemination and implementation of study findings could arise due to the complexity of h ealth insurance 
benefits, and of HDHPs in particular.  Health plans, employers, and public payers may decide not to adopt HSA -HDHPs 
with PDLs if they feel that the added complexity of a PDL would make it hard for patients to understand and use 
appropriatel y.  For PDLs to be effective, patients must be aware that asthma medications are on the list and free of cost -
sharing ; our research will ident ify areas where there are information gaps and learning effects over time .  Limitations in 
provider awareness of c ost barriers for patients in HDHPs and of what medications and services will cost their patients 
could also pose barriers to successful implementation of HDHPs and PDLs.  The Aim [ADDRESS_228505] method (p ostal address or email ), and provide a copy of 
our pu blications when they become available  and a result s summary in plain language appropriate for a lay audience, 
which will be reviewed by [CONTACT_192410] . Because our data on health 
plan members participating in the quantitative studies (Aims 2 -4) will c ome from fully de -identified existing health plan 
data, we have no way of contact[CONTACT_192411].  However, they may be reached through our other efforts 
to disseminate study results to the asthma community  described above.   
 
REPLICATION AND REPRODUCIBILITY OF RESEARCH AND DATA SHARING  
 
A. Describe the ability to reproduce potentially important findings from this research  in other data sets and 
populations.  
Our Aim [ADDRESS_228506] the reproducib ility of our findings on a larger scale among broader 
populations of patients with asthma and their families in the future, through AAFA or our health plan partners .  
Our claims analyses (Aims 2 -4) could readily be replicated in datasets  of other health pl ans, although not on the same 
scale as our proposed analyses , which  will be conducted among  one of the largest insurers in the U .S. Additionally, 
analyses using other  datasets may not  yield the same amount of comprehensive, detailed, and robust information  for 
such large numbers of patients . However, there may be value in replicating our  studies in future years, given that 
insurance designs  are constantly evolving , and HDHPs  and strategies to help patients cope with cost barriers may change 
in future years .  
The implementation of the ACA and the launch of federal and state -based insurance exchanges has accelerated the 
growth of HDHPs, with expansion into the individual, non -group insurance market due to the ACA’s coverage mandate 
and the low er premiums affor ded by  [CONTACT_192412]. It will be crucially important to conduct studies examining how patients 
with asthma fare in HDHPs in exchange s and non -group market , especially given that exchange enrollees are more likely 
to come from vulnerable populations. However, while  these potential  studies could borrow some of the  measures and 
design features of our proposed claims -based studies, they would not be able to offer our study’s ability to mitigate 
selection effects by [CONTACT_192413] a choic e of plans .  
B. Describe your data management and sharing plan, including how you will make study data sets available  in a 
manner that is consistent with applicable privacy, confidentiality and other legal requirements , if requested . 
Transcripts of Aim 1 individual patient/ parent in-depth interviews and the intermediate coded material from interviews  
cannot be shared with requestors external  to our study team. These data will be collected from patient/parent  
participants  with the promis e of confidential ity by [CONTACT_192414] .   
This agreement also affirms that the study team will share data only in aggregate form.  Our finalized interview 
instrument will be made available to other resea rchers  upon request, and our qualitative analysis methods will be 
presented in a transparent manner in published  papers and on -line appendices  should other researchers wish to adopt 
them . 
Unfortunately, the individual -level analytic dataset  for Aims [ADDRESS_228507] qualitative data from patients with asthma or parents of children with asthma through telephone interviews 
(Aim 1) and will use  retrospective analysis of insurance claims and linked data to detect differences in hea lth care 
utilization patterns and costs for  adults and children with asthma  (Aims 2 -4). This constitutes human subjects research 
according to federal guidelines. Prior to obtaining data, we will seek Institutional Review Board approval from the 
Harvard Pi[INVESTIGATOR_192334] (HPHC) Human Studies Committee.  
A. Risks to Human Subjects  
1. Human Subjects Involvement, Characteristics, and Design  
Our aims include understanding  health care decision making and experiences of families with asthma w ith high -
deductible health plans (HDHPs ) and determining the impact of HDHPs  and preventive drug lists  (PDLs)  on controller and 
rescue medication adherence, emergency department visits, hos pi[INVESTIGATOR_602], and out -of-pocket costs, overall, for 
vulnerable subgroups, and within families.  
Subjects for Aim [ADDRESS_228508] commercial  
health insurance plans (high -deductible plans with and without a PDL or traditional plans).  Potential subjects will be 
recruited through  Harvard Pi[INVESTIGATOR_192334] (HPHC) and through our partnership with AAFA.  Potential subjects from 
HPHC will be ident ified from enrollment and claims data, and invited to participate through a mailing  and/or email .  
Enrollees will be given the option to opt out of the study by [CONTACT_3379] a toll -free number, and the study team will contact [CONTACT_192415] t o invite them to participate . To recruit subjects through AAFA, the AAFA team will 
send out a description of the study to potential subjects through its Asthma Online Community, Educational Support 
Group, email list serv, Facebook page, newsletter s, and/or other outreach channels ; patients with high -deductible plans 
and traditional plans will be invited to participate.  
Those interested will complete a pre -screening questionnaire, either online or by [CONTACT_6292] a member of the research 
team.  T he research tea m will use pre-screening information to confirm eligibility and representation of 
sociodemographic and clinical sub -groups, and will schedule and conduct the phone interviews.   Interviews will take 
approximately [ADDRESS_228509]’s insurance plan in order to create family -level variables, such as the number 
of family members, family -level morbidity, and presence of other family members with asthma or other chronic 
conditions. The research will be pe rformed at the Department of Population Medicine at the Harvard Pi[INVESTIGATOR_192347]/Harvard Medical School and the Harvard School of Public Health; datasets will remain solely at the 
Department of Population Medicine.  
 
2. Sources of Materials  
For Aim [ADDRESS_228510] subscribers and their families 
for the study samples.  Analysts from the Research Support Data Center (RSDC) in the Department of Population 
Medicine at the Harvard Pi[INVESTIGATOR_192348] h Care Institute will access HPHC claims data for eligible patients.   Data on plan 
benefits policies will be provided by [CONTACT_192416], and will be linked by [CONTACT_192417]. We will 
collect patient -reported data from eligible subjec ts through in -depth qualitative interviews with patients with asthma or 
parents of children with asthma.  Interviews will be conducted by [CONTACT_192379] -ended 
questions designed to take approximately [ADDRESS_228511]. The administrative data are anonymized, linked to 
credit bureau data, archived, and made available for purchase to health services researchers. The health plan will also 
provide linked data on members’ access to a preventive drug list.  All data, including credit report data on household 
income, net worth, and race/ethnicity, will be obtained in de -identified form from Optum.  The dataset provided by 
[CONTACT_192418], dates of bir th, social security numbers, or exact addresses beyond zip code. The subjects 
themselves will only be identified by [CONTACT_192419]. Please see the section below on Protections Against Risk for 
further details.  
3. Potential Risks  
The risks to participating subjects are minimal. The greatest potential risk s to subjects in our study is loss of 
confidentiality of their medical data  or potential psychological distress to the subscribers from being interviewed . 
However, all potential identifying inf ormation except service dates and zip code have been removed from claims and 
substituted with encrypted study identifiers.  Please see the section below on Protections Against Risk for further 
details.  
B. Adequacy of Protection Against Risks  
1. Recruitment  and Informed Consent  
For the Aim [ADDRESS_228512] a waiver of consent  and HIPAA authorization  to obtain these initial data to establish the sampling frame.  
We will approach up to 660 HPHC members by [CONTACT_188052]/or email to invite them to participate.  This message will include  
an information sheet that describes  the study and includes elements relev ant to  informed consent (e.g. the voluntary 
nature of participation, confidentiality, etc.) .  We will recruit patients through AAFA through posting s to Asthma Online 
Community, Educational Support Group, email list serv, Facebook page , newsletter s, flyers, and/or other communication 
channels ; subjects recruited through AAFA who are eligible to participate  will receive the  information sheet following 
completion of the pre -screening questionnaire.  Copi[INVESTIGATOR_192349], mail, or as an immediate download from REDCap (if the pre -screening was completed online).   
We estimate completing approximately 27 phone interviews with each group (HPHC and AAFA).  Participants will be 
offered a $[ADDRESS_228513] access to this. Through Drs. Wharam and Ross -
Degnan, the Department of Population Medicine (DPM) has licensed these Optum data and has an existing Data Use 
Agreement to use these data (described in the  application’s letter of support from Michael Sanky from Optum).  [CONTACT_192440] has completed Optum’s required privacy and compliance training for users licensing these data.  License 
requirements stipulate that re -identification of the data is prohibited by [CONTACT_2371].  We will not attempt to link Optum data 
with other data sources other than through geographic linkages provided by [CONTACT_192420].  
To protect the privacy and confidentiality of participant data and to minimize the risk of a breach of confidentiality, we 
have strong confidentiality and data security measures in place for these electronic records.  The Optum datasets will be 
stored at DPM on password -protected, virus -protected DPM hard drives subject to rigorous Harvard Pi[INVESTIGATOR_192350].  Data will be stored only on a secure network and not on any laptops, portable drives, or other unsecured 
devices.  Data will remain on DPM’s local servers/computers at all times, as per our data -use agreement with 
Optum.   Investigat ors may access these servers/computers remotely within the [LOCATION_002] using DPM's approved 
Citrix software, which is approved under the DUA that governs the dataset.   
These data are only available to the study teams whose research projects are approved  for their use and may be used 
only for the purposes of completing the approved analyses.   Only investigators [CONTACT_192441], [CONTACT_192442], and [CONTACT_192443], programmer, data manager, and project manager will have access to the data on their computers at DPM for  the 
proposed research.  All investigators and study staff who access the data must have completed required CITI training 
and privacy and security training. These data will not be accessed by [CONTACT_192421][INVESTIGATOR_192351].   Each member of the study team  will undergo structured HIPAA 
training in procedures to maintain confidentiality and must sign an oath of confidentiality; breach of confidentiality is 
grounds for immediate termination . Study investigators outside of the DPM will not be allowed to access  these data, and 
only summarized data will be shared outside the DPM.    
3. Potential Benefits of the Proposed Research to Human Subjects and Others  
The proposed research will provide no direct benefit to study subjects.  The proposed research may benefit o ther similar 
populations by [CONTACT_192422].  The future potential benefits on insurance plan design that might emerge from the 
findings of this study outweigh the minimal risk of loss of confidentiality.  
4. Importance of the Knowledge to be Gained  
The analyses in this study have potential benefits for individuals and families with asthma with commercial insurance. 
Results could help health pl ans and employers refine insurance benefit design to target the needs of patients with 
asthma while containing costs.  Findings may be especially useful to vulnerable populations who may suffer worse 
health under insurance with high levels of cost sharing.  This project will increase awareness of particular sub -groups 
who are at risk for adverse outcomes, and for whom strategies such as preventive drug lists may be beneficial.  Risks to 
subjects are small and the benefits from the knowledge to be gained far o utweigh these minimal risks.  
INCLUSION OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES  
This research focuses on adults and children enrolled in commercial health insurance plans.  The proposed study will 
include all women and minorities who qualify for the study based on age, presence of asthma, and having commercial 
insurance from an employer  or (in Aim 1) through the non -group market . The proposed project does not use 
race/ethnicity or sex/gender as part of its inclusion criteria.   We expect the distribution of study subject s by [CONTACT_4321]/gender 
and race/ethnicity to be similar to that of commercially -insured populations with asthma nationally, in which asthma is 
more prevalent among certain racial and ethnic minorities and among women overall (although more prevalent among 
boys fo r children). Study aims will specifically examine potential disparities for racial/ethnic minority populations in 
response to high levels of cost sharing in high deductible plans, based on prior evidence that these groups may be 
adversely affected.  We exp ect that we will have sufficient sample size to make comparisons based on race/ethnicity and 
on sex/gender.  Thus, we do not propose specific outreach programs for recruiting subjects of a particular race/ethnicity 
or sex/gender.  
 INCLUSION OF CHILDREN  
Subjects in the Aim [ADDRESS_228514] T. H. Chan School of Public Health  (HSPH) in [LOCATION_011], [LOCATION_005] is a premier U.S. educational institution 
dedicated to advancing the health of populations worldwide. Our subcontract to HSPH will be for the services and effort 
of our co -investigators on the application, Anna Sinaiko, PhD and Mer edith Rosenthal, PhD as well as a research 
assistant. [CONTACT_192444] is a Research Scientist in the Department of Health Policy and Management at HSPH with extensive 
expertise in health economics and health policy. She has conducted claims -based and qualitati ve studies of consumer 
evaluation of consumer response to health insurance coverage options and benefit design .  [CONTACT_192445] is a Professor 
of Health Economics and Policy and Associate Dean for Diversity in the Department of Health Policy and Management at 
HSPH. [CONTACT_192445] has broad experience conducting research on the impact of market -based health policy reforms, 
and has advised both federal and state policymakers in healthcare payment policy and implementation The principal 
investigator [INVESTIGATOR_192352] y, [CONTACT_192446], has a history of successful collaboration with Drs. Sinaiko and Rosenthal 
on studies of health insurance innovations such as high -deductible plans and health insurance exchanges plans and their 
impact on patient decision -making str ategies, insurance plan selections , and spending.  Drs. Sinaiko will collaborate and 
provide economic expertise on all aims of the project.  Her work will include assisting with research strategy design, 
conceptualization and definition of variables, provid ing input on preliminary results, manuscript writing, and interpreting 
and inseminating results. She will lead a manuscript as part of Aim [ADDRESS_228515], particularly 
for Aim 4. She will advise on generation of study hypotheses, the design for the empi[INVESTIGATOR_192353], the interpretation 
and framing of find ings in a policy context, and  dissemination of findings.  She will take a senior author role in 
manuscri pt-writing for Aim 4 .  
The Asthma and Allergy Foundation of America  (AAFA) is a not -for-profit  voluntary health organization that has been  
recognized nationally and internationally as the trusted source of inf ormation and education about asthma and allergies 
for patients, their families , and caregivers . AAFA has a national network of health professionals, certified asthma 
educators, and volunteers (patients, parents and family caregivers) that delivers its nati onal and community -focused 
programs  through f ive state and regional chapters, with  over 45 affili ated educational support groups and  141 
community awareness partners, including clinics and pharmacies, and allied health providers and faculty.  AAFA’s  
websites house hundreds of pages of evidence -based content and resources for disease prevention, manag ement, 
treatment, and support; t oget her, these websites host an average of 700,000 unique visitors each month.  AAFA has 
received funding from multiple cooperative agreements from the Center s for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) , 
including a five -year comprehensive school -based initiative  to educate school staff, teens, parents, and community 
health professionals with asthma using AAFA’s Power Breathing Program  and a five -year project to create easy -to-read 
educational lesson materials in English and Spanish for home visitors and childcare  providers to  educate families and 
their preschool -age children with asthma.   AAFA has  also received cooperative agreements from EPA including a six -
year project to educate child care providers about asthma management and controlling indoor and outdoor 
environmental triggers. In addition to AAFA’s federal projects, AAFA educates and informs the asthma and allergy 
communi ty via print and e -newsletters , regular social media posts (Facebook and Twitter), monthly webinars, numerous 
public awareness campaigns, the product certification program, educational support groups, and through  their  extensive 
website content.   These capabilities, resources, and relationships are unique strengths that AAFA will bring to the 
proposed project which will enhance the project’s  scientific quality, patient and stakeholder engagement, and 
dissemination.  
Meryl Bloomrosen, MBI, MBA,  Senior Vice President of Policy, Advocacy, and Research, will be a co -investigator on the 
project. She has over 30 years of experience in healthcare and  currently oversees AAFA’s research portfolio, including 
projects supported by [CONTACT_6750], Genetic Alliance, and PCORI.  As Co -Investigator, [CONTACT_192436] will attend monthly 
study team meetings via conference call, and a ttend meetings with the project’s Stak eholder Advisory Board three times 
a year via . She will a ssist with study design, selection of target populations , and outcomes to be measured . In Aim [ADDRESS_228516] and Patient and Family Research Council.  [CONTACT_192447] will also r eview findings from the qualitative and quantitative analyses  and co -author  presentations and 
manuscript s.  Through AAFA’s extensive resources and relationships with the patient, provider, research, and policy 
communities, MS. Bloomrosen and AAFA will be able to implement a robust dissemination strategy for project findings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
REFERENCES CITED  
 
 
1. National Heart Lung and Blood Institute. Morbidity & Mortality: 2012 Chart Book on Cardiovascular, Lung, and 
Blood Diseases 2012.  
2. Akinbami LJ, Moorman JE, Liu X. Asthma prevalence, health care use, and mortality: [LOCATION_002], 2005 -2009. 
National health statistics reports.  2011(32):1 -14. 
3. Akinbami LJ, Simon AE, Rossen LM. Changing trends in asthma prevalence among children. Pediat rics. 
2016;137(1):1 -7. 
4. Gupta RS, Carrion -Carire V, Weiss KB. The widening black/white gap in asthma hospi[INVESTIGATOR_192354]. J 
Allergy Clin Immunol.  2006;117(2):351 -358.  
5. Mannino DM, Homa DM, Akinbami LJ, Moorman JE, Gwynn C, Redd SC. Surveilla nce for asthma --[LOCATION_002], 
1980 -1999. MMWR Surveill Summ.  2002;51(1):1 -13. 
6. Weiss KB, Wagener DK. Changing patterns of asthma mortality. Identifying target populations at high risk. JAMA.  
1990;264(13):1683 -1687.  
7. National Asthma Education and Preve ntion Program. Expert Panel Report 2: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Asthma.  1997. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NIH Publication No. 97 -40511997.  
8. National Heart Lung and Blood Institute National Asthma Education and Preventi on Program. Expert Panel 
Report 3: Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Asthma.  Bethesda, MD.2007.  
9. Szefler SJ, Baker JW, Uryniak T, Goldman M, Silkoff PE. Comparative study of budesonide inhalation suspension 
and montelukast in young children with mild persistent asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol.  2007;120(5):1043 -1050.  
10. Sorkness CA, Lemanske RF, Jr., Mauger DT, et al. Long -term comparison of 3 controller regimens for mild -
moderate persistent childhood asthma: the Pediatric Asthma Controller Tr ial. J Allergy Clin Immunol.  
2007;119(1):[ADDRESS_228517], compared with fluticasone, for 
control of asthma among 6 - to 14 -year -old patients with mild asthma: the MOSAIC study. Pediatric s. 
2005;116(2):360 -369.  
12. Chauhan BF, Ducharme FM. Anti -leukotriene agents compared to inhaled corticosteroids in the management of 
recurrent and/or chronic asthma in adults and children. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.  2012;5:CD002314.  
13. Barnes PJ, Peders en S. Efficacy and safety of inhaled corticosteroids in asthma. Report of a workshop held in Eze, 
[LOCATION_009], October 1992. Am Rev Respir Dis.  1993;148(4 Pt 2):S1 -26. 
14. Gustafsson P, Tsanakas J, Gold M, Primhak R, Radford M, Gillies E. Comparison of the effi cacy and safety of 
inhaled fluticasone propi[INVESTIGATOR_16847] 200 micrograms/day with inhaled beclomethasone dipropi[INVESTIGATOR_16847] 400 
micrograms/day in mild and moderate asthma. Arch Dis Child.  1993;69(2):[ADDRESS_228518] of inhaled formoterol and budesonide on exacerbations of 
asthma. Formoterol and Corticosteroids Establishing Therapy (FACET) International Study Group. N Engl J Med.  
1997;337(20):1405 -1411.  
16. Dales RE, Sch weitzer I, Kerr P, Gougeon L, Rivington R, Draper J. Risk factors for recurrent emergency 
department visits for asthma. Thorax.  1995;50(5):520 -524.  
17. Williams LK, Pladevall M, Xi H, et al. Relationship between adherence to inhaled corticosteroids and poo r 
outcomes among adults with asthma. J Allergy Clin Immunol.  2004;114(6):1288 -1293.  
18. Bauman LJ, Wright E, Leickly FE, et al. Relationship of adherence to pediatric asthma morbidity among inner -city 
children. Pediatrics.  2002;110(1 Pt 1):e6.  
19. Wu AC, Butler MG, Li L, et al. Primary adherence to controller medications for asthma is poor. Annals of the 
American Thoracic Society.  2015;12(2):161 -166.  
20. Campbell JD, Allen -Ramey F, Sajjan SG, Maiese EM, Sullivan SD. Increasing pharmaceutical copayments: impact 
on asthma medication utilization and outcomes. American Journal of Managed Care.  2011;17(10):703 -710.  
21. Karaca -Mandic P, Jena AB, Joyce GF, Goldman DP. Out -of-pocket medication costs and use of medications and 
health care services among children with asthma. JAMA.  2012;307(12):1284 -1291.  
22. Ungar WJ, Paterson JM, Gomes T, et al. Relati onship of asthma management, socioeconomic status, and 
medication insurance characteristics to exacerbation frequency in children with asthma. Annals of Allergy, 
Asthma & Immunology.  2011;106(1):[ADDRESS_228519]. Employer Health Benefits 2015 Annual 
Survey. 2015; http://files.kff.org/attachment/report -2015 -employer -health -benefits -survey . 
24. Department  of the Treasury. Health Savings Accounts and Other Tax -Favored Health Plans. 2015; 
https:// www.irs.gov/pub/irs -pdf/p969.pdf . Accessed January 19, 2016.  
25. America's Health Insurance Plans. January 2 013 Census Shows 15.5 Million People Covered by [CONTACT_192423]/ High -Deductible Health Plans (HSA/HDHPs). 2013. https:// www.ahip.org/hsa2013/ . Accessed Jan 8, 
2016.  
26. Mayer K. Seven reasons HSAs are ta king off. 2013; http://www.benefitspro.com/2013/09/11/seven -reasons -
hsas -are-taking -off?t=Consumer -Driven&page=[ADDRESS_228520] 3. 2016. 
http://files.kff.org/attachment/Topline -Survey -of-Non -Group -Health -Insurance -Enrollees . Accessed May 20, 
2016.  
28. Newhouse JP and the Insurance Experiment Group. Free for all? Lessons from the RAND Health Insurance 
Experiment . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; 1993.  
29. Tamblyn R, Lapris e R, Hanley JA, et al. Adverse events associated with prescription drug cost -sharing among 
poor and elderly persons. JAMA.  2001;285(4):[ADDRESS_228521] -sharing on oral hypoglycemic use in five 
managed care organizations: how much is too much? Medical Care.  2005;43(10):[ADDRESS_228522] sharing:  associations with medication and medical 
utilization and spending and health. JAMA.  2007;298(1):[ADDRESS_228523] of a Medicaid copayment 
policy on prescription drug and health servic es utilization in a fee -for-service Medicaid population. Medical Care.  
2008;46(6):[ADDRESS_228524] sharing: a review of the evidence. 
American Journal of Managed Care.  2005;11(11):730 -740.  
34. Hamel L, Norton M, Pollitz K, Levitt L, Claxton G, Brodie M. The Burden of Medical Debt: January 2016 Results 
from the Kaiser Family Foundation/[LOCATION_001] Times Medical Bills Survey. 2016; http://kff.org/report -
section/the -burden -of-medical -debt -section -1-who -has-medical -bill-problems -and-what -are-the-contributing -
factors/ . Accessed January 5, 2016.  
35. Goldman DP, Joyce GF, Escarce JJ, et al. Pharmacy benefits and the use of drugs by [CONTACT_192424]. JAMA.  
2004;291(19):[ADDRESS_228525] sharing drug insurance plan on drug utilization among 
individuals receiving social assistance. Health Policy.  2003;64(2):[ADDRESS_228526] -sharing on use of asthma medication in children. 
Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine.  2008;162(2):[ADDRESS_228527] CA, Cheang MS, Simons F. Income -based drug benefit policy: impact on receipt of inhaled 
corticosteroid prescriptions by [CONTACT_192425]. Canadian Medical Association Journal.  
2001;165(7):[ADDRESS_228528] -Sharing Changes on Albuterol 
Inhaler Use by [CONTACT_63779]. Paper presented at: AcademyHealth Annual Research Meeting; June 9, 2014; San Diego, 
CA. 
41. Ho A, Collins SR, Davis K, Doty MM. A Look at Working -age Caregivers' Roles, Health Concerns, and Need for 
Support. 2005; http://www.cmwf.org/publications/publications_show.htm?doc_id=[ADDRESS_228529] sharing, family health care burden, and the use of 
specialty drugs for rheumatoid arthritis. Health Serv Res.  2010;45(5 Pt 1):1227 -1250.  
43. Monheit AC, Grafova I, Kumar R. How does family health care use respond to economic shocks? realized and 
anticipated effects. NBER Working Paper Series. . Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research; 2014.  
44. Karaca -Mandic P, Choi Yoo SJ, Sommers BD. Recession led to a decline in out -of-pocket spending for children 
with special health care needs. Health Affairs.  2013;32(6):1054 -1062.  
45. Galbraith AA, Soumerai SB, Ross -Degnan D, Rosenthal MB, Gay C, Lieu TA. Delayed and forgone care for families 
with chronic conditions in high -deductible health plans. Journal of General Internal Medicine.  2012;27(9):1105 -
1111.  
46. Galbraith AA, Sinaiko AD,  Soumerai SB, Ross -Degnan D, Dutta -Linn MM, Lieu TA. Some families who purchased 
health coverage through the [LOCATION_005] Connector wound up with high financial burdens. Health Aff 
(Millwood).  2013;32(5 ):[ADDRESS_228530] of a high -deductible health plan on 
outpatient visits and associated diagnostic tests. Med Care.  2014;52(1):86 -92. 
48. Wharam JF, Galbraith AA, Kleinman KP, Soumerai SB, Ross -Degnan D, Landon BE. Cancer screening before and  
after switching to a high -deductible health plan. Ann Intern Med.  2008;148(9):647 -655.  
49. Wharam JF, Landon BE, Zhang F, Soumerai SB, Ross -Degnan D. High -deductible insurance: two -year emergency 
department and hospi[INVESTIGATOR_29399]. Am J Manag Care.  2011;17(10):e 410-418.  
50. Galbraith AA, Ross -Degnan D, Soumerai SB, et al. High -deductible health plans: are vulnerable families enrolled? 
Pediatrics.  2009;123(4):e589 -594.  
51. Wharam JF, Zhang F, Landon BE, Soumerai SB, Ross -Degnan D. Low -socioeconomic -status enrollee s in high -
deductible plans reduced high -severity emergency care. Health Aff (Millwood).  2013;32(8):[ADDRESS_228531] of high -deductible health plans on 
men and women: an analysis of eme rgency department care. Med Care.  2013;51(8):639 -645.  
53. Wharam JF, Landon BE, Galbraith AA, Kleinman KP, Soumerai SB, Ross -Degnan D. Emergency department use 
and subsequent hospi[INVESTIGATOR_192355] a high -deductible health plan. JAMA.  2007;297(1 0):1093 -
1102.  
54. Galbraith A, Ross -Degnan D, Soumerai S, et al. Use of well -child visits in high -deductible health plans. Am J 
Manag Care.  2010;16(11):833 -840.  
55. Kozhimannil KB, Huskamp HA, Graves AJ, Soumerai SB, Ross -Degnan D, Wharam JF. High -deductib le health plans 
and costs and utilization of maternity care. Am J Manag Care.  2011;17(1):e17 -25. 
56. Reiss SK, Ross -Degnan D, Zhang F, Soumerai SB, Zaslavsky AM, Wharam JF. Effect of switching to a high -
deductible health plan on use of chronic medications.  Health Services Research.  2011;46(5):1382 -1401.  
57. Wharam JF, Graves AJ, Landon BE, Zhang F, Soumerai SB, Ross -Degnan D. Two -year trends in colorectal cancer 
screening after switch to a high -deductible health plan. Med Care.  2011;49(9):865 –871.  
58. Whara m JF, Graves AJ, Zhang F, Soumerai SB, Ross -Degnan D, Landon BE. Two -year trends in cancer screening 
among low socioeconomic status women in an HMO -based high -deductible health plan. J Gen Intern Med.  
2012;27(9):[ADDRESS_228532]. Med Care.  2016;54(5):466 -
473.  
60. Blustein J. Medicare coverage, supplemental insurance, and the use o f mammography by [CONTACT_192426]. N Engl J 
Med.  1995;332(17):[ADDRESS_228533] sharing on care seeking and health 
status: results from the Medical Outcomes Study. Am J Public Health.  2001;91 (11):[ADDRESS_228534] of incentive -based 
formularies on prescription -drug utilization and spending. N Engl J Med.  2003;349(23):[ADDRESS_228535] of a consumer -driven health plan on medical 
care expenditures and utilization. Health Serv Res.  2004;39(4 Pt 2):1189 -1210.  
64. Lo Sasso AT, Helmchen LA, Kaestner R. The effects of consumer -directed health plans on health care spending. J. 
Risk Insur.  2010;77(1):85 -103.  
65. Lo Sasso AT, Shah M, Frogner BK. Health savings accounts and health care spending. Health Services Research.  
2010;45(4):1041 -1060.  
66. Collins SR, Rasmussen PW, Beutel S, Doty MM. The Problem of Underinsurance and How Rising Deductibles Will 
Make It Worse: Findings from the Commonwealth Fund Biennial Health Insurance Survey, 2014. Issue Brief 
(Commonw Fund).  2015 ;13:[ADDRESS_228536], Feldman R, Chen S. Effects of a consumer driven health plan on pharmaceutical spending and 
utilization. Health Serv Res.  2008;43(5):[ADDRESS_228537] chronic conditions face substantial financial burden. Health 
Affairs.  2011;30(2):[ADDRESS_228538] Buy Drugs: Evaluating Inhaled Steroids Used to Treat Asthma. Comparing Effe ctiveness, 
Safety, and Price. 2013; https:// www.consumerreports.org/health/resources/pdf/best -buy-
drugs/InhaledSteroidsFINAL.pdf . 
70. McGuire K. 'Gr een' device is mandated for people and planet. New inhalers are ozone -safe, but they cost more 
and operate differently. St. Louis Post - Dispatch.  Dec 28, 2008.  
71. Rosenthal E. The Soaring Cost of a Simple Breath. The [LOCATION_001] Times.  October 12, 2013.  
72. Chen S, Levin RA, Gartner JA. Medication adherence and enrollment in a consumer -driven health plan. American 
Journal of Managed Care.  2010;16(2):e43 -50. 
73. Nair KV , Park J, Wolfe P, Saseen JJ, Allen RR, Ganguly R. Consumer -driven health plans: impact on utilization and 
expenditures for chronic disease sufferers. J Occup Environ Med.  2009;51(5):594 -603.  
74. Fronstin P, Sepulveda MJ, Roebuck MC. Medication utilization  and adherence in a health savings account -eligible 
plan. Am J Manag Care.  2013;19(12):e400 -407.  
75. Greene J, Hibbard J, Murray JF, Teutsch SM, Berger ML. The impact of consumer -directed health plans on 
prescription drug use. Health Aff (Millwood).  2008;2 7(4):1111 -1119.  
76. Kullgren J, Galbraith A, Hinrichsen V, et al. Health care use and decision -making among lower -income families in 
high -deductible health plans. Arch Intern Med.  2010;170:1918 -1925.  
77. Lieu T, Solomon J, Sabin J, Kullgren J, Hinrichsen V , Galbraith A. Consumer awareness and strategies among 
families with high -deductible health plans. J Gen Intern Med.  2010;25(3).  
78. Sinaiko AD, Mehrotra A, Sood N. Cost -sharing obligations, high -deductible health plan growth, and shoppi[INVESTIGATOR_192356]:  Enrollees with skin in the game. JAMA Internal Medicine.  2016:1 -3. 
79. Lohr KN, Brook RH, Kamberg CJ, et al. Use of medical care in the Rand Health Insurance Experiment. Diagnosis - 
and service -specific analyses in a randomized controlled trial. Med Care.  1986;24([ADDRESS_228539]):S1 -87. 
80. Collins SR, Gunja M, Doty MM, Beutel S. How High Is America’s Health Care Cost Burden? Findings from the 
Commonwealth Fund Health Care Affordability Tracking Survey, July –August 2015. Issue Brief (Commonw Fund).  
2015;32:1 -15. 
81. Tseng CW, Tierney EF, Gerzoff RB, et al. Race/ethnicity and economic d ifferences in cost -related medication 
underuse among insured adults with diabetes: the Translating Research Into Action for Diabetes Study. Diabetes 
Care.  2008;31(2):261 -266.  
82. Pi[INVESTIGATOR_74182], Heisler M, Harand A, Juip M. Beliefs about prescription medication s among patients with diabetes: 
variation across racial groups and influences on cost -related medication underuse. Journal of health care for the 
poor and underserved.  2010;21(1):[ADDRESS_228540] 
sharing on socioeconomic disparities in health care. Journal of General Internal Medicine.  2008;23(8):1131 -1136.  
84. Chernew ME, Rosen AB, Fendrick AM. Value -based insurance design. Health Aff (Millwood).  2007;26(2): w195 -
203.  
85. Chernew ME, Shah MR, Wegh A, et al. Impact of decreasing copayments on medication adherence within a 
disease management environment. Health Aff (Millwood).  2008;27(1):103 -112.  
86. Fendrick AM, Chernew ME. Value -based insurance design: alignin g incentives to bridge the divide between 
quality improvement and cost containment. Am J Manag Care.  2006;12 Spec no.:SP5 -SP10.  
87. Fendrick AM, Chernew ME. Value -based insurance design: a "clinically sensitive" approach to preserve quality of 
care and con tain costs. Am J Manag Care.  2006;12(1):18 -20. 
88. Choudhry NK, Rosenthal MB, Milstein A. Assessing the evidence for value -based insurance design. Health Aff 
(Millwood).  2010;29(11):1988 -1994.  
89. Wojcik J. IRS’ lack of definitive drugs list has firms full y covering maintenance meds. Nov 9, 2014; 
http://www.businessinsurance.com/article/20141109/NEWS03/311099985/irs -lack-of-definitive -drugs -list-has-
firms -fully -covering . Accessed Jan 25, 2016.  
90. Aetna. Reducing your out -of-pocket costs for the medicine you need Preventive Medicine List.  
https:// www.aetna.com/content/dam/aetna/pdfs/formulary/2016_Preventive.pdf . Accessed Jan 25, 2016.  
91. Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois. Preventive Drug Benefit Program, Employee Guide Effective January 1, 2015.  
http://www.bcbsil.com/cdw/21009_preventive_rx.pdf . Accessed Jan 25, 2016.  
92. Choudhry NK, Fischer MA, Avorn J, et al. At Pi[INVESTIGATOR_192357], value -based insurance design cut copayments and 
increased drug adherence. Health Aff.  2010;29(11):1995 -2001.  
93. Choudhry NK, Fischer MA, Smith BF, et al. Five features of value -based insurance desi gn plans were associated 
with higher rates of medication adherence. Health Aff (Millwood).  2014;33(3):493 -501.  
94. Lee JL, Maciejewski ML, Raju SS, Shrank WH, Choudhry NK. Value -based insurance design: quality improvement 
but no cost savings. Health Affair s. 2013;32(7):[ADDRESS_228541] JH, Parker JC, Maciejewski ML. Medication adherence changes following value -
based insurance design. Am J Manag Care.  2012;18(5):265 -274.  
96. Choudhry NK, Avorn J, Glynn RJ, et al. Full coverage f or preventive medications after myocardial infarction. New 
England Journal of Medicine.  2011;365(22):[ADDRESS_228542] of reducing cardiovascular medication copayments on 
health spending and resource utiliz ation. J Am Coll Cardiol.  2012;60(18):1817 -1824.  
98. Choudhry NK, By[CONTACT_8570] K, Shrank WH, et al. Eliminating medication copayments reduces disparities in 
cardiovascular care. Health Aff (Millwood).  2014;33(5):863 -870.  
99. Huckfeldt PJ, Haviland A, Mehrotra A, Wagner Z, Sood N. Patient Responses to Incentives in Consumer -directed 
Health Plans: Evidence from Pharmaceuticals. NBER Working Papers Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of 
Economic Research; 2015.  
100.  Gibson TB, Wang S,  Kelly E, et al. A value -based insurance design program at a large company boosted 
medication adherence for employees with chronic illnesses. Health Affairs.  2011;30(1):[ADDRESS_228543] Evidenc e-based Practice Center. Research 
Prioritization Topic Briefs PCORI Scientific Program Area: Improving Health Systems.  Washington, DC: Patient -
Centered Outcomes Research Institute;2014.  
102.  Fronstin P, Sepúlveda MJ, Roebuck MC. Consumer -directed health pl ans reduce the long -term use of outpatient 
physician visits and prescription drugs. Health Affairs.  2013;32(6):[ADDRESS_228544] vulnerable 
populations? Forum for Health  Economics & Policy.  2011;14(2).  
104.  Haviland AM, Eisenberg MD, Mehrotra A, Huckfeldt PJ, Sood N. Do “Consumer -Directed” Health Plans Bend the 
Cost Curve Over Time? NBER Working Paper Series. . Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research; 
2015.  
105. Parente ST, Feldman R, Christianson JB. Employee choice of consumer -driven health insurance in a multiplan, 
multiproduct setting. Health Serv Res.  2004;39(4 Pt 2):1091 -1112.  
106.  Charlton ME, Levy BT, High RR, Schneider JE, Brooks JM. Effects of health savings account -eligible plans on 
utilization and expenditures. Am J Manag Care.  2011;17(1):[ADDRESS_228545], Christianson JB. Consumer -directed health plans: new evidence on spending and 
utilization. Inquiry.  2007;44(1):[ADDRESS_228546] sharing and HEDIS performance. Med Care Res Rev.  2008;65(6):713 -728.  
110.  McLaughlin CG, ed Health Policy and the Uninsured . Washington, DC: The Urban Institute Press; 2004.  
111.  Shadish W, Cook T, Campbell D. Experimental and quasi -experimental designs for generalized causal inference . 
[LOCATION_011]: Houghton Mifflin; 2001.  
112.  Clair TS, Cook TD, Hallberg K. Examining the internal va lidity and statistical precision of the comparative 
interrupted time series design by [CONTACT_7425] a randomized experiment. American Journal of Evaluation.  
2014.  
113.  Schreyogg J, Stargardt T, Tiemann O. Costs and quality of hospi[INVESTIGATOR_192358] h care systems: a multi -level 
approach with propensity score matching. Health Econ.  2011;20(1):[ADDRESS_228547] RH, Dalal A, Blanchette CM. Economic burden prior to COPD 
diagnosis: a matched case -control study in the U nited States. Respir Med.  2008;102(12):1744 -1752.  
115.  Nordstrom BL, Norman HS, Dube TJ, Wilcox MA, Walker AM. Identification of abacavir hypersensitivity reaction 
in health care claims data. Pharmacoepi[INVESTIGATOR_9697].  2007;16(3):289 -296.  
116.  Wharam JF, Zhang F, Xu X, Landon BE, Ross -Degnan D. National trends and disparities in cervical cancer 
screening among commercially insured Women, 2001 -2010. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_1948].  
2014;23(11):2366 -2373.  
117.  Wharam JF, Landon B, Zhang F, Xu X, Soumerai S,  Ross -Degnan D. Mammography rates 3 years after the 2009 US 
Preventive Services Task Force Guidelines changes. J Clin Oncol.  2015;33(9):1067 -1074.  
118.  Larochelle MR, Zhang F, Ross -Degnan D, Wharam JF. Rates of opi[INVESTIGATOR_192359] -deterrent extended -release oxycodone and withdrawal of propoxyphene. JAMA Intern Med.  
2015;175(6):978 -987.  
119.  Larochelle MR, Liebschutz JM, Zhang F, Ross -Degnan D, Wharam JF. Opi[INVESTIGATOR_192360] r epeated overdose: a cohort study. Ann Intern Med.  2016;164(1):1 -9. 
120.  Lewis K, Zhang F, Arterburn D, Ross -Degnan D, Gillman M, Wharam J. Comparing medical costs and utilization 
after laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding and roux -en-Y gastric by[CONTACT_6476]. JAMA -Surgery.  In Press.  
121.  Wharam J, Landon B, Zhang F, Xu X, Ross -Degnan D. National trends and disparities in mammography among 
commercially insured women, 2001 -2010. Journal of Public Health Management and Practice. [In press].  
122.  Wu AC, Li L, Fung V,  et al. Use of leukotriene receptor antagonists are associated with a similar risk of asthma 
exacerbations as inhaled corticosteroids. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology: In Practice.  2014;2(5):607 -
613.  
123.  Lewis KH, Zhang F, Arterburn DE, Ross -Degnan D, Gillman MW, Wharam JF. Comparing Medical Costs and Use 
After Laparoscopic Adjustable Gastric Banding and Roux -en-Y Gastric By[CONTACT_6476]. JAMA Surg.  2015;150(8):787 -794.  
124.  Graves AJ, Kozhimannil KB, Kleinman KP, Wharam JF. The association between high -deductible health plan 
transition and contraception and birth rates. Health Serv Res.  2016;51(1):187 -204.  
125.  Ertefaie A, Stephens DA. Comparing approaches to causal inference for longitudinal data: inverse probability 
weighting versus propensity scores. The international journal of biostatistics.  2010;6(2):Article 14.  
126.  Fung V, Graetz I, Galbraith A, et al. Financial barriers to care among low -income children with asthma: Health 
care reform implications. JAMA Pediatrics.  2014;168(7):649 -656.  
127.  Wu A. Insurance and high out of pocket costs of #asthma meds. 2016; https://storify.com/Asthma3Ways/hdhps -
and-asthma -meds?utm_source=direct -sfy.co&utm_campaign=&awesm=sfy.co_f1EmL&utm_medium=sfy.co -
twitter&utm_content=storify -pi[INVESTIGATOR_192361]. Accessed Jan 25, 2016.  
128.  Smith LA, Bokhour B, Hohman KH, et al. Modifiable risk factors for suboptimal control and controller medication 
underuse among children with asthma. Pediatrics.  2008;122(4):[ADDRESS_228548] of medication nonad herence on hospi[INVESTIGATOR_192362]. Archives of Internal Medicine.  2006;166(17):1836 -1841.  
130.  Pladevall M, Williams LK, Potts LA, Divine G, Xi H, Lafata JE. Clinical outcomes and adherence to medications 
measured by [CONTACT_192427]. Diabetes Care.  2004;27(12):[ADDRESS_228549].  
https:// www.bcbst.com/brokers/onlineCatalog/material/Brochure/cdhc/CDHC -012.pdf . Accessed Oct 12, 2016.  
132.  Caterpi[INVESTIGATOR_192363]. Consumer Driven Health Plan (CDHP) Preventive Drug List.  
https://benefits.cat.com/content/dam/benefits/2017healthcare/CDHP -Preventive -Drug -List6 -10-16.pdf. 
Accessed Oct 12, 2016.  
133.  North Carolina State Health Plan for Teachers and State Employees. [ADDRESS_228550]. 
2016; https://shp.nctreasurer.com/Medical%20Benefits/CDHP_Preventative_Med_List -2016.pdf. Accessed Oct 
14, 2016.  
134.  Schatz M, Zeiger RS, Vollmer WM, et al. The controller -to-total asthma medication ratio is associated with 
patien t-centered as well as utilization outcomes. Chest.  2006;130(1):43 -50. 
135.  Fuhlbrigge A, Carey VJ, Adams RJ, et al. Evaluation of asthma prescription measures and health system 
performance based on emergency department utilization. Med Care.  2004;42(5):465 -471.  
136.  Long SK, Masi PB. Access and affordability: an update on health reform in [LOCATION_005], fall 2008. Health Aff 
(Millwood).  2009;28(4):w578 -587.  
137.  Merlis M. Family out -of-pocket spending for health services: a continuing source of financial in security. The 
Commonwealth Fund. 2002. http://www.cmwf.org/usr_doc/merlis_oopspending_509.pdf . 
138.  Galbraith AA, Wong ST, Kim SE, Newacheck PW. Out -of-pocket financial burden for low -income families with 
children: socioeconomic disparities and effects of insurance. Health Serv Res.  2005;40(6 pt 1):[ADDRESS_228551] DM. Changes in financial burdens for health care: national estimates for the population 
younger than 65 y ears, 1996 to 2003. JAMA.  2006;296(22):2712 -2719.  
140.  The Johns Hopkins ACG Case -Mix System Reference Manual, Version 7.0 . Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins 
University; 2005.  
141.  Reid RJ, Roos NP, MacWilliam L, Frohlich N, Black C. Assessing population he alth care need using a claims -based 
ACG morbidity measure: a validation analysis in the Province of Manitoba. Health Serv Res.  2002;37(5):[ADDRESS_228552] (HCUP). Chronic Con dition 
Indicator (CCI) for ICD -10-CM.  https:// www.hcup -us.ahrq.gov/toolssoftware/chronic_icd10/chronic_icd10.jsp . 
Accessed Sept 29, 2015.  
143.  Fiscella K, Fremont AM . Use of geocoding and surname [CONTACT_192434]. Health Services 
Research.  2006;41(4p1):1482 -1500.  
144.  Krieger N, Chen JT, Waterman PD, Rehkopf DH, Subramanian SV. Painting a truer pi[INVESTIGATOR_192364]/ethnic health inequalities: the Public Health Disparities Geocoding Project. Am J Public Health.  
2005;95(2):312 -323.  
145.  Krieger N, Chen J T, Waterman PD, Soobader MJ, Subramanian SV, Carson R. Choosing area based socioeconomic 
measures to monitor social inequalities in low birth weight and childhood lead poisoning: The Public Health 
Disparities Geocoding Project (US). J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_192365] H ealth.  2003;57(3):186 -199.  
146.  Krieger N, Chen JT, Waterman PD, Soobader MJ, Subramanian SV, Carson R. Geocoding and monitoring of US 
socioeconomic inequalities in mortality and cancer incidence: does the choice of area -based measure and 
geographic level matter?: the Public Health Disparities Geocoding Project. Am J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541].  2002;156(5):471 -482.  
147.  Krieger N, Chen JT, Waterman PD, Rehkopf DH, Subramanian SV. Race/ethnicity, gender, and monitoring 
socioeconomic gradients in health: a comparison of area -based socioeconomic measures --the public health 
disparities geocoding project. American Journal of Public Health.  2003;93(10):1655 -1671.  
148.  Cook EF, Goldman L. Performance of tests of significance based on stratification by a multivariate confounder 
score or by a propensity score. J Clin Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541].  1989;42(4):317 -324.  
149.  D'Agostino RB, Jr. Propensity score methods for bias reduction in the comparison of a treatment to a non -
randomized control group. Statistics in medicine.  1998;17(19):2265 -2281.  
150.  Rubin DB. The design versus the analysis of observational studies for causal effects: parallels with the design of 
randomized trials. Statistics in medicine.  2007;26(1):20 -36. 
151.  Coca -Perraillon M. Local and Global Optimal Propensity Score Matching.  [LOCATION_011] , MA: Harvard Medical 
School;2007. 185 -2007.  
152.  Austin PC. Optimal caliper widths for propensity -score matching when estimating differences in means and 
differences in proportions in observational studies. Pharmaceutical statistics.  2011;10(2):150 -161.  
153. Adams AS, Zhang F, LeCates RF, et al. Prior authorization for antidepressants in Medicaid: effects among 
disabled dual enrollees. Arch Intern Med.  2009;169(8):750 -756.  
154.  Lu CY, Soumerai SB, Ross -Degnan D, Zhang F, Adams AS. Unintended impacts of a M edicaid prior authorization 
policy on access to medications for bipolar illness. Med Care.  2010;48(1):4 -9. 
155.  Zhang Y, Adams AS, Ross -Degnan D, Zhang F, Soumerai SB. Effects of prior authorization on medication 
discontinuation among Medicaid beneficiaries with bipolar disorder. Psychiatr Serv.  2009;60(4):520 -527.  
156.  Soumerai SB, Zhang F, Ross -Degnan D, et al. Us e of atypi[INVESTIGATOR_192366] a policy change. Health Aff (Millwood).  2008;27(3):w185 -195.  
157.  Koenker R, Bassett GW. Regression Quantiles. Econometrica.  1978;46(1):33 -50. 
158.  Liang K -Y, Zeger S. Longitud inal data analysis using generalized linear models. Biometrika.  1986;73:13 -22. 
159.  Zeger SL, Liang KY. Longitudinal data analysis for discrete and continuous outcomes. Biometrics.  1986;42(1):121 -
130.  
160.  Buntin MB, Zaslavsky AM. Too much ado about two -part models and transformation? Comparing methods of 
modeling Medicare expenditures. J Health Econ.  2004;23(3):525 -542.  
161.  Manning WG, Mullahy J. Estimating log models: to transform or not to transform? J Health Econ.  
2001;20(4):461 -494.  
162.  Pregibon D. G oodness of link tests for generalized linear models. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series C 
(Applied Statistics).  1980;29(1):15 -14. 
163.  PASS 13 Power Analysis and Sample Size Software (2014) . Kaysville, Utah: NCSS Statistical Software.  Available at 
www.ncss.com/software/pass . 
164.  Akinbami L, Moorman J, Baily C, et al. Trends in Asthma Prevalence, Health Care Use, and Mortality in the United 
States, 2001 –2010.  Hyattsville, MD National Center for Health Statistics;2012.  
165.  Wu AC, Smith L, Bokhour B, Hohman KH, Lieu TA. Racial/ethnic variation in parent perceptions of asthma. 
Ambulatory Pediatrics.  2008;8(2):89 -97. 
166.  Galbraith A, Smith L, B okhour B, et al. Asthma care quality for children with minority -serving providers. Arch 
Pediatr Adolesc Med 2010;164:[ADDRESS_228553] DW. Comparison of methods for classifying Hispanic 
ethnicity in a populat ion-based cancer registry. Am J Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541].  1999;149(11):[ADDRESS_228554] DW, Jenkins CN, McPhee SJ. Accuracy of racial classification of 
Vietnamese patients in a population -based cancer registry. Ethnicity & disease.  1998;8(2):[ADDRESS_228555]. Predictors of misclassification of Hispanic ethnicity in 
a population -based cancer registry. Ann Epi[INVESTIGATOR_5541].  1997;7(3):200 -206.  
170.  Jacobs EA, Lauderdale DS. Receipt of cance r screening procedures among Hispanic and non -Hispanic health 
maintenance organization members. Cancer.  2001;91([ADDRESS_228556]):257 -261.  
171.  Coronado GD, Koepsell TD, Thompson B, Schwartz SM, Wharton RS, Grossman JE. Assessing cervical cancer risk 
in Hispanics. Cancer Epi[INVESTIGATOR_1948].  2002;11(10 Pt 1):979 -984.  
172.  Fremont AM, Bierman A, Wickstrom SL, et al. Use of geocoding in managed care settings to identify quality 
disparities. Health Aff (Millwood).  2005;24(2):516 -526.  
173.  Valet RS, Gebretsadik T,  Minton PA, et al. Prevalence and characteristics of medication sharing behavior in a 
pediatric Medicaid population with asthma. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol.  2015;114(2):[ADDRESS_228557] of Copayment Changes on Childre n's Albuterol Inhaler Use and Costs 
after the Clean Air Act Chlorofluorocarbon Ban. Health Serv Res.  2016.  
175.  Krieger N. Overcoming the absence of socioeconomic data in medical records: validation and application of a 
census -based methodology. American J ournal of Public Health.  1992;82(5):703 -710.  
176.  Ahuja N, Zhao W, Xiang H. Medical errors in US pediatric inpatients with chronic conditions. Pediatrics.  
2012;130(4):e786 -793.  
177.  Friedman B, Jiang HJ, Elixhauser A, Segal A. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_192367]. 
Med Care Res Rev.  2006;63(3):327 -346.  
178.  Sawicki GS, Smith L, Bokhour B, et al. Periodic use of inhaled steroids in children with mild pers istent asthma: 
what are pediatricians recommending? Clinical Pediatrics.  2008;47(5):[ADDRESS_228558], and equity. N Engl J M ed. 1987;317(9):550 -556.  
180.  Soumerai SB, McLaughlin TJ, Ross -Degnan D, Casteris CS, Bollini P. Effects of a limit on Medicaid drug -
reimbursement benefits on the use of psychotropic agents and acute mental health services by [CONTACT_192428]. N Engl J Med.  1994;331(10):650 -655.  
181.  Soumerai SB, Ross -Degnan D, Gortmaker S, Avorn J. Withdrawing payment for nonscientific drug therapy. 
Intended and unexpected effects of a large -scale natural experiment. JAMA.  1990;263(6):[ADDRESS_228559] risk in context. Market withdrawal of 
zomepi[INVESTIGATOR_192368] a case study. JAMA.  1993;270(16):1937 -1942.  
183.  Wagner AK, Soumerai SB, Zhang F, Ross -Degnan D. Segmented regression analysis of interrupted time series 
studies in medication use research. Journal of Clinical Pharmacy and Therapeutics.  2002;27(4):299 -309.  
184.  Soumerai SB, Ross -Degnan D, Avorn J, McLaug hlin T, Choodnovskiy I. Effects of Medicaid drug -payment limits on 
admission to hospi[INVESTIGATOR_192369]. N Engl J Med.  1991;325(15):1072 -1077.  
185.  Soumerai SB, McLaughlin TJ, Ross -Degnan D, Casteris CS, Bollini P. Effects of limiting Medicaid drug -
reimbursement benefits on the use of psychotropic agents and acute mental health services by [CONTACT_192428]. N Engl J Med.  1994;331(10):[ADDRESS_228560] of [LOCATION_001] State regulatory action on benzo diazepi[INVESTIGATOR_192370]. Ann Intern Med.  2007;146(2):96 -103.  
187.  Earp JA, French EA, Gilkey MB, eds. Patient advocacy for health care quality: Strategies for achieving patient -
centered care . [LOCATION_011], MA: Jones & Bartlett; 2007.  
188.  Gilkey MB. Supporting cancer survivors' participation in peer review: perspectives from NCI's CARRA program. J 
Cancer Surviv.  2014;8(1):[ADDRESS_228561] -quality chasm era. N C Med J.  2009;70(2):[ADDRESS_228562] patient choice of provider in a tiered network setting? 
Results from a survey. Health Serv Res.  2011;46(2):437 -456.  
191.  Sinaiko AD, Hirth RA. Consumers, health insurance and dominated choices. J Health Econ.  2011;30(2):450 -457.  
192.  Sinaiko AD, Rosenthal MB. Consumer experience with a tiered physician network: early evidence. The American 
Journal of Managed Care.  2010;16(2):123 -130.  
193.  Sinaiko AD, Rosenthal MB. Increased price transparency in he alth care --challenges and potential effects. N Engl J 
Med.  2011;364(10):[ADDRESS_228563] of tiered physician networks on patient choices. Health Serv Res.  
2014;49(4):1348 -1363.  
195.  Sinaiko AD, Rosenthal MB. Examining a he alth care price transparency tool: who uses it, and how they shop for 
care. Health Affairs.  2016;35(4):662 -670.  
196.  Sinaiko AD, Ross -Degnan D, Soumerai SB, Lieu T, Galbraith A. The experience of [LOCATION_005] shows that 
consumers will need help in navigating insurance exchanges. Health Aff (Millwood).  2013;32(1):78 -86. 
197.  Rosenthal MB, Li Z, Milstein A. Do patients co ntinue to see physicians who are removed from a PPO network? 
Am J Manag Care.  2009;15(10):713 -719.  
198.  Rosenthal M, Milstein A. Awakening consumer stewardship of health benefits: prevalence and differentiation of 
new health plan models. Health Serv Res.  2004;39(4 Pt 2):[ADDRESS_228564] on the freshman class of consumer -directed health plans. 
Health Aff.  2005;24(6):[ADDRESS_228565] of financial incentives for prenatal care on birth outcomes 
and spending. Health Serv Res.  2009;44(5 Pt 1):[ADDRESS_228566] on consumer choices. Health Affairs.  2012;31(3):[ADDRESS_228567] TD, Schpero WL, Rosenthal MB. Choosing wisely: prevalence and correlates of low -
value health care services in the [LOCATION_002]. J Gen Intern Med.  2015;30(2):221 -228.  
203.  Bloomrosen M, Sennett C. Pati ent engagement: challenges and opportunities for physicians. Ann Allergy Asthma 
Immunol.  2015;115(6):459 -462.  
204.  Buttorff C, Tunis S, Weiner J. Improving Value and Investing in Prevention: Encouraging Value -Based Insurance 
Designs in State Health Insuran ce Exchanges. A white paper prepared for the Executive Board of Maryland’s 
Health Benefit Exchange. 2011. http://healthcareforall.c om/wp -content/uploads/2011/11/VBID -and-HIEs -
White -Paper -MCHI -TAC-Final -11-14-11.pdf . Accessed Jan 17.  
205.  Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Medicare Advantage Value -Based Insurance Design Model. 2016; 
https://innovation.cms.gov/initiatives/vbid/. Accessed January 5, 2016.  
206.  Corlette S, Downs D, Monahan CH, Yondorf B. State insurance exchanges face challenges in offering 
standardized choices alongside innovative value -based insurance. Health Affairs.  2013;32(2):418 -426.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX  (optional )  
 
 
APPENDIX: DRAFT INTERVIEW GUIDE FOR AIM [ADDRESS_228568] on hand during  the interview.   After 
describing the study and obtaining verbal consent and permission to audiotape the interview, the interview will be 
conducted as foll ows:  
 
Introduction:  
In this study,  we want to  understand how people living with asthma obtain health care and manage their illness. We are 
especially interested in how health insurance affects their choices. In answering the following questions, please think of 
your experiences as a [patient with ast hma/parent of a child with asthma]  in the past year . 
 
 
INTERVIEW QUESTIONS  (with bulleted questions as prompts)  
 
1. Tell me about [your/your child’s] asthma.  
a. At what age [were you/ your child ] diagnosed?  
b. What medications [do you/ your child ] take for asthma?  
c. How often [do you/does your child ] take these medications?  
d. How well do these m edications work for [you/your child ]?  Have [you/your child] had to change 
medications over time, and if so, why?  
e. In the past year, have [you/your child] had to miss [wor k/school] because of [your/his/her] asthma?  
 
2. I’d like to talk more about [your/your child’s] asthma medications. For some people, taking these medications is 
challenging. What challenges have [you/your child] faced with taking asthma medications?  
a. How often  [do you/ does your child] miss doses?  
b. Why [do you /does your child]  miss doses?  
 
3. Health care for asthma can be expensive, so the next questions are about cost.  
a. How affordable are [your/your child’s] asthma medications?  
b. How much of the cost is covered by [CONTACT_192429]?  How much of the cost do you pay for yourself?  
c. What challenges have you faced paying for asthma medications? Paying for other asthma care such as 
doctor visits or emergency room visits?  
d. How often have [you/your child] had to skip doses of asthma medication because the medication is not 
affordable? How did this affect [your/your child’s] asthma?  
e. How much of a challenge is the cost of asthma medications compared to other challenges that 
[you/your child] face in taking asthma medications?  
f. Can you describe a situation when you talked with [your/your child’s] doctor about the costs of asthma 
medications?  
g. What strategies do you use to reduce asthma costs?  Have [you/your child] used medication sharing as a 
way to reduce asthma costs?  
 
 
 
 
4. Tell me about how the affordability of asthma medications affects your family’s finances as a whole.  
a. What other health -related costs affect your family?  
b. To what extent have you faced trouble paying medical bills?  
c. How have the costs of asthma medications affected y our family’s use of other medical care?   
d.  C a n y o u t hi n k of a ti m e w h e n t h e c ost of h e alt h c ar e m a d e it a c h all e n g e t o m e et t h e n e e ds of m or e 
t h a n o n e f a mil y m e m b er ? H o w di d y o u r es p o n d ?  
e.  H o w h av e t h e c osts of ast h m a m e dic ati o ns r e q uir e d y o ur f a mil y t o m ak e  tr a d e -offs wit h ot h er n o n -
m e dic al n e e ds ?  
 
5.  T h er e ar e m a n y diff er e nt ty p es of i ns ur a nc e, a n d it w o ul d b e h el pf ul f or m e t o k n o w m or e a b o ut t h e ki n d of pl a n 
y o u h av e. F e el fr e e t o us e y o ur i ns ur a nc e c ar d t o h el p y o u a ns w er.   
a.  Pl e as e d escri b e y o ur c urr e nt h e a lt h i ns ur a nc e pl a n.  
b.  H o w di d y o u c h o os e y o ur c urr e nt pl a n ?  
c.  Di d y o u h av e ot h er pl a ns t o c h o os e fr o m ?  
d.  H o w m uc h d o y o u h av e t o p ay o ut -of -p oc k et b ef or e y o ur i ns ur a nc e c o v ers m ost ty p es of c ar e ?  T his is 
k n o w n as t h e d e d ucti bl e a m o u nt.  
 
6.  [ F or r es p o n d e nts wit h P D L] Y o u h av e a s p eci al ty p e of i ns ur a nc e t h at c o v ers s o m e i m p ort a nt m e dic ati o ns f or 
fr e e. C a n y o u d escri b e t his b e n efit ?  
a.  T ell m e a b o ut h o w y o u h av e us e d t his b e n efit.  
• T o w h at ext e nt d o es t his b e n efit c o v er [ y o ur/ y o ur c hil d’s] ast h m a m e dic ati o ns ?  
• W h e n it c o m es t o m a n a gi n g [ y o ur/y o ur c hil d’s] ast h m a, h o w h el pf ul is t his b e n efit ?  
• W h at ot h er ty p es of m e dic ati o ns d o es t his c o v er ?  H av e y o u us e d a n y of t h es e m e dic ati o ns ?  
• H o w d o es t his b e n efit aff ect h o w y o u a n d y o ur f a mil y us e ot h er m e dic ati o ns ?  
 
 
 
S O CI O D E M O G R A P HI C Q U E S TI O NS   
 
7.  W h at is y o ur a g e ?  _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
 
8.  W h at is y o ur c hil d’s a g e ?  _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
 
9.  I ncl u di n g y o u, h o w m a n y f a mil y m e m b ers li v e i n y o ur h o us e h ol d ?  _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
 
[ADDRESS_228569] at e d o y o u li v e ?  _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
 
1 1.  Ar e [y o u /y o ur c hil d]  of His p a nic or L ati n o ori gi n or d esc e nt ?  
 Y es , His p a nic or L ati n o  
 N o , n ot His p a nic or L ati n o  
 D o n’t k n o w  
 R ef us e d  
 
 
 
 
1 2.  W h at is [ y o ur/y o ur c hil d’s] r ac e ? Pl e as e s el ect 1  or m or e of t h e f oll o wi n g r ac es:   
 W hit e  
 Bl ack or Afric a n A m eric a n  
 A m eric a n I n di a n or Al as k a N ati v e  
 Asi a n  
 N ati v e H a w aii a n or ot h er P acific Isl a n d er  
 Ot h er  →  _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
 D o n’t K n o w  
 R ef us e d  
 
13. This study look s at the costs of health care.  While we don’t need to know the exact amount, we would like to 
know roughly your annual household income to be able to interpret your answers accurately.  These data are 
completely confidential and will only be used to come u p with averages for the purpose of this study.   
 
a. Could you tell me whether your total annual household income in 2016  was under $30,000 or over $30,000 
before taxes?   
□  Under $30,000 (go to 13 b) □  Don’t know (skip to CLOSE ) 
□  Over $30,000 (go to 13 c) □  Refused (skip to CLOSE ) 
    
b.   Was it under $10,000, between $10,000 and $20,000, or over $20,000?  
□  Under $10,000  (skip to CLOSE)  □  Don’t know (skip to CLOSE ) 
□  Between $10,000 and $20,000  (skip to 
CLOSE)  □  Refused (skip to CLOSE ) 
□  Over $20,000  (skip to CLOSE)  
  
c. Was it under $40,000, between $40,000 and $50,000, between $50,000 and $80,000, or over $80,000?  
□  Under $40,000  □  Over $80,000  
□  Between $40,000 and $50,000  □  Don’t know  
□  Between $50,000 and $80,000  □  Refused  
 
Close:  
 
We are nearing the end of the interview.  Those are all the questions I have.  Do you have any comments or questions?  
Pause, record comments below.    
 
 
 
 
Thank you very much for your time.  Your knowledge and insights will be very helpful to this study.  
 
 