 
Virtual Empowered Relief for People With Chronic 
Pain Who Take Methadone or Buprenorphine   
[STUDY_ID_REMOVED]  
[ADDRESS_1234524] related health factors, such 
as pain, sleep, function, depression, and anxiety.  
c. Rationale for Research in Humans  
This research necessitates human participants because there is no equivalent animal 
model or non-human model to answer the study questions. The "Virtual Empowered 
Relief" (vER) class is designed for human participants only.  
2. STUDY PROCEDURES  
a. Procedures  
I. Recruitment: Participants with chronic pain and opi[INVESTIGATOR_882615] a flyer at methadone or buprenorphine clinics. Potential participants will be 
screened for interest and eligibility via the attached phone script. Participa nts will be 
informed that participation in the study is optional and not required as part of their care at 
methadone or buprenorphine clinics. They will also be informed that their information 
will not be shared with medical providers and staff at methadon e or buprenorphine 
2024 -04-10  Page 2 of 8 clinics. During or after this call, all eligible participants will be invited to participate in 
the 2 -hour Virtual Empowered Relief (vER) class.  
 
Researchers at RTI International will be involved in recruiting study sites, check -in with 
each study site for posting a flyer, and resolve any recruitment issues at each site -contact. 
However, researchers at RTI will not have a direct contact [CONTACT_10974] s. Researchers at 
RTI may also analyze de -identified data and write a paper together.  
 
II. Pre -Class Procedures: All interested and eligible participants will receive study 
information and informed consent will be obtained over the phone from each eligible 
participant prior to attending the vER class. Informed consent will be obtained on the  
phone with a research coordinator. All participants will have the informed consent 
presented to them through REDCap, emailed, or mailed to them.  
 
Participants will complete the questionnaire using a secure, HIPAA -compliant, online 
system (via REDCap) or phone. Additionally, the questionnaire may be administered in 
hard copy form.  
 
III. Intervention Pain Education Class "Virtual Empowered Relief" The participants will 
attend the class offered by [CONTACT_882622]. This class will be held online via Zoom. The c lass 
will NOT be recorded. Zoom video function will be disabled so participants will NOT 
see other participants' faces. Participants will also be recommended to display only their 
first name. Class participants will learn skills and develop a personalized plan to use the 
skills every day. At the end of class, participants will be given a survey about the class. 
Treatment participants will receive a relaxation audio file via email or a CD/USB post -
class via mail. We aim to give all patients rapid access to l ow-risk care that empowers 
them to self -manage their pain and reduce reliance on opi[INVESTIGATOR_2438]. If participants cannot 
download the app, they will receive an audio file of the relaxation resource.  
 
IV. Post -Class follow -up: Participants will be followed for approximately 3 months after 
completing the class. Participants will be asked to complete questionnaires at 2 weeks 
and 1, 2, and 3 months after the class. All participants will be provided a link  to an online 
secure system (REDCap), paper, or phone to complete follow -up questionnaires.  
 
All questionnaires to be administered by [CONTACT_882623] 16 
of the protocol.  
 
Time line for questionnaire administration is as follows:  
 
BEFORE CLASS:  
- Demographics  
- Treatment expectation  
- Medication Use  
- PROMIS clinical questions  
- Non-PROMIS clinical questions  
2024 -04-10  Page 3 of 8  
 
IMMEDIATELY AFTER CLASS:  
- Post-class questionnaire  
 
WEEKS [ADDRESS_1234525] -CLASS:  
- Medication Use  
- PROMIS clinical questions  
- Non-PROMIS clinical questions  
- Global Impression of Change  
- Treatment change and adverse events  
 
Participants ma y also be mailed a thank you note.  
b. Procedure Risks  
All members of the study team have been trained to conduct the research procedures in 
the safest manner possible. There are no known risks to completing the questionnaires or 
undergoing the vER class. Participants will be informed that they have the right to refuse 
to answer questions and they can withdraw from the study at any time. All the responses 
will not be shared with their medical providers and staff at their methadone or 
buprenorphine clinics.  
c. Use of Deception in the Study  
No deception will be used.  
d. Use of Audio and Video Recordings  
The class will NOT be recorded.  
e. Alternative Procedures or Courses of Treatment  
No standard treatment is being withheld. Participants are  encouraged to continue with 
their current course of treatment for  their pain under the care of their regular physician.  
Participant's alternative is to not participate.  
f. Will it be possible to continue the more (most) appropriate therapy for the 
participant(s) after the conclusion of the study?  
Participants are free to pursue the treatment of their choice at any time during and/or after 
the study  
g. Study Endpoint (s) 
Each participant will meet the study endpoint once he/she  completes the last set of 
questionnaires at the final time point.  The study will end once the target enrollment is 
reached.  
[ADDRESS_1234526] Experimental and/or Clinical Findings  
At Stanford Pain Management Center, we have routinely delivered the  Empowered Relief 
class as pain psychology treatment and have received  very high indices of satisfaction 
from class participants. Our  previous NIH -funded study on patients with chronic low 
back pain has  also shown reductions of pain, pain catastrophizing, and pain  interference 
and increase in pain self -efficacy after taking the  class. However, we do not know if vER 
is effective in patients with  opi[INVESTIGATOR_882616]. The current study will 
allow us  to understand whether  vER is effective in this patient population who  usually 
has a limited access to pain psychology services. Based on  the findings from the current 
study, we plan to apply for a NIH  funding and do a large scale study.  
 
Darnall BD, Sturgeon JA, Kao MC, Hah JM, Mackey SC. From  catastrophizing to 
recovery: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_14737] a single -session  treatment for pain catastrophizing. Journal of 
pain research.  2014;7:219.  
 
Darnall BD, Ziadni MS, Krishnamurthy P, Flood P, Heathcote LC, Mackey  IG, Taub CJ, 
Wheeler A. “My surgical success”: effect of a digital  behavioral pain medicine 
Intervention  on time to opi[INVESTIGATOR_882617] —a pi[INVESTIGATOR_882618]. Pain Medicine. 2019 Nov 1;20(11):2228 -37. 
 
Darnall  et al., Comparison of a Single session Pain Management Skills  intervention to a 
Single session Health Education Intervention to  Eight sessions of Cognitive Behavioral 
Therapy in Patients with  Chronic Low Back Pain: A Randomized Clinical Trial 
(Submitted to JAMA  
open)  
b. Findings from Past Animal Experiments  
NA 
4. PARTICIPANT POPULATION  
a. Planned Enrollment  
i-iii) A total of up to 100 participants with chronic pain are expected to enroll.  
b. Age, Gender, and Ethnic Background  
Men and women, ages 18 and older of any race or ethnicity will be recruited.  
c. Vulnerable Population s 
NA 
d. Rationale for Exclusion of Certain Populations  
The pain catastrophizing protocols (Taub et al, 2016, Roditi et al, 2009) have been 
validated only for adults with chronic pain. This study will be the first to use this protocol 
[ADDRESS_1234527] will not be recruited for this study . 
f. Healthy Volunteers  
Healthy volunteers are not being recruited for this study  
g. Recruitment Details  
We will recruit patients from the methadone or buprenorphine clinics via a flyer (attached). 
Participants with chronic pain and opi[INVESTIGATOR_882619] a prescreening survey 
by a research staff at Stanford. We will also recruit patients f rom the Stanford Pain Clinic using 
the Stanford Pain Registry (https://choir.stanford.edu/). We will partner with the Research 
Participant Engagement Program (RPEP) team for Honest Broker outreach. Potential participants 
are identified via STARR and invite d by [CONTACT_253664] (honest broker) on behalf of study team. See 
Section [ADDRESS_1234528] Broker 
outreach. For Postal Mail, study team may support the process by [CONTACT_253666] -printed address 
labels (created by [CONTACT_253667], the honest broker) on the envelopes.  
 
h. Eligibility Criteria  
i. Inclusion Criteria  
1)Age 18+  
2)Chronic pain at least 3 month  
3)Taking Methadone or buprenorphine  
ii. Exclusion Criteria  
1) Cognitive impairment  
2) Pregnant  
3) non -English speaking . 
i. Screening Procedures  
Contact [CONTACT_882624]. Potential participants will be 
screened using the attached phone script (section 13) to determine eligibility pr ior to 
consent. We are obtaining a limited waiver of authorization to collect eligibility 
information in the phone screen as well as to access the patient's Medical Record and 
Clinic Registry (clinical questionnaire database) to assess eligibility . 
2024 -04-10  Page 6 of 8 j. Participation in Multiple Protocols  
Participants will be asked whether they are enrolled in any other research studies. If 
another study's procedures interferes with our own or places the subject at increased risk, 
he/she will not be enrolled in our study.  
k. Payments to Participants  
Participants will be compensated with Amazon gift card for completing assessments at 
prescreening ($10), baseline and post -intervention ($20 & $25), 2 -week ($20), 1 -month 
($30), 2 -month ($20), and 3 -month ($20) after the class ($145 total). Participants wi ll be 
compensated with $[ADDRESS_1234529] for completion of optional lifetime OUD survey . 
l. Costs to Participants  
No costs will be charged to the participant.  
m. Planned Duration  of the Study  
We estimate the study to take less than 1 year to complete.  
i)1-3 months for recruitment and screening of participants  
ii)approximately [ADDRESS_1234530] Research Coordinator.  
iii)3 months of analysis.  
5. RISKS 
a. Potential Risks  
i. Investigational devices  
NA 
ii. Investigational drugs 
NA 
iii. Commercially available drugs, biologics, reagents or chemicals  
NA 
iv. Procedures  
NA. 
 
v. Radioisotopes/radiation -producing machines  
NA 
vi. Physical  well-being  
NA 
[ADDRESS_1234531] completed participation. If an 
individual participant chooses to withdraw, or the researcher determines it is unsafe or 
scientifically invalid for him/her to continue, his/her participation will end.  We do not 
anticipate the study will directly result in adverse effects to the participants. However, we 
will encourage them to speak to their medical provider at methadone or buprenorphine 
clinic for any necessary medical intervention in the event of an a dverse event.  
e. Data Safety Monitoring Plan (DSMC)  
i. Data and/or events subject to review  
Self-reported adverse events were collected at each data point (monthly) for 3 months 
(the study endpoint) . Adverse events were reviewed as soon as participants reported 
any events on the REDCap, which sent automatic email notification to [CONTACT_182210], PI.  
ii. Person(s) responsible for Data and Safety Monitoring  
Dokyoung Sophia You, PhD  
iii. Frequency of DSMB meetings  
N/A 
2024 -04-10  Page 8 of 8 iv. Specific triggers or stoppi[INVESTIGATOR_882620]  
v. DSMB Reporting  
No DSMB  
vi. Will the Protocol Director be the only monitoring entity? (Y/N)  
Y 
vii. Will a board, committee, or safety monitor be responsible for study monitoring? 
(Y/N)  
N 
f. Risks to Special Po pulations  
NA 
6. BENEFITS  
Participants may or may not experience benefits from the "Virtual Empowered Relief" (vER)  
class. The vER class is designed to help patients learn new skills to better cope with chronic  
pain. Knowledge gained from this study may inform future research studies and clinical  
treatments aimed at reducing catastrophizing in patients with opi[INVESTIGATOR_882621]. Furthermore, the patient may also benefit from lowering opi[INVESTIGATOR_40533].  
7. PRIVACY AND CONFIDENTIALITY  
All participant information  and specimens are  handle d in compliance with the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)  and privacy policies of Stanford University, Stanford 
Health Ca re, and Stanford Children’s Health.  