1   
 
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS  PLAN  
  
DEVELOPI[INVESTIGATOR_260961]: 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai 
[LOCATION_001] 
 
 
Data Coordination and Statistical  Center: 
InCHOIR 
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai 
[LOCATION_001] 
 
June [ADDRESS_317295] OF ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITION OF TERMS  ........................................................... 3  
PURPOSE OF STATISTICAL ANALYTICAL PLAN (SAP)  ............................................................ [ADDRESS_317296] Task  
QIDS -SR Quick Inventory of Depression Scale – Self Report 
SAE Serious adverse event 
SAP Statistical analytical plan 
SD Standard deviation  
SLIPS Specific Loss of Interest and Pleasure Scale (SLIPS) 
TEPS Temporal Experience of Pleasure Scale  
V0 Visit 0 (baseline) 
V5 Visit 5 (primary outcome assessment at week [ADDRESS_317297]-
randomization) 
VS Ventral striatum  
WHODAS WHO Disability Assessment Schedule 
WHO World Health Organization  
  
 
4  PURPOSE OF STATISTICAL ANALYTICAL PLAN (SAP ) 
The purpose of this SAP is to outline the planned analyses to be completed for the 
EZOR61-[ADDRESS_317298], and 
response to pleasure (e.g., anhedonia: markedly diminished response to pleasure). 
Evidence from a series of preclinical studies highlighted the KCNQ subtype of 
neuronal potassium (K+) channel as a novel target for the treatment of depressive 
disorders, and data from human pi[INVESTIGATOR_260962] a reduction in anhedonia and 
related symptoms with an increased brain response to reward (as measured by 
[CONTACT_161183] [fMRI]) following treatment with ezogabine, 
a KCNQ channel opener. Building on these data, this study will assess reward circuit 
activity following treatment with ezogabine in depressed patients with anhedonia and 
will examine the relationship between change in reward circuit activity and clinically 
relevant symptom and behavior outcomes.  
 
1.1 Study Objectives 
1.1.1 Primary Objective 
The primary objective of this study is to establish target engagement of a KCNQ channel 
opener (ezogabine) in patients with depressive disorder and anhedonia. 
 
1.1.[ADDRESS_317299]. 
 
1.2 Study Design 
This study is a Phase IIa, prospective, multi -site, randomized  (1:1), parallel arm, double -
blind, placebo -controlled clinical trial.  
 
1.2.[ADDRESS_317300] up to 6 
weeks; after randomization, titration and treatment lasts 5 weeks at which point the primary endpoint is ascertained. Participants will continue to be followed for a 3 week 
medication taper period after collection of the primary endpoint. 
 
1.2.2 Randomization and masking 
Patients will be randomized in a 1:1 allocation to ezogabine or placebo. Randomization will be stratified by [CONTACT_260963], 
and treatment code will be allocated through the interactive web response system 
(IWRS). Randomization will take place only after it has been determined that all 
study eligibility criteria have been met and the baseline fMRI scan has been obtained. 
 
This is a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Site personnel and patients will be blinded to treatment assignment throughout the trial. 
 
6   
 
2. STUDY POPULATIONS  
 Intent-to-Treat (ITT) Population 
The ITT population is defined as all randomiz ed subjects, regardless of when  they 
withdrew  from the study  or received the assigned treatment . The ITT population will be 
used to present all data (including the primary endpoint) by [CONTACT_260964].  
Subjects will be analyzed according to the treatment to which  they were  randomiz ed, 
regardless of the treatment they actually received. 
 
 
3. EFFICACY  ENDPOINTS  
 
3.1 Primary Endpoint 
The primary endpoint of this study is the baseline-corrected fMRI activation in an a 
priori bilateral ventral striatum (VS) area mask during the “gain” cue of the Incentive 
Flanker Task (IFT) contrasted with neutral cue for reward anticipation. The primary outcome fMRI will be obtained at [ADDRESS_317301]-randomization. The primary endpoint 
will be used as the sole criterion for the “go-no go” decision. 
 
3.[ADDRESS_317302]-randomization unless otherwise 
noted. The following secondary endpoints will be analyzed. All secondary analyses will 
be considered exploratory and will not influence the study “go-no/go” decision.  
 
3.2.[ADDRESS_317303] cortico-striatal circuit (medial prefrontal cortex [mPFC], bilateral dorsal 
striatum [DS], and anterior cingulate cortex [ACC]), as well as whole-brain analyses, 
will be measured during the gain cue of the IFT and contrasted with neutral cue. 
 
Similarly, activation during the loss cues of the IFT task will be compared with the 
fMRI activation in neutral tasks. 
 
3.2.2 Change in Anhedonia Symptoms of anhedonia will be measured with the Snaith-Hamilton Pleasure Scale 
(SHAPS), the Temporal Experience of Pleasure Scale (TEPS), the Anticipatory and 
Consummatory Interpersonal Pleasure Scale (ACIPS), and the Specific Loss of 
Interest and Pleasure Scale (SLIPS). The SHAPS, TEPS, ACIPS, and SLIPS will be 
collected at baseline and weekly through the primary outcome assessment (V0 – V5). 
 
3.2.3 Change in Depressive Symptoms Symptoms of depression will be measured with the Quick Inventory of Depressive 
Symptomatology, Self-Report (QIDS-SR), the Montgomery-Asberg Depression 
Rating Scale (MADRS), the Mood and Anxiety Symptoms Questionnaire (MASQ), 
 
7  and the Columbia-Suicide Severity Rating Scale (C-SSRS). The QIDS, MADRS, and 
C-SSRS will be collected at baseline (V0) and weekly through the primary outcome 
assessment (V1 – V5). The MASQ will be collected at baseline (V0) and primary 
outcome assessment (V5) only.   
3.2.4 General Functioning 
The Clinical Global Impression – Improvement and Clinical Global Impression – 
Severity scales will be used to measure overall illness severity at baseline and weekly through the primary outcome assessment (V0 – V5). 
 
The World Health Organization (WHO) Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0 
(WHODAS 2.0) will also measure general functioning. The WHODAS will be 
measured at baseline (V0) and at the time of the primary outcome assessment (V5). 
 
3.2.[ADDRESS_317304] Task (PRT) will be used as a behavioral assessment to calculate an index of reward learning at baseline (V0) and at the time of the primary 
outcome assessment (V5). 
 
 
4. SAFETY  ENDPOINTS  
 
The incidence and frequency of all anticipated and unanticipated serious and non-
serious adverse events (AEs) that occur between randomization and study exit (V8) 
eight weeks after randomization will be determined. Severity/grade and expectedness 
will be assessed by [CONTACT_1003]. The Medical Dictionary for Regulatory 
Activities (MedDRA) system organ class and preferred terms will be recorded for 
each reported AE. 
 
 
5. STATISTICAL METHODOLOGY 
5.1 Statistical Methods  
All data will be presented by [CONTACT_260965] . 
 
For all baseline, demographic  and efficacy variables, data will be summari zed and 
analyzed by [CONTACT_260966] . 
 In summary  tables of normally distributed continuous variables, the following descriptive 
statistics will be used: minimum and maximum, mean, and standard deviation (SD). In 
summary tables of non-normally distributed variables data will be presented using  the 
minimum, maximum, median and lower and upper quartiles. 
 In summary  tables of categorical variables, counts and percentages  will be used. The 
denominator  for each percentage  will be the number of patients within  the randomization 
group unless otherwise specified.  
Rates of events will be calculated as the ratio of the total number of events recorded divided by [CONTACT_260967]-time in study (months or days). Total patient-time will be 
 
8  calculated by [CONTACT_260968] (in days) that patients were at risk for a specific event 
from the time they were randomized in the study until study exit. Rates and 95% 
confidence intervals will be reported. 
 For any variable measured at multiple points in time, change from baseline will be 
calculated as the difference between the value of the variable at a specific point in time 
(e.g. 5 weeks) minus the baseline value.  Relative change from baseline will be calculated as the value of a parameter at a specific 
point in time minus the baseline value of the parameter divided by [CONTACT_260969].  
Percent change will be calculated as the relative change multiplied by 100. 
 
Hypothesis testing will be conducted at the 0.05 two-sided significance  level for the 
primary endpoint. No formal hypothesis tests will be conducted for the secondary 
endpoints, rather, we will calculate estimates and 95% confidence intervals by [CONTACT_19313]. 
 
P-values will be rounded to three decimal  places. P- values less than 0.001 will be 
reported as <0.001 in tables. P- values greater than 0.999 will be reported as >0.999. 
 
Should any of the statistical methods proposed prove unsuitable during data analysis,  
more appropriate methods will be used. These include data transformation (for example 
to a logarithmic scale)  to satisfy model assumptions  such as normally distributed 
residuals with constant variance, or the application of non-parametric techniques. 
 
Additional  ad-hoc analyses  may be conducted as deemed appropriate. 
 All statistical  analysis will be performed using SAS V9.4 or higher. 
 
5.2 Handling of Dropouts and Missing Data 
 
Missing baseline values that  are needed to compute absolute, relative, or percent change 
from baseline will be imputed using mean imputation  (Thompson, 2005). The missing 
values of a variable will be replaced with the  observed sample mean of that variable. Mean 
imputation is appropriate because baseline variables are independent of randomization 
assignment.  
 
5.2.1 Missing values for the primary outcome 
Missing outcome values for primary endpoint analysis will not be imputed. For the 
primary endpoint, missing data can be the result of patient refusal, missed visit, or study dropout (withdrawal, lost to follow-up). Missing data due to patient refusal or missed 
visits are assumed to be missing at random (MAR). Study dropout is also assumed to be 
MAR. 
 
5.2.2 Missing values for the secondary outcomes 
Missing outcome values for secondary endpoints will not be imputed. 
 
9   
5.2.3 Sensitivity analysis 
Sensitivity analyses will be conducted to investigate possible violations of the missing at 
random assumption. Specifically, we will determine if patients missing the primary 
outcome fMRI differ from patients with fMRI data at V5 in terms of: 
 
• Baseline demographics 
• Baseline rewards circuit activation 
• Longitudinal anhedonia symptoms 
• Longitudinal depression symptoms 
• Treatment group 
 
Three imputed datasets will be created to assess the robustness of the primary endpoint 
analysis: 
• Multiple imputation will be used to impute any missing V5 value of the bilateral 
VS activation  
• Lowest overall observed (across both treatment groups) of the bilateral VS 
activation will be imputed for any missing V5 value  
• Highest overall observed (across both treatment groups) of the bilateral VS 
activation will be imputed for any missing V5 value 
 In addition, we will conduct sensitivity analyses to examine the effect of lowering the 
dose of ezogabine in patients who could not tolerate the protocol-defined maximum 
dosage. Specifically, we will determine if patients on a reduced dose compared to the protocol-defined dose differed in terms of  
• Baseline demographics 
• Baseline rewards circuit activation 
• Longitudinal anhedonia symptoms 
• Longitudinal depression symptoms 
 We will repeat the primary endpoint analyses in the subset of patients treated per-protocol and compare primary endpoint results between patients on a reduced dose 
versus the protocol-defined maximum dose. 
 
5.[ADDRESS_317305] disposition table will summari ze patients’ characteristics by [CONTACT_260970]. 
 
• The number (%) of patients randomiz ed 
• The number (%) of patients withdrawn  or lost to follow- up by [CONTACT_260971] (week 5)  
 
The number (%) of subjects who complete and withdraw /lost to follow- up from the study 
and the primary reason for withdrawal  will be summari zed by [CONTACT_260972] 
 
10  overall for all subjects. 
 
The percentages will be calculated based on the total number of patients randomized in 
each randomization group. 
 
5.3.2 Protocol Deviations 
Major and minor protocol deviations are defined as deviations from the procedures 
outlined in the protocol. All statistical  analyses and summaries  will be conducted on an 
intent- to-treat basis (with the exception of the sensitivity analysis to examine the effect of 
dose reduction due to medication intolerance).  
Treatment compliance will be compared by [CONTACT_260973] (%) of total prescribed pi[INVESTIGATOR_38947], and subject report will be compared to 
serum drug levels.  
 
5.3.[ADDRESS_317306] anticipation as described in the 
Neuroimaging Methods section of the protocol. To calculate the beta weight for the bilateral VS, the beta weights for the right and left VS will be averaged. 
 
A linear mixed effects model with a single random intercept term will be used to assess 
the change in activation of the bilateral VS by [CONTACT_1570]. A sample size of 48 
provides 85% power to detect a difference in means between groups of 0.[ADDRESS_317307]. 
 
Although randomization is stratified by [CONTACT_3725], the primary endpoint analysis will be of the pooled dataset; secondary analyses will provide site-specific estimates.  
No adjustment to the primary analysis will be made for baseline measures that are found 
to be imbalanced but, if applicable, secondary sensitivity analyses may adjust for any factors that are imbalanced at a significance level below p = 0.05. (Altman, 1985) (Peter 
Peduzzi, 2002) (Senn, 1989) (Senn, Testing for baseline balance in clinical trials, 1993)  
5.4.2 Secondary Endpoints  
All secondary analyses will be performed using the ITT population. 
 
 
11  As the secondary fMRI outcomes are exploratory analyses, we will present the mean and 
95% confidence interval of the difference in change in activation between treatment 
groups rather than conducting formal hypothesis testing. As with the bilateral VS, a 
single beta weight for the bilateral DS will be calculated by [CONTACT_260974]. 
 
Linear mixed effects models will be used to analyze the anhedonia, depression, and general functioning scales that are collected at multiple time points. Slopes will be estimated with 95% confidence intervals by [CONTACT_1570]. Mean change and 95% 
confidence intervals by [CONTACT_260975].  
5.5 Safety Analysis 
All adverse events in this study will be analyzed from the time of randomization. All 
adverse events will be analyzed using the ITT population.  
AEs will be mapped to the MedDRA coding system. The incidence of non-serious 
AEs and serious AEs will be summarized by [CONTACT_1196], MedDRA 
Preferred Term and treatment. 
 
The number and percentage of patients with an AE or serious AE will be presented. 
For the incidence count, a patient will be counted only once for a specific MedDRA Preferred Term, although a MedDRA Preferred Term might be recorded more than 
once for a particular patient. 
 
The number and rate of each AE will also be presented. Differences in the incidence 
of individual AEs will be assessed using negative binomial regression with the 
treatment group as the predictor. 
 
5.6 Interim Analysis 
There is no planned interim analysis for this study.  
 
 
6. REFERENCES 
 
Altman, D. G. (1985). Comparability of randomized groups. Statistician, 125-136. 
Peter Peduzzi, W. H. (2002). Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. 
Epi[INVESTIGATOR_37082] , 26-38. 
Senn, S. (1989). Covariate imbalance and random allocation in clinical trials. 
Statistics in Medicine, 467-475. 
Senn, S. (1993). Testing for baseline balance in clinical trials. Statistics in Medicine, 
1715 - 1726. 
Thompson, I. R. (2005). Adjusting for partially missing baseline measurements in 
randomized trials. Statistics in Medicine, 993-1007. 
 