Version Date:  9/8/[ADDRESS_853716] on receptors widely distributed throughout the brain. Today, synthetic oxytocin 
(marketed as Pi[INVESTIGATOR_31933]® and Syntocinon®) is commonly administered intravenously to 
induce or augment labor in pregnant women.  
 
Traditionally, oxytocin has been examined for its role in childbirth, lactation, and 
maternal attachment behavior. Given recent advances in delivering oxytocin via nasal 
administration, oxytocin has seen an exponential growth of research examining its 
effects on social cognition and behavior. For example, animal research has shown that 
intranasal administration of oxytocin to pairs of rats increases the duration of physical 
contact [CONTACT_40568] (Witt, Winslow, & Insel, 1992), whereas administration of an 
oxytocin -receptor antagonist in male rats  is associated with reduced social exploration 
of a con -specific male rat (Lukas et al., 2011). In human populations, studies have 
shown that oxytocin increases trust during a money transfer game (Kosfeld, Heinrichs, 
Zak, Fischbacher, & Fehr, 2005), improv es memory for positive social information 
(Guastella, Mitchell, & Mathews, 2008), and attenuates amygdala reactivity to emotional 
stimuli (Domes et al., 2007).  
 
These findings have major treatment implications for psychiatric disorders in which 
social cog nitive deficits are prominent, such as autism, schizophrenia, and social 
anxiety disorder. Indeed, early evidence indicates that intranasal oxytocin may have 
therapeutic potential in these psychiatric populations. Studies have shown that oxytocin 
improves emotion recognition ability in autistic youth (Guastella et al., 2010),  and 
patients with schizophrenia (Averbeck, Bobin, Evans, & Shergill, 2011). A recent meta -
analysis found that intranasal oxytocin may enhance the recognition of facial 
expressions of e motion (van Ijzendoorn & Bakermans -Kranenburg, 2012). Furthermore, 
several experiments have now investigated the effect of intranasal oxytocin in patients 
with social anxiety disorder (SAD). One study examined the impact of administering 
oxytocin as an adj unct to exposure therapy for SAD and found that patients treated with 
oxytocin showed a positive effect in increasing positive evaluations of appearance and 
speech performance  (Guastella, Howard, Dadds, Mitchell, & Carson, 2009) . Another 
study demonstrated that OT modulates amygdala reactivity in patients with generalized 
SAD (Labuschagne et al., 2010) , which may reflect an important mechanism of 
treatment. These studies are consistent with previous research in healthy individual s, 
which show that oxytocin may have therapeutic potential given its anxiolytic and pro -
social effects.  
 
Although the use of intranasal oxytocin has direct  implications for the treatment of body 
dysmorphic disorder (BDD), no studies have yet investigated the effects of oxytocin in 
Version Date:  9/8/17  2 
 this population. BDD is a highly distressing and debilitating psychiatric disorder that is 
characterized by [CONTACT_638336] a 
perceived physical flaw (American Psychiatric Association, 20 13). It is associated with 
significant functional impairment and poor quality of life (Phillips, Menard, Fay, & 
Pagano, 2005). Although research has tested some pharmacologic and psychological 
treatments for these disorders, evidence suggests that there is  still considerable room 
for improvement, as most patients across clinical trials only improve by 30 -50% in 
symptom severity (Veale et al., 1996; Wilhelm, Phillips, Fama, Greenberg, & Steketee, 
2011).   
 
Given that oxytocin is involved in the regulation of a variety of dimensions of social 
cognition and behavior, including emotion recognition and social information processing, 
there are direct implications regarding its role in the development of such deficits among 
individuals BDD in particular. Individuals  with BDD display deficits in social cognition, as 
they are convinced that their appearance is flawed, and that people may be staring and 
laughing at their physical flaws. Experiments have shown that BDD is associated with 
selective attentional biases to i magined flaws in one’s own face and to corresponding 
regions in unfamiliar others’ faces (e.g., Grocholewski, Kleim, & Heinrichs, 2012). 
Moreover, research has shown that individuals with BDD incorrectly interpret faces 
showing neutral emotional expression s as contemptuous and angry (Buhlmann, Etcoff, 
& Wilhelm, 2006). Despi[INVESTIGATOR_638328], no 
studies have yet examined the effect of oxytocin in BDD. The current study therefore 
aims to investigate the effect of oxyto cin administration on modifying core social 
cognitive i mpairments associated with BDD. This study has major public health 
significance, given the prevalence of OC spectrum disorders and the need to investigate 
more parsimonious treatments.  
 
II. Specific Aims  
 
Primary Aim 1 : To examine differential effects of oxytocin on social cognitive  deficits 
during an emotion recognition task and trust game by [CONTACT_637].  
Hypothesis 1a : Individuals with BDD will exhibit poor performance on the emotion 
recognition task and trust game, compared to healthy controls.  
Hypothesis 1b : The effects of oxytocin vs. placebo on the emotion recognition 
task and trust game will be greater for indivi duals with BDD than for healthy 
controls.  
 
Secondary Aim 2 : To examine the effect of oxytocin on cognitive biases (attentional  and 
interpretive  biases) associated with BDD.  
Hypothesis 2a : Individuals with BDD (compared to healthy controls) will exhibit 
the following cognitive biases: attentional bias (difficulty disengaging from threat 
cues, as measured by a spatial cueing parad igm), and negative interpretive  bias 
(as measured by [CONTACT_638337]).  
Hypothesis 2b : For individuals with BDD (c ompared to healthy controls), oxytocin 
will attenuate these biases compared to placebo.  
 
Version Date:  9/8/17  3 
 Exploratory Aim : To examine whether symptom severity, social anxiety, mood, 
attachment style, and rejection sensitivity moderate the effects of oxytocin.  
 
 
III. Subject S election  
 
Inclusion Criteria  for BDD Groups : 
1. Treatment -seeking adult males and females ≥ 18 years of age  
2. Meets DSM -IV criteria for principal BDD as determined by [CONTACT_638338] -IV (SCID) diagnostic interview  
3. For females only: must be using low -dose hormonal contraceptives, as defined 
by <50 mcg daily dose of ethinyl estradiol . Female participants will bring 
medication labeling to the screening visit so study staff may verify acceptable 
drug composition.  
 
Exclusion Criteria for BDD Groups :  
1. Current diagnosis of schizophrenia, psychotic disorder, bipolar disorder, 
substance abuse or substance dependence. All other Axis I comorbidities will be 
permitted to foster the accrual of a clinically relevant sample.  
2. Significant nasal pathology  (e.g., atrophic rhinitis, history of hypophysectomy, 
recurrent nosebleeds)  
3. Smokers who smoke ≥ 15 cigarettes daily  
4. Serious medical illnesses (including untreated thyroid disease, diabetes, 
cardiovascular disease, and seizures, as assessed by [CONTACT_638339]). 
Individuals who are taking levothyroxine or who report a history of thyroid 
disease will be given a blood test to determine thyroid hormone levels  and 
eligibility for the study.  
5. Active homicidal or suicidal ideation  
6. Steroid or hormone use  (except low -dose contraceptives for females, which is 
allowed)  
7. For females only: positive urine pregnancy test and use of high dose 
contraceptives (low dose contraceptives will be allowed due to stability of 
hormone levels during active phase ) 
 
Inclusion Criteria for  Control Participants :  
1. Adult males and females ≥ 18 years of age  
2. No current DSM -IV Axis I diagnosis, as determined by [CONTACT_73794]  
3.  For females only: must be using low -dose hormonal contraceptives, as defined 
by <50 mcg daily dose of ethinyl estradiol . Female participants will bring 
medication labeling to the screening visit so study staff may verify acceptable 
drug composition.  
 
Exclusion Criteria for Control Participants :  
1. Current diagnosis of any DSM -IV Axis I disorder  
2. Significant nasal pathology (e.g., atrophic rhinitis, history of hypophysectomy, 
recurrent nosebleeds)  
Version Date:  9/8/17  4 
 3. Smokers who smoke ≥ 15 cigarettes daily  
4. Serious medical illnesses  (including untreated thyroid disease, diabetes, 
cardiovascular disease, and seizures, as assessed by [CONTACT_9870]). 
Individuals who are taking levothyroxine or who report a history of thyroid 
disease will be given a blood test to determine thyroid hormone levels  and 
eligibility for the study.  
5. Active homicidal or suicidal ideation  
6. Steroid or hormone use (except low -dose contraceptives for females, which is 
allowed)  
7. For females only: positive urine pregnancy test and use of high dose 
contraceptives (low dose contraceptives will be allowed due to stability of 
hormone levels during active phase)  
 
Source of S ubjects and Recru itment M ethods : 
We will enroll a maximum of 50 participants to obtain a sample of 40 participants (20 
BDD, and 20 healthy volunteers) in the study. Potential participants will be recruited to 
the MGH OCD and Related Disorders Program through flyers and gen eral clinic 
advertisements in the General Recruitment Protocol (Protocol #2009P -002227), and 
databases of research volunteers, such as the Volunteer Research Registry (Protocol 
#2010P -002496). These referrals are presented in a weekly meeting to the clinic ians. In 
the intake phone call, the coordinator asks the patient if he/she is willing to hear about a 
research study. If the patient meets initial eligibility criteria (e.g., has BDD ) and agrees 
to be informed about a research study, then our research assi stant will call the patient to 
conduct a BDD -specific phone screen, which has already been approved through the 
General Recruitment Protocol (Protocol # 2009P -002227).  Given our high number of 
referrals, we do not antic ipate any problems recruiting [ADDRESS_853717] Enrollment  
 
Methods of E nrollment : 
Version Date:  9/8/17  5 
 Potential participants who are eligible for the study after the phone screening procedure 
(described above) will be invited to the MGH OCD and Related Disorders Program for 
an initial evaluation to determine their eligibility for the study. After the consenting 
process, an advanced doctoral student or doctoral level member of the study staff will 
provide a diagnostic assessment using the SCID -I/P, as well as thoroughly assess each 
inclusion and exclusion criteria using direct questioning. Females will provide a urine 
pregnancy test to ensu re that they are not pregnant. Females will also confirm the 
formulation of their contraception at the time of their screening visit. Any participant 
taking psychotropic medications will be allowed to participate in the study, and will be 
asked to keep taking their medication as usual d uring the study. If an enrolled BDD  or 
healthy participant has already completed a SCID and the same clinician -administered 
and self -report questionnaires within  the past six months as part of a different study 
within the OCD and Related Disorders Program,  they will be able to consent to give us 
permission to access data from their previous screening assessment.  
 
Procedures for Obtaining Informed Consent : 
An advanced doctoral student or a doctoral level member of the study staff will obtain 
written informed  consent, and  will thoroughly review the consent form with the potential 
participant. If an advanced doctoral student obtains consent, a licensed physician 
investigator will be available to speak with the subject during the consent process. 
Subjects who ar e consented by [CONTACT_638340] a physician Investigator during the consent process and this will be 
recorded in research records.  During the consenting process, potential participants will 
be apprised of the voluntary  nature of their participation in the study and that they can 
withdraw at any point in the study without penalty. Specifically, we will reassure all 
potential participants that refusal to participate will in no way influence their care or 
affiliation with the Clinics at the [LOCATION_005] General Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_638329]. Potential participants will be informed that the study 
will examine how oxytocin impacts their performance on different social cognit ive tasks, 
but they will not be informed as to the exact study hypotheses (e.g., how oxytocin’s 
effects on social and cognitive functioning may relate to their BDD symptoms). It will be 
necessary to use incomplete disclosure at the outset of the study to e nsure maximum 
internal validity of study results. Potential participants will also be given as much time as 
needed to consider participation, and will be given an opportunity to ask questions 
about the study prior to signing the consent form. We will obtai n written informed signed 
consent through the use of a PHRC approved written consent from all participants 
before they enter into the study and start study procedures. After signing the consent 
form, participants will be given a copy of the consent, and th e original copy will be filed 
in a locked file separate from study data in a research office.  
 
Treatment Assignment Procedures :  
Given the cross -over design, all participants will receive an oxytocin and placebo nasal 
spray at two separate visits. The MGH  Research Pharmacy will randomize the order of 
nasal sprays that will be given to participants, and will thus be un -blinded of assigned 
drug condition for participants’ study visits. All other study staff, as well as participants 
themselves, will be blind to drug condition.  
Version Date:  9/8/17  6 
  
V. Study Procedures  
 
Overview of Study Procedure:  
The study will consist of [ADDRESS_853718] complete 
Visits 2 and 3 during the active phase of their contraceptive medication (e.g. not during 
their menses); female subjects using multiphasic contraceptives must be on the same 
dose of ethinyl estradiol for both Visit 2 and 3. Participants will be instructed to avoid 
alcohol, caffeine, and nicotine for 24 hours prior to Visits 2 and 3. These visits will  
involve the administration of both an oxytocin and placebo nasal spray, in randomized 
order, and the completion of various social cognition tasks. They will be separated by a 
one-week washout period  (maximum 28 day window period) . The study design and 
procedures are represented in the following schematic:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Diagnostic Assessment and Medical Screen : 
After obtaining informed consent, participants will be adminis tered the Structured 
Clinical Interview for DSM -IV (SCID -I/P; First, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], Gibbon, & Williams, 2002) to 
determine diagnostic eligibility. The SCID allows the investigator to assess all diagnostic 
inclusion and exclusion criteria. Participants who are re cruited for the healthy control Visit 1: Eligibility assessment for all study 
participants and administration of clinician -
administered and self -report questionnaires (if 
eligible)  
Visit 2: Oxytocin or placebo nasal s pray 
administration and completion of study tasks 
(Emotion Recognition Task, Trust Game, Posner 
Task, Interpretation Questionnaire, Navon Task, 
Gradual Onset CPT)  
Visit 3: Oxytocin or placebo nasal spray 
administration and completion of study tasks 
(Emotion Recognition Task, Trust Game, Posner 
Task, and Interpretation Questionnaire, Navon 
Task, Gradual Onset CPT)  Max 28 day 
window  
Version Date:  9/8/17  7 
 group will be given the SCID -I/P to confirm the absence of Axis I psychopathology. 
Participants who meet the diagnostic inclusion and exclusion criteria will be given a 
medical screen consisting of a history and physical exa mination (H&P) by a study nurse 
or physician to determine the participant’s eligibility and safety for the study. In addition, 
a urine pregnancy test will be gi ven to females during this visit, as well as at the 
beginning of Visits 2 and 3 to ensure contin ued eligibility.    
 
Investigational Agent  (dose, method, schedule of admi nistration, dose modifications) :  
 
Oxytocin (OT) is a nine -amino -acid peptide, or nonapeptide, which is produced in the 
paraventricular and supraoptic nuclei of the hypothalamus and projected to many brain 
regions, particularly within the limbic system. The empi[INVESTIGATOR_638330] 
C43H66N12O12S2 (molecular weight 1007.19). The structural formula of OT is as follows:  
 
 
 
H-Cys-Tyr-lle-Glu (NH2) - Asp(NH2) -Cys-Pro-Leu-Gly-NH2 
      1      2    3   4        5         6    7     8     9  
 
Synthetic oxytocin (e.g., Syntocinon® or Pi[INVESTIGATOR_31933]®) is typi[INVESTIGATOR_638331]. It is widely distributed throughout the 
extracellular fluid and ca uses uterine response almost immediately. Its removal from the 
blood is facilitated by [CONTACT_638341], and has a plasma half -life of approximately 1 
to 6 minutes (per Pi[INVESTIGATOR_638332]). Intranasal delivery of oxytocin enables actions 
within the  brain and produces pro -social behavioral effects in humans.  
 
The oxytocin and placebo nasal sprays to be used in the current investigation will be the 
commercially available product known as Syntocinon ®, which is widely used in studies 
investigating intranasal oxytocin but is currently not available in the U.S. Therefore, the 
nasal sprays will  be provided by [CONTACT_638342] 
(http://www.pharmaworld.com ), and manufactured by [CONTACT_5343]. The nasal spray s will 
consist of 24 IU of oxytocin (with 4 IU per puff), and will be dispensed in 5 ml metered -
dose nasal spray bottles. Oxytocin nasal sprays will be shipped in boxes with identical 
placebo nasal sprays  (containing all of the same ingredients as the oxyt ocin sprays but 
without the active oxytocin ingredient) , and will require cooling at [ADDRESS_853719] the blind . Per  Syntocinon® package insert, the 
product should  be stored in a refrigerator between 2 -8ºC. Nasal sprays for each 
participant will be ordered  by a written prescription to the MGH Research Pharmacy by 
[CONTACT_638343] a patient -by-patient basis.  
 
Oxytocin and Placebo Administration:  
Oxytocin and placebo administration will occur at Visit 2 and Visit 3. 24 internation al 
units (IU) of oxytocin and placebo will be administered in a double -blind manner to 
subjects. This represents the most commonly used dosage in studies involving 
Version Date:  9/8/17  8 
 intranasal administration of oxytocin (MacDonald et al., 2011). The nasal sprays 
(Syntocinon ® nasal spray, 40  IU/ml) will be purchased from Pharmaworld  and 
manufactured by [CONTACT_638344] (IND) 
application from the Food and Drug Administration. The principal investigator, Angela 
Fang, Ph.D., and study phy sician, Elizabeth A. Lawson, M.D., both have experience 
obtaining an IND for intranasal oxytocin, and are familiar with the sponsor -investigator 
responsibilities associated with maintaining the IND. As the physician on the IND, [CONTACT_638355] will provide medi cal oversight regarding reported adverse events, as well as 
risk coverage for subjects enrolled in the study. Subjects will follow a standardized 
protocol for self -administering the metered dose nasal sprays (see attached 
administration protocol) with thre e sprays per nostril (4 IU oxytocin per spray). A study 
nurse at the MGH Clinical Rese arch Center, who will be blind  to the subject’s assigned 
drug condition, will be present for drug administration. Only the MGH Research 
Pharmacy will be un -blinded to dru g condition during the study, as they will be 
responsible for treatment assignment at each study visit .  
 
Clinician -Administered Measures : 
Structured Clinical Interview for DSM -IV-TR (SCID; First, Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], Gibbon, & Williams, 
2002): The SCID is a clinician -administered, semi -structured interview that assesses 
current Axis I disorders. Given that the SCID has not yet been updated to reflect DSM -5 
diagnostic criteria, we will assess dia gnoses based on DSM -IV criteria. The SCID will be 
administered during the screening visit to diagnose participants, characterize the 
sample, and screen for other eligibility criteria.  
 
Demographics and Eligibility Form : This clinician -administered measure  will be 
developed specifically for the purposes of this study to assess demographic information, 
and to document other inclusion and exclusion criteria (e.g., medical illnesses, nasal 
pathology, suicidal/homicidal ideation, cigarette use, concurrent medic ations, steroid 
use, pregnancy test results).  
 
Yale-Brown Obsessive -Compulsive Scale modified for BDD  (BDD -YBOCS; Phillips, 
Hollander, Rasmussen, & Aronowitz, 1997): The BDD -YBOCS is a 12 -item clinician -
administered severity rating scale for BDD. It will be administered during the screening 
visit. (BDD participants only)  
 
Brown Assessment of Beliefs Scale  (BABS; Eisen et al., 1998): The BABS is a 7 -item 
clinician -administered scale to assess degree of insight and conviction of beliefs. It will 
be administe red during the screening visit to assess degree of delusionality. (BDD  
participants only)  
 
Self-Report Questionnaires : 
Body Dysmorphic Disorder Symptom Scale (BDD -SS; Wilhelm, unpublished): The BDD -
SS revised is a self -report measure that assesses s everity  of specific BDD symptom 
domains . The scale organizes symptoms into conceptually similar clusters, such as 
checking and comparing, fixing and correcting, weight and shape concerns, skin pi[INVESTIGATOR_638333]:  9/8/17  9 
 and hair pulling, avoiding and hiding, seeking cosmetic surger y, and beliefs about 
appearance.  
 
Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale - Self-Report  (LSAS; Liebowitz, 1987): The LSAS is a [ADDRESS_853720] week. It 
is widely used in treatment studies for SAD. Th e LSAS has been validated in clinical 
samples and has high internal consistency (α = .82 -.92) (Heimberg et al., 1999).  
 
Brief Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale (BFNE; Leary, 1983): The BFNE is an 
abbreviated 12 -item self -report questionnaire adapted from the original Fear of Negative 
Evaluation Scale (Watson & Friend, 1969), which measures apprehension about others’ 
evaluations, expectation for negative evaluation, avoidance of evaluative situations, and 
distress associated with negative evaluation.  
 
Interpersonal Sensitivity Measure  (IPSM; Boyce & Parker, 1989): The original IPSM is a 
36-item self -report measure to assess sensitivity to rejection. It has been demonstrated 
to have good internal consistency (Boyce & Parker, 1989; Harb, Heimberg, Fresco, 
Schneier, & Liebowitz, 2002).  
 
Experience in Close Relationships Inventory  (ECR; Brennan et al., 1998): The ECR is a 
36-item self -report questionnaire that measures attachment anxiety and avoidance in 
adults. It yields two subscales reflecting attachment anxiety (anxiety about being 
rejected or abandoned) and attachment avoidanc e (discomfort with closeness and 
intimacy).  
 
Depression Anxiety Stress Scale -21 (DASS; Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995): The DASS is 
a shortened, [ADDRESS_853721] Scales  (PANAS; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988): The 
PANAS is a [ADDRESS_853722].  
 
Mini-Markers  Scale  (MM; Saucier, 1994): The Mini -Markers Scale is a 40 -item self -
report measure of the five factor model personality factors: extraversion, agreeableness, 
conscientiousness, emotional stability, and openness. It asks participants to rate how 
accurately each item describes themselves on a 1 -9 point Likert scale ranging from 
“extremely inaccurate” to “extremely accurate.”  
 
Adverse Events Form : This self -report form will be administered at Visits [ADDRESS_853723] whether they experienced a negative reaction to the 
oxytocin and placebo nasal sprays. If participants endorse ‘yes’ on any item, a study 
clinician or nurse will follow up and ask them w hether the symptom resolves by [CONTACT_638345].  
 
Version Date:  9/8/17  10 
 Assessment of Blind Form : This questionnaire will be given at Visits 2 and 3 after nasal 
spray administration to assess for participants’ expectancies regarding the drug they 
received. Participan ts will be asked which nasal spray they believe they received 
(oxytocin or placebo), to rate their degree of certainty, and to describe their reasons 
why. 
 
Tasks:  
The following tasks will be administered at each study visit approximately [ADDRESS_853724] of the drug. However, the order of tasks will be 
counterbalanced  between participants in the study, to account for possible carry -over 
effects .    
 
Emotion Recognition Task (ERT; Buhlmann, Etcoff, & Wilhelm, 2006):  In this task, 
subjects will view 24 facial photographs (Ekman & Friesen, 1975), each expressing a 
different emotion (anger, disgust, neutral, surprise). The photographs will be drawn from 
the new facial affect collection ( http://www.paulekman.com/ ). In this computerized, self -
administered task, eac h emotion will be presented 6 times, and each facial photograph 
will be followed by [CONTACT_5640] a self-referent scenario (“Imagine this bank teller is looking in 
your direction”) or other -referent scenario (“Imagine this bank teller is looking in your 
friend’s  direction”). Participants will identify the emotion for each scenario. Total scores 
for correctly identifying the emotion range from 0 -24 for each questionnaire (self - vs. 
other -referent), whereas for each emotion subcategory, scores range from 0 -6. 
Moreov er, for each scenario, participants will rate whether the other person’s emotional 
expression was caused by [CONTACT_2299] (self -attributional, score=0) or by [CONTACT_638346] (other -attributional, score=1). Total scores for attribution range 
from 0 -24 for each questionnaire (self - vs. other -referent), with higher scores reflecting 
other -referent attribution.  
 
Interpretation Questionnaire  (Buhlmann et al., 2002; 2006): This questionnaire consists 
of 33 ambiguous scenarios (11 BDD -related , 11 social, and 11 general scenarios), with 
each scenario involving a short description followed by [CONTACT_638347]. 
Participants will be asked to rate the likelihood of each thought coming to mind on a 
scale from 0 (very unlikely) to 4 (very like ly).  
 
Posner Task  (Posner, 1980; Posner, Snyder, & Davidson, 1980):  The Posner Task is a 
spatial cueing paradigm that measures attentional engagement toward and 
disengagement from certain visual  cues. The stimuli for this task will be modified to 
include a set of disgust, happy, and neutral faces. The task will consist of 360 trials. 
During each trial, the participant will see a fixation cross. On each trial, a face (disgust, 
happy, or neutral) will appear within either the top or bottom half of the screen  (the other 
half of the screen will remain blank) and then disappear. Then, a probe (the letter “E” or 
“F”) will appear in the top or bottom half of the screen. The participant will be instructed 
to identify the letter as quickly and accurately as possible  by [CONTACT_638348] (left for “E”, right for “F”). Upon responding, the next trial will commence. 
Version Date:  9/8/[ADDRESS_853725] the participant’s attentional 
engagement towards threat and disengagement from threat, respectively, and will be 
used to calculate attentional bias scores for threat cues.  
 
Trust Game : The participant will be told that he will be playing the Trust Game with 
another player in a different room, and that both players will be allocated a sum of 10 
game dollars to start the game. The participant will be told that he will take the role of 
Player 1. The instructions for the game will be as follows: Player [ADDRESS_853726] Game twice . The amount of money 
given by [CONTACT_638349] a measure of “trust”. Thre e game 
dollars will equal $1. The subject will be paid the value of this amount in dollars.  
 
Social Perception Tasks: Testmybrain.org : Data for the following tests will be collected 
through testmybrain.org  (approved under Harvard FAS IRB protocol F15795). Before 
starting the tests, the experimenter will be asked to enter a ra ndomly generated ID code 
for the participant. The participant will then complete the measures described below. No 
uniquely identifying information will be collected and stored on testmybrain.org  for the 
participant. Instead, ID codes will be kept along with identifying participant information 
on password -protected computers ac cessible only by [CONTACT_351772].  At the 
end of the study, participant codes that are retained in TestMyBrain databases will be 
destroyed along with any other study -specific information or information linking a 
particular testing session with the e xternal research study.  Data stripped of both 
participant and study -specific information will then be included in the large data 
repository that TestMyBrain uses to understand and interpret test scores of other 
participants and may also be submitted to a p ublicly available data repository for 
the benefit of the broader academic and research community.  Publicly available 
datasets will not include any information that can be used to identify the participant, the 
study, the researcher, or the institution where  the data was collected.  Testmybrain.org 
will not be used for any purpose in our study other than collection and storage of 
data, and there is no other involvement of this website.  
 
Navon Task : The Navon Task is a measure of attention and inhibition, which will be 
used to examine how oxytocin affects global and local processing of non -social stimuli. 
Participants will be asked to view big letters that are made up of smaller letters (e.g., an 
H that is made up of little S’s). They will be asked to judge the letter being depi[INVESTIGATOR_638334], as quickly as possible.  
 
Gradual Onset Continuous Performance Test:  This task is a measure of cognitive 
control and responsive inhibition. Participants will be asked to attend to images that 
gradually transition from one image to the next. They will be asked to press a button 
when they see a new street image (most images), and not to press a button when they 
Version Date:  9/8/17  12 
 see a m ountain image (occurs much less frequently). This task will allow us to examine 
how oxytocin affects inhibitory control.   
 
 
VI. Biostatistical Analysis  
 
Prior to analysis, all major variables will be screened for inconsistent or abnormal 
values, and continuous measures assessed for skewness and outliers. Variable 
distributions will be examined and transformations made when distributions are skewed 
or other wise violate analytic assumptions. Linear regression models will be used, and in 
all models, the effect of diagnosis will be based not on the global (type III) effect, but on 
the specific pair -wise comparison of interest: BDD vs. Healthy Controls. Analyses  will be 
conducted using SAS v9.4 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC), and all models will employ a two -
sided alpha=0.05 to determine significance.  
 
Aim 1 Analyses :  
The primary outcomes will be the Emotion Recognition Task  total score and the Trust 
Game "back tran sfer" amount. Two sets of outcome scores will be obtained for each 
subject - one during placebo and the other during oxytocin administration. To test 
Hypothesis 1a, we will regress placebo outcome scores against diagnosis. To test 
Hypothesis 1b, we will re gress oxytocin outcome scores against diagnosis, and will 
control for the placebo outcome score. If we find significant differences in oxytocin 
Emotion Recognition Task  total score by [CONTACT_637], we will further examine the 3 
Emotion Recognition Task  valenc e categories (positive, negative, neutral) as 
exploratory outcomes.  
 
Aim 2 Analyses :  
Secondary outcomes include the Posner Task difference score for disengagement 
response latencies between disgust vs. neutral faces, and the Interpretation 
Questionnaire total score . Mirroring the analyses for the primary aim, we will test 
Hypothesis 2a by [CONTACT_638350], 
and will test Hypothesis 2b by [CONTACT_638351], con trolling for the placebo secondary outcome scores.  
 
Exploratory Analyses :  
Exploratory moderators include the BDD -YBOCS total score, YBOCS total score, LSAS  
total score, BFNE total score, ECR Anxiety subscale mean, ECR Avoidance subscale 
mean, and IPSM to tal score. To test the moderation effects, we will enter each 
moderator (one at a time) into each of the aforementioned linear regression models 
along with a covariate representing the interaction between the moderator and 
diagnosis (the term of interest).  We will examine moderation of each pair -wise 
comparison separately.  
 
For all analyses, we  will include concomitant medication use as a covariate, in order to 
control for the effect of concomitant medications on study results. We will also compare 
partici pants who are taking psychotropic medications from participants who are not, on 
Version Date:  9/8/17  13 
 demographic and clinical variables, to ensure there are no systematic differences 
between these groups.  
 
Power and Sample Size:  
Given the novelty of our approach, no background data on the effects of oxytocin in 
BDD exist to inform the power calculation. Therefore, the proposed sample size of 40  
participants (20 per group) was chosen based on feasibility. With 20 participants per 
group and a two -sided alpha=0.05, for our primary pair -wise comparison (BDD vs. 
healthy controls) of the mean within -subject difference (oxytocin vs. placebo) in Emotion 
Recognition Task  total score and Trust Game "back transfer" amount, we will have 81% 
power to detect a moderate effect size of f=0.23 .  
 
VII. Risks and Discomforts  
 
Oxytocin -Related Risks and Side E ffects : 
Between [ADDRESS_853727] been 38 controlled studies involving intranasal 
delivery of oxytocin (MacDonald et al., 2011). A total of 1,[ADDRESS_853728] included participants (N=182)  who 
had a developmental, medical, or mental health disorder. The dosage of oxytocin has 
typi[INVESTIGATOR_638335] a single dose ranging from 20 international units (IU) to [ADDRESS_853729] received intranasal oxytocin or placebo, 279 (18 %) 
reported mild side -effects (MacDonald et al., 2011) . The most common side -effect was 
a feeling of calmness, but this did not differ between those who received oxytocin or 
placebo. A recent review of studies using  intranasal oxytocin supported the short -term 
use of oxytocin, demonstrating that oxytocin produced minimal side -effects, no 
detectable differences in side -effects between oxytocin or placebo recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840], no 
subjective changes in recipi[INVESTIGATOR_840], and is equally safe to use with vulnerable populations 
as with healthy adults (MacDonald et al., 2011). The proposed study intends to use a 
single [ADDRESS_853730] commonly used dose 
in previous trials (25 out of 38 studies).  
 
Potential risks associated with intranasal oxytocin include headaches, nausea, and 
allergic dermatitis ( ≥ 1/10,000, <1/1,000), an d uterine contractions (< 1/10,000 ), per 
[COMPANY_001] Basic Prescribing Information for Syntocinon® . Additional sources of 
discomfor t may include lightheadedness, nasal irritation, or dry mouth/throat, although 
these appear to be mild (MacDonald et al., 2011). Participants with any serious adverse 
events will be immediately withdrawn from the study. The half -life of oxytocin  is 
approxi mately three minutes when administered intravenously, therefore, it will not 
remain in the system for very long.  
 
Regarding the use of TestMyBrain.org, the following steps will minimize risk to subjects:  
(1)  Identifying Information :  TestMyBrain does not collect any uniquely identifying 
information about the participant, including birth date or IP addresses. A 
participant will only be linked to his/her data through the participant codes 
generated by [CONTACT_638352].   
Version Date:  9/8/17  14 
 (2) Data Transfer between Client (Browser) and Server:  TestMyBrain uses SSL 
(secure sockets layers) encryption to protect any information that is being 
transferred between a browser and server and all study -specific links will use 
secure communications protocols incorporating SSL (https).  
(3)  Database and Web Hosting : All data is stored through TestMyBrain.org  in 
custom MySQL databases provided by [CONTACT_638353]. TestMyBrain is currently hosted through 
Rackspace, which offers added customer support and security 
benefits  http://www.rackspace.com/ . Their comprehensive privacy policy 
insures that they will not have access to any of the data that goes through 
TestMyBrain without permission or unless required by [CONTACT_2371]: 
http://www.rackspace.com/information/legal/privacy statement . Rackspace 
offers an automatic backup system with nightly updates.  
(4)  Monitoring and Quality Assurance : TestMyBrain.org  has been in operation 
since 2008, with numerous collaborations resulting in a dozen peer -reviewed 
papers and over 900,[ADDRESS_853731] been 
reported that would indicate a privacy, security, or personal risk to 
participants.  
(5) Protection from Malicious Attack :  The TestMyBrain system is implemented 
as a virtual Linux host, so the primary danger from malware is malicious SQL 
injection attacks. To guard against this, all entered data are sanitized before 
being included in any SQL updates.  
(6) Transmission of Data : Participant test data and codes will be transmitted 
directly from the TestMyBrain.org  database to the external researcher using 
either secure http file transfer or secure SQL connection protocol.    
(7) Storage of Data : Once the study is complete and all data have been 
downloa ded from TestMyBrain.org  databases, participant codes that are 
retained in TestMyBrain databases will be destroyed along with any other 
study -specific information or information linking a particular testing session 
with the external research study.  
 
Other Risks : 
Information obtained from participants will be treated confidentially. There may be some 
discomfort associated with nasal spray administration. Nurses at the MGH Clinical 
Research Center are highly skilled in educating patients about nasal spray use and 
sensitive to expressions of discomfort. There may also be mild discomfort associated 
with responding to questions during the diagnostic assessment and answering multiple 
questionnaires about negative symptoms. Participants will be told that they can refuse 
to answer any questions that they do not want to answer, and that they can withdraw 
participation at any point without penalty. Participants with an emergent need for 
immediate psychiatric care will be referred to the Acute Psychiatry Service at MGH.  
 
 
VIII. Potential Benefits  
 
Potential Benefits to Participating I ndividuals : 
Version Date:  9/8/17  15 
 There are no immediate benefits to the individual for participating in this study. 
Participants with BDD may receive feedback regarding their symptoms. In the case that 
participants need ref errals for psychiatric treatment, we will facilitate those referrals to 
MGH or other appropriate facilities. Participants will be provided compensation for their 
time, in a pro -rated hourly amount of $15/hour, with a maximum of $[ADDRESS_853732] Game (up to $20),  by [CONTACT_638354]. In addition , participants will be compensated for 
parking and public transportation costs such that participants are not responsible for any 
costs as sociated with participating in the study.  
 
Potential Benefits to Society : 
Data gathered from this study may benefit other individuals with BDD in the future. To 
date, no studies have examined the oxytocin system in BDD. Given the mounting 
evidence for oxytocin’s role in social and cognitive deficits in autism spectrum disorders, 
schizophrenia, and other disorders, it is clear that the effects of oxytocin have 
transdiagnostic implications. Our findings may show that a single administration of 
intranasal oxytocin may alter social cognitive processes thought to maintain BDD . More 
importantly, if study aims are achieved, we may learn how to improve treatments for 
BDD, and identify individuals who would be responsive to oxytocin. Thus, the current 
study repre sents a translational approach to investigating potential pathophysiological 
mechanisms underlying BDD, and will advance knowledge regarding the potential of a 
promising novel therapeutic agent for BDD.  
 
 
IX. Monitoring and Quality Assurance  
 
Data and Safety Monitoring Plan : 
The study will be monitored for quality assurance and adherence to the protocol 
according to the following monitoring plan:  
 
A Data Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB) will be formed consisting of three 
members who are not associated with the study. The purpose of the DSMB is to: (1) 
review all adverse events, (2) assess the timeliness, completeness, and quality of the 
data collected, (3) assess the adherence to protocol requirements, especially measures 
taken to protect participant safety,  and (4) assess the benefit/risk ratio of study 
procedures. The DSMB will meet once after [ADDRESS_853733] been enrolled, and will be 
provided with the following data prior to this meeting: (1) all adverse events reported, 
and (2) subject recruitment, enro llment, and dropout numbers. During the meeting, the 
board will review these data and have [ADDRESS_853734] to the participants’ 
treatment assignment and  corresponding study visit. DSMB members will then provide 
suggestions for the progress of the study, as well as determine whether modifications to 
the protocol are needed.  
Version Date:  9/8/17  16 
  
Adverse Event Reporting G uideline s: 
 
Definitions :  
1. Adverse event  means any untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a 
human subject, including any abnormal sign (for example, abnormal physical 
exam or laboratory finding), symptom, or disease, temporally associated with the 
subject’s participation in the research, w hether or not considered related to the 
subject’s participation in the research (modified from the definition of adverse 
events in the 1996 International Conference on Harmonization E -6 Guidelines for 
Good Clinical Practice).  
 
2. Serious adverse event  means any event temporally associated with the 
subject’s participation in research that meets any of the following criteria:  
  results in death;  
  is life threatening (places the subject at immediate risk of death from the event 
as it  
occurred);  
  requires inpatient hospi[INVESTIGATOR_1081];  
  results in a persistent or significant disability/incapacity;  
  results in a congenital anomaly/birth defect; or  
  any other adverse event that, based upon appropriat e medical judgment, may 
jeopardize the subject’s health and may require medical or surgical intervention 
to prevent one of the outcomes listed above (examples of such events include 
allergic bronchospasm requiring intensive treatment in the emergency room or at 
home, blood dyscrasias or convulsions that do not result in inpatient 
hospi[INVESTIGATOR_059], or the development of drug dependency or drug abuse).  
 
3. Unanticipated problem involving risks to subjects or others  means any 
incident, experience, information, ou tcome, or other problem that is unexpected 
and related to the research, and that indicates that the research places subjects 
or others at an increased risk of physical, psychological, economic, legal, or 
social harm than was previously known or recognized.   
 
4. Unexpected  means that the incident, experience, or outcome is unexpected (in 
terms of nature, severity or frequency) given the (a) research procedures that are 
described in the protocol - related documents, such as the IRB -approved 
research protocol and informed consent document and (b) the characteristics of 
the study population being studied.  
 
5. Unexpected adverse event  means any adverse event occurring in one or more 
subjects participating in a research protocol, the nature, severity, or frequency of 
which is not consistent with either: (1) the known or foreseeable risk of adverse 
events associated with the procedures involved in the research t hat are 
described in (a) the protocol -related documents, such as the IRB -approved 
research protocol, any applicable investigator brochure, and the current IRB - 
Version Date:  9/8/17  17 
 approved informed consent document, and (b) other relevant sources of 
information, such as produ ct labeling and package inserts; or (2) the expected 
natural progression of any underlying disease, disorder, or condition of the 
subject(s) experiencing the adverse event and the subject’s predisposing risk 
factor profile for the adverse event.  
 
Reportin g Requirements : 
According to the PHRC adverse events reporting policy, PIs are required to report 
unanticipated problems that occur during the conduct of the study, after study 
completion, or after subject withdrawal or completion, to be submitted within 5  
working days/[ADDRESS_853735] becomes aware of the problem. 
Specifically, reports of unanticipated problems involving risks to subjects or others 
are to be submitted through Insight/eIRB within 5 working days/[ADDRESS_853736] becomes aware of the problem.  
 
Internal  adverse events that are unexpected  and related/possibly related  to the 
research and external  adverse events that are serious, unexpected and 
related/possibly related  must be reported to the IRB wi thin 5 working days/[ADDRESS_853737] becomes aware of them . Any less serious, 
expected (e.g., documented in the protocol), or unlikely related adverse events will 
be reported to the IRB as part of its yearly continuing review proces s. 
 
Adverse events to be expected  in the current study, based on Syntocinon ® Basic 
Presc ribing Information , previously published  data, and from participants in the study 
to date,  include:  
 Headaches  
 Nausea  
 Allergic dermatitis  
 Uterine contractions  
 Lightheadedness  
 Nasal irritation  
 Dry mouth/throat  
 Feeling of calmness or euphoria  
 Anxiety or depression  
 Feeling drowsy or sleepy  
 Difficulty sitting still  
 Trouble concentrating  
 Tremors or shakiness  
 
 
X. References  
 
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Dia gnostic and statistical manual of mental 
disorders (Fifth ed.). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing.  
Averbeck, B. B., Bobin, T., Evans, S., & Shergill, S. S. (2011). Emotion recognition and 
oxytocin in patients with schizophrenia. Psychological Medicine, 11, 1 -8. 
Version Date:  9/8/17  18 
 doi:10.1017/S0033291711001413  
Boyce, P., & Parker, G. (1989). Development of a scale to measure interpersonal 
sensitivity. The Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 23,  341-351. 
doi:10.3109/00048678909068294  
Brennan, K. A., Clark, C. L., & Shaver, P. R. (1998). Self -report measurement of adult 
attachment: An integrative overview. In : J. A. Simpson & W. S. Rholes (Eds.), 
Attachment Theory and Close Relationships (pp. 46 -76). [LOCATION_001]: Guilford 
Press.  
Buhlmann, U., Etcoff, N.L. , Wilhelm, S. (2006). Emotion recognition bias for contempt 
and anger in body dysmorphic disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 40,  
105-11. 
Buhlmann, U., Wilhelm, S., McNally, R. J., Tuschen -Caffier, B., Baer, L., & Jenike, M.A. 
(2002). Interpretive bi ases for ambiguous information in body dysmorphic 
disorder. CNS Spectrums, 7,  436-443.  
Domes, G., Heinrichs, M., Glascher, J., Buchel, C., Braus, D. F., & Herpertz, S. C. 
(2007). Oxytocin attenuates amygdala responses to emotional faces regardless 
of vale nce. Biological Psychiatry, 62,  1187 -1190. 
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.03.025  
Eisen, J. L., Phillips, K. A., Baer, L., Beer, D. A., Atala, K. D., & Rasmussen, S. A. 
(1998). The Brown Assessment of Beliefs Scale: Reliability and validity. 
American Journal o f Psychiatry,  155, 102 -108.  
Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. (1975). Unmasking the face: a guide to recognizing emotions 
from facial cues . Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice -Hall 
First, M. B., Spi[INVESTIGATOR_626], R. L., Gibbon, M., & Williams, J. B. W. (2002). Structured clinic al 
interview for DSM -IV-TR Axis I Disorders, Research Version, Patient Edition 
(SCID -I/P).  [LOCATION_001]: Biometrics Research.  
Goodman, W. K., Price, L. H., Rasmussen, S. A., & Mazure, C. (1989). The Yale -Brown 
Obsessive Compulsive Scale: I. Development, use,  and reliability. Archives of 
General Psychiatry, 46, 1006 -1011.  
Grocholewski, A., Kliem, S., Heinrichs, N. (2012). Selective attention to imagined facial 
ugliness is specific to body dysmorphic disorder. Body Image, 9,  261-9 
Guastella, A. J., Einfeld, S.  L., Gray, K. M., Rinehart, N. J., Tonge, B. J., Lambert, T. J., 
& Hickie, I. B. (2010). Intranasal oxytocin improves emotion recognition for youth 
with autism spectrum disorders. Biological Psychiatry, 67, 692-694. 
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.09.[ADDRESS_853738], A. L., Dadds, M. R., Mitchell, P., & Carson, D. S. (2009). A 
randomized controlled trial of intranasal oxytocin as an adjunct to exposure 
therapy for social anxiety disorder. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 34, 917-923. 
doi:10.1016/j.psyneue n.2009.01.005  
Guastella, A. J., Mitchell, P. B., & Mathews, F. (2008). Oxytocin enhances the encoding 
of positive social memories in humans. Biological Psychiatry, 64,  256-258. 
doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.02.008  
Harb, G. C., Heimberg, R. G., Fresco, D. M.,  Schneier, F. R., & Liebowitz, M. R. (2002). 
The psychometric properties of the Interpersonal Sensitivity Measure in social 
anxiety disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 40 , 961 -979.  
Version Date:  9/8/17  19 
 Heimberg, R. G., Horner, K. J., Juster, H.R., Safren, S. A., Brown, E. J., Schneier, F.R., 
& Liebowitz, M. R. (1999). Psychometric properties of the Liebowitz Social 
Anxiety Scale. Psychological Medicine, 29 , 199 -212.  
Kosfeld, M., Heinrichs, M., Zak, P. J., Fischbacher, U., & Fehr, E. (2005). Oxytocin 
increases trust in humans. Nature, 435,  673-676. doi:10.1038/nature03701  
Labuschagne, I., Phan, K. L., Wood, A., Angstadt, M., Chua, P., Heinrichs, M.,...Nathan, 
P. J. (20 10). Oxytocin attenuates amygdala reactivity to fear in generalized social 
anxiety disorder. Neuropsychopharmacology, 35,  2403 -2413. 
doi:10.1038/npp.2010.123  
Leary, M. R. (1983). A brief version of the fear of negative evaluation scale. Personality 
and Soc ial Psychology Bulletin, 9,  371-375.  
Liebowitz, M. R. (1987). Social phobia. Modern Problems in Pharmacopsychiatry, 22,  
141-173. 
Lovibond, P. F., & Lovibond, S. H. (1995). The structure of negative emotional states: 
Comparison of the Depression Anxiety Stress Scales (DASS) with the Beck 
Depression and Anxiety Inventories. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 33,  335-
343.  
Lukas, M., Toth , I., Reber, S. O., Slattery, D. A., Veenema, A. H., & Neumann, I. D. 
(2011). The neuropeptide oxytocin facilitates pro -social behavior and prevents 
social avoidance in rats and mice. Neuropsychopharmacology, 36 , 2159 -2168. 
doi:10.1038/npp.2011.95  
MacDonal d, E., Dadds, M. R., Brennan, J. L., Williams, K., Levy, F., & Cauchi, A. J. 
(2011). A review of safety, side -effects and subjective reactions to intranasal 
oxytocin in human research. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 36, 1114 -1126.  
Phillips, K. A., Hollander, E ., Rasmussen, S. A., & Aronowitz, B. R. (1997). A severity 
rating scale for body dysmorphic disorder: Development, reliability, and validity of 
a modified version of the Yale -Brown Obsessive Compulsive Scale. 
Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 33,  17-22.  
Philli ps, K.A., Menard, W., Fay, C., &Weisberg, R. (2005). Demographic characteristics, 
phenomenology, comorbidity, and family history in 200 individuals with body 
dysmorphic disorder. Psychosomatics, 46 , 317 -25. 
Posner, M. I. (1980). Orienting of attention. Quarterly Journal of Experimental 
Psychology, 32, 3–25. 
Posner, M. I., Snyder, C. R., & Davidson, B. J. (1980). Attention and the detection of 
signals. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 109,  160-174. 
doi:10.1037/0096 -3445.109.2.160  
Saucier, G. (199 4). Mini -Markers: A brief version of Goldberg’s unipolar Big -Five 
markers. Journal of Personality Assessment, 63,  506-516. 
doi:10.1207/s15327752jpa6303_8  
Van Ijzendoorn, M. H., & Bakermans -Kranenburg, M. J. (2012). A sniff of trust: Meta - 
analysis of the e ffects of intranasal oxytocin administration on face recognition, 
trust to in -group, and trust to out -group. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 37, 438-443. 
doi:10.1016/j.psyneuen.2011.07.008  
Veale, D., Boocock, A., Gournay, K., & Dryden, W. (1996) Body dysmorphic disorder: A 
survey of fifty cases. British Journal of Psychiatry, 169,  196-201.  
Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief 
Version Date:  9/8/[ADDRESS_853739]: The PANAS scales. Journal of 
Personality and Soc ial Psychology, 54, 1063 -1070. doi:10.1037/0022 -
3514.54.6.1063  
Watson, D., & Friend, R. (1969). Measure of social -evaluative anxiety. Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 33,  448-457. doi:10.1037/h0027806  
Wilhelm, S., Phillips, K.A., Fama, J.M., Greenberg, J.L., & Steketee, G. (2011). Modular 
cognitive –behavioral therapy for body dysmorphic disorder. Behavior Therapy, 
42, 624-633. 
Witt, D. M., Winslow, J. T., & Insel, T. R. (1992). Enhanced social interacti ons in rats 
following chronic, centrally infused oxytocin. Pharmacology, Biochemistry, and 
Behavior, 43 , 855 -861. doi:10.1016/0091 -3057(92)[ZIP_CODE] -F 
 