1 
CCMC Department of Research  
Version 1.7, March 15, 2023  PROTOCOL TITLE: Application of Virtual Reality in Post -Operative Recovery of a Pediatric Scoliosis 
Patient Population  
 
PROTOCOL VERSION DATE:  2.12.24  
 
PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: [INVESTIGATOR_822535], MD  CO-INVESTIGATOR: Robert Astur, PhD  
DEPARTMENT: Neurosurgery  DEPARTMENT: Psychological Sciences  
INSTITUTION: Connecticut Children’s  INSTITUTION: University of Connecticut  
PHONE: 860 -545-8373  PHONE:  
EMAIL: [EMAIL_15627]  EMAIL: [EMAIL_15628]  
 
CO-INVESTIGATOR: Mark Lee, MD  CO-INVESTIGATOR: William Zempsky, MD 
MPH  
DEPARTMENT: Orthopedic Surgery  DEPARTMENT: Pain and Palliative Medicine  
INSTITUTION: Connecticut Children’s  INSTITUTION: Connecticut Children’s  
PHONE:  PHONE:  
EMAIL: [EMAIL_15629]  E-MAIL: [EMAIL_15630]  
 
 
STUDY COORDINATOR : Cameron King    
DEPARTMENT:  Neurosurgery   
INSTITUTION: Connecticut Children’s   
PHONE:   
EMAIL: [EMAIL_15631]   
 
STUDY TEAM MEMBER: Prabhath Mannam  STUDY TEAM MEMBER : Patrick Halloran  
DEPARTMENT: School of Medicine  DEPARTMENT: School  of Medicine  
INSTITUTION: University of Connecticut  INSTITUTION: University of Connecticut  
PHONE: 860 -709-2371  PHONE: [PHONE_17177]  
EMAIL: [EMAIL_15632]  EMAIL: [EMAIL_15633]  
 
STUDY TEAM MEMBER: Oluwadamilola Egbewole  
DEPARTMENT:  Neurosurgery   
INSTITUTION: Connecticut Children’s   
PHONE:   
EMAIL: [EMAIL_15634]  
 
  
2 
CCMC Department of Research  
Version 1.7, March 15, 2023  Table of Contents  
 
Background/Introduction  
Research Question  
Primary and Secondary Aims  
Outcome Definitions/Data Points Collected  
Study Design  
Target Population  
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria  
Sampling Method and Recruitment Process  
Study Retention and Withdrawal  
Study Procedures  
Sample Size Justification  
Feasibility, Accrual, and Duration of Accrual  
Study Limitations  
Data Analysis  
Administrative Organization, Roles and Responsibilities  
Use of Study Results  
Study Budget  
References  
Appendices
3 
CCMC Department of Research  
Version 1.7, March 15, 2023  Background/Introduction  
 Scoliosis is broadly defined as deviation of the normal vertical alignment of the spi[INVESTIGATOR_158407]. 
Scoliosis is typi[INVESTIGATOR_822536], neuromuscular, syndromic, or idiopathic and may be treated 
with observation, bracing, or surgical correction, depending on the severity and the clinical status of the 
patient. [1] Idiopathic scoliosis represents the most common pediatric subtype and has a prevalence of 0.5 
– 5.2%, with an operative rate ranging from 3.9 – 9.8 operations per 100,000 members of the general 
population. [2-4] Post-operative pain following the surgical correction of pediatric scoliosis is inevitable 
and must be well managed to achieve the goals of patient comfort, early mobilization, and early discharge. 
As a result of the short - and long -term adverse effects o f opi[INVESTIGATOR_822537], many 
practices are adopting multimodal pain management strategies to reduce the reliance on opi[INVESTIGATOR_83269]. [5, 
6] 
 
 Virtual reality (VR) has been extensively studied in regards to its ability to reduce peri -procedural 
pain and anxiety in a pediatric population.[ADDRESS_1140582] of 
VR following scoliosis surgery has yet to be assessed.8  At Connecticut Children’s, patients undergo 
multimodal pain management following scoliosis correction, including narcotics, muscle relaxants, anti -
inflammatories, and gabapentin. Patients are also expected to participate with physical therapy daily. In the 
present study, we intend to investigate the ef fect of VR on subjective post -operative pain, total inpatient 
narcotic administration, and mobilization with physical therapy.  
 
Research Question  
 Does implementation of VR reduce pain, reduce total narcotic administration, and increase 
mobilization with physical therapy in the immediate post -operative period following spi[INVESTIGATOR_822538]?  
 
Primary and Secondary Aims  
 
Primary Aim (s):  
• To determine if virtual reality ( VR) reduces the subjective perception of pain for pediatric patients 
in the  acute  post-operative period (until discharge) following spi[INVESTIGATOR_272178].  
o Hypothesis: The mean self-reported pain level using a 10-point numeric  pain scale will be 
a minimum of 1 point lower in patients receiving VR compared to those in the control 
group .  
 
Secondary Aims:  
• To determine if  VR reduce s the total amount of inpatient narcotic use in the acute post-operative 
period (until discharge) following spi[INVESTIGATOR_272178].  
o Hypothesis: Patients receiving VR will have reduced total inpatient narcotic administration 
during their hospi[INVESTIGATOR_822539].  
• To determine if VR can facilitate earlier mobilization following spi[INVESTIGATOR_272178].  
4 
CCMC Department of Research  
Version 1.7, March 15, 2023  o Hypothesis: Patients receiving VR will participate in a fewer number of physical therapy 
(PT) sessions prior to receiving clearance for discharge by [CONTACT_822549].  
 
Outcome Definitions/Data Points Collected  
Primary Outcome : 
Pain will be measured through  the 10-point numeric  pain s cale self -reported by [CONTACT_102]  
(patient ’s will be between 1 3-18 years of age) .  
Secondary Outcomes:  
• Mobilization will be assessed by [CONTACT_822550].  
• Patient post -operative gross motor activity level will be measured via wearable Fitbit  
• Opi[INVESTIGATOR_822540] 
(as documented in the EMR) during the post -operative period.  
• Side effects  from virtual therapy, including headaches, vertigo, and nausea  
 
Data collected:  
• Patient demographics  
o Age, Sex, Race, Language, Ethnicity  
• Patient Past Medical History  
• Patient medication/drug history (prescription and recreational)  
• Prior experience with VR  
• Surgical details  
o # of spi[INVESTIGATOR_822541]   
o Duration of surgery  
o Surgical blood loss  
o Need for transfusion  
o Complications  
• Radiographic imaging  
•  10-point  numeric pain scale ratings Physical Therapy notes  
o Number of sessions  prior to discharge clearance , timing of sessions, duration of each 
session, comments from each session ,  
• EPIC Medication History  
• Length of stay  
• Timing and duration of virtual reality sessions  
• Side effects from virtual therapy sessions  
o Seizures  
o Loss of awareness  
o Headaches  
o Vertigo  
o Nausea  
o Eye strain / blurred or double vision  
o Eye or muscle twitching  
5 
CCMC Department of Research  
Version 1.7, March 15, 2023  o Involuntary movements  
o Dizziness  and lightheadedness  
o Disorientation  
o Impaired balance and hand -eye coordination  
o Excessive sweating  
o Increased salivation  
o Drowsiness  
o Fatigue  
o Motion sickness  
o Skin irritation  
o Low temperature burns  
o Hair loss  
o  
Study Design  
Mixed methods with a prospective cohort and retrospective chart review.  
Target Population   
Pediatric patients (age s 13-18) undergoing corrective scoliosis  surgery at Connecticut Children’s over a 
span of 12 months  (03/01/2 4-03/01/2 5). 
Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria  
Inclusion:  
 
Prospective:  
• All pediatric patien ts (ages 13-18) at Connecticut Children’s undergoing surgical correction for 
idiopathic scoliosis over a span of 12 months (03/01/2 4-03/01/2 5) will be eligible for inclusion  in 
the prospective arm.  
 
Retrospective:  
• All pediatric  patients (age s 13-18) at Connecticut Children’s that underwent surgical correction for 
idiopathic scoliosis in the retrospective time frame (03/01/1 9 - 03/01/2 4) will be eligible for 
inclusion in the retrospective arm.  
 
Exclusion:  
• History of seizures  
• Cognitive d evelopmental delay precluding participation in VR  
• Head or neck surgery that does not allow a head -mounted display to be worn safely  
• Chronic pain requiring the daily use of opi[INVESTIGATOR_283146] 2 weeks prior to the procedure  
• Non-English speakers  
• Side effects during screening  
• Patients with  vagal nerve stimulators, cardiac pacemakers, and/or cochlear implants that may 
receive interference from the VR device  
6 
CCMC Department of Research  
Version 1.7, March 15, 2023  Sampling Method/Recruitment Process  
Prospective cohort  sample:   
All pediatric patients (age s 13-18) undergoing corrective scoliosis surgery at Connecticut Children’s over 
a span of 12 months  (03/01/2 4-03/01/2 5) will be approached by a study team member  during the pre -
operative stage  with information and consent documentation about the study. If the patient acknowledges 
that they are interested and would like more information, then the study team member will complete the 
formal consent and HIPAA process with the patient and family. This will take place in a private setting, 
and the patient/family will  be given ample time to reach the consent and have any questions answered. As 
a part of the consent and HIPAA, patients will consent to the study procedures as well as the research study 
team accessing their medical record for data collection . Each patient’s MRN will be entered into a secure 
password protected Excel enrollment log and be given a subject identification number for de -identification . 
During the consenting procedure, the patient will utilize the VR device for 5 minutes to screen for side 
effects  and become accommodated to the device. In the event that the patient experiences side effects during 
this 5 -minute period, they will be excluded from the study.  
 
Retrospective chart review  sample:  
The retrospective chart review is intended to be used as a historical control to the prospective arm of the 
study. All patients in the retrospective time frame (02/01/1 9 - 02/01/2 4) will be identified using CPT codes 
(fusion codes: [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE] and instrumentation codes: [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE], [ZIP_CODE]) as well as ICD -10 
Code M41.* from Slicer Dicer. These patient’s charts will be verified by a study team member to ensure 
they meet inclusion criteria, and then they will be entered into a  using a secure password protected Excel 
enrollment log. Each patient’s MRN will be recorded into the enrollment log and will be given a subject 
identification  number for de -identification. Patients in this cohort will not be approached for consent as we 
will not collect identifiable information and only their deidentified medical record will be in review. It is 
also likely that some patients are no longer clinically active at Connecticut Children’s, and therefore we 
would not be able to contact [CONTACT_822551] .  
Study Retention/Withdrawal  
Prospective Cohort:  
All patients will be admitted after surgery . It is anticipated that some subjects may opt to not continue with 
VR and withdraw fr om the study. Participants will be told that they may withdraw from the study at any 
time by [CONTACT_822552], [CONTACT_822555], or the study coordinator, Cameron King . Withdrawing 
from the study will not affect patient care. A patient may also decline participation for a VR session, but  
choose  not to withdraw from the entire study. If a patient declines three consecutive VR sessions, then they 
will be withdrawn from the study. If a patient withdraws, any data already collected will be made de-
identifiable and no further information will be collected. These patients will not be included in downstream 
analyses.  
 
Retrospective Cohort:  
These patients will  not be approached for consent and therefore will not be able to withdraw from the 
study.  
Study Procedures  
7 
CCMC Department of Research  
Version 1.7, March 15, 2023  Due to the limited number of corrective surgeries for scoliosis in a given year, a true randomized control 
trial cannot be performed. As such, a prospective cohort will be used – all patients undergoing surgery 
during the study period will be offered VR an d will be assessed for pain, opi[INVESTIGATOR_16444], and mobilization 
following surgery. These outcome measures will be compared to data identified from a retrospective chart 
review of children receiving the same surgery but without an additional VR -intervention, th us serving as a 
historical control.  
 
Prospective Arm : 
After consenting to the study, the following baseline assessments will be performed and collected from the 
patient during the pre -operative stage: pain level  and vital signs (heart rate, blood pressure, O2 saturation). 
Starting on postoperative day 1, the prospective cohort will begin receiving VR. These sessions will occur 
twice daily, starting 30 minutes prior to the patient’s scheduled PT appointment s, and will be facilitated by 
a study team member . At the beginning of the session, a study team member wi ll visit the patient’s room 
and set up the virtual reality device. A study team member will try to stay with the patient for the duration 
of the VR session, but in the event that they are unavailable to do so, a member of the nursing team, physical 
therapy  team, or a parent will remain with the participant. As such, there will always be an adult in close 
proximity to the participant while  they use the VR device. The duration of the session will last 
approximately 20 minutes and will utilize a low physical l oad VR experience (underwater or space 
exploration). The goal of the VR experience is to immerse the patient a setting that gives the experience of 
decreased weight bearing load to decrease their post -operative pain.  The VR screen will display a simulated 
environment, such as an underwater exploration, in which the participant can interact with floating marine 
life and vegetation. If the patient experiences side effects or would like a break during the VR intervention, 
they can inform a study team member and remove the VR device . They are permitted to place the VR 
device back on and continue the session  when they feel comfortable to do so . A session will be considered 
“failed” if more than 50% of the session is spent not using the VR device. During the post -operative stage, 
the above outcome measures  will be reassessed daily immediately before and after VR and also following 
the PT session. After the patient is discharged, the total number of PT sessions and total administered  opi[INVESTIGATOR_822542]’s medical charts. In addition to pain, opi[INVESTIGATOR_822543], and mobility data from 
the study, the following information will be collected from the patient charts and entered into REDCap: 
demographics, degree of scoliosis, surgical details, PT notes, pain medication regimens, associated pain 
scales, and relevant follow up notes.  As the VR device will be shared between users, the device will be 
sanitized with UV LEDs by [CONTACT_822553].  
 
Retrospective Arm:  
Eligible patients verified for the retrospective chart review will be entered into a secure  Excel enrollment 
log and be deidentified  by [CONTACT_2329] a subject identification number . The MRN and subject ID will be entered 
into a linking file that will be password protected and only accessible to authorized study personnel . The 
following information will be collected from the patient charts: demographics, degree of scoliosis, surgical 
details, PT notes, pain medication regimens, associated pain scales, and relevant follow up notes. These 
data will be entered into REDCap in a de -identified manner and will only be accessible to authorized study 
team members.  
 
Sample Size Justification  
8 
CCMC Department of Research  
Version 1.7, March 15, 2023  This study will utilize a convenience sample of patients presenting to Connecticut Children’s for a scoliosis 
surgery within the study timeframe.  
 
Feasibility, Accrual, and Duration of Accrual  
Accrual will occur over a 12 month period  (03/01/2 4 - 03/01/2 5). Approximately 60-80 patients undergo a 
surgical procedure for the correction of scoliosis annually at Connecticut Children’s. We estimate ~40% 
will decline to participate, therefore we anticipate approximately 35-50 patients being included in the  
prospective arm of  study.  For the retrospective arm of the study, we approximate to include 350 patients 
for chart review.  
 
Study Limitations  
This study is limited in that we are only assessing the utility of VR to reduce pain in a specific patient 
population ( pediatric patients undergoing surgical correction of scoliosis), at a specific time (the immediate 
post-operative period), at a single institution (Connecticut Children’s) , and within a  relatively small sample 
size,  which limits the generalizability of the study to apply to other patient populations. This study is also 
limited in that it utilizes a retrospective chart review as a historical control . By [CONTACT_822554], it is likely that the study team will encounter missing variables and will not be able to 
categorize pain as accurately as they would be able to in a prospective or true randomized control trial study 
designs.  
Data Analysis  
• Intention to treat analysis  
• A biostatistician will assist in analysis  
• Descriptive statistics (frequency, percentage, mean, standard deviation, median, and interquartile 
range) will be utilized to describe the two groups ( VR and control)  
• Fisher’s Exact test, independent t -tests, and Wilcoxon Rank Sum tests will be used for univariate 
analysis to compare demographics between the two groups ( VR and control)  
• Pain outcome:  
o Univariate analysis using independent t -tests or Wilcoxon rank sum tests will be used to 
compare the daily mean pain scales  
• Opi[INVESTIGATOR_822544]  
o Univariate analysis using independent t -tests or Wilcoxon rank sum tests will be used to 
compare the total inpati ent dose of opi[INVESTIGATOR_822545]/Roles and Responsibilities  
• Principal Investigator - David Hersh, MD - Connecticut Children’s Division of Neurosurgery  
• Co-Principal Investigator – Robert Astur, PhD – UConn Department of Psychological Sciences  
• Co-Principal Investigator – Mark Lee, MD – Connecticut Children’s Division of Orthopedic 
Surgery  
• Co-Principal Investigator – William Zempsky, MD MPH – Connecticut Children’s Division of 
Pain and Palliative Medicine  
• Student Coordinators and Responsibilities:  
o Cameron King  – Study Coordinator  
▪ Study Design  
9 
CCMC Department of Research  
Version 1.7, March 15, 2023  ▪ Data quality  
▪ Data analysis  
▪ Project management  
▪ Manuscript drafting  
o Prabhath Mannam – Medical student  
▪ Study design  
▪ Study Procedures  
▪ Data analysis 
▪ Manuscript drafting  
o Patrick Halloran – Medical Student  
▪ Study Design  
▪ Study procedures  
▪ Data analysis  
▪ Manuscript drafting  
 
 
 
Use of Study Results  
The data generated from this study will be used to re -evaluate the postoperative pain management pathway 
for pediatric patients in the post -operative period following spi[INVESTIGATOR_272178]. These data will also 
be used for presentations / publications.   
 
Study Budget  
 
 
References:  
 
1. Janicki, J.A. and B. Alman, Scoliosis: Review of diagnosis and treatment.  Paediatr Child 
Health, 2007. 12(9): p. 771 -6. 

10 
CCMC Department of Research  
Version 1.7, March 15, 2023  2. Al-Mohrej, O.A., S.S. Aldakhil, M.A. Al -Rabiah, and A.M. Al -Rabiah, Surgical treatment 
of adolescent idiopathic scoliosis: Complications.  Ann Med Surg (Lond), 2020. 52: p. 19 -
23. 
3. Sung, S., et al., Incidence and Surgery Rate of Idiopathic Scoliosis: A Nationwide 
Database Study.  Int J Environ Res Public Health, 2021. 18(15). 
4. Tsirikos, A.I., S.B. Roberts, and E. Bhatti, Incidence of spi[INVESTIGATOR_822546] a 
national health service from 2005 to 2018: an analysis of 2,205 children and 
adolescents.  Bone Jt Open, 2020. 1(3): p. 19 -28. 
5. Matson, K.L., et al., Opi[INVESTIGATOR_822547].  J Pediatr Pharmacol Ther, 2019. 24(1): p. 
72-75. 
6. Shah, S.A., et al., Current Trends in Pediatric Spi[INVESTIGATOR_822548]: Multimodal Pain 
Management and Rapid Recovery.  Global Spi[INVESTIGATOR_050] J, 2020. 10(3): p. 346 -352. 
 
  
11 
CCMC Department of Research  
Version 1.7, March 15, 2023  Appendices  
 
Appendix A  – Data Collection Tool  
 
Appendix B  – FACES  pain scales  
 