17-704H, Meyer, Form BC, 11 -21-17, NS                              vSept3 -2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1 
 COVER PAGE FOR PROTOCOL AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS PLAN  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Official Study Title : A Randomized Controlled Trial for Optimal Feeding Tube 
Placement  
 
NCT number : NCT  
 
IRB Approval Date : 11-21-17 
 
Unique Protocol ID : HSC20170704H  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17-704H, Meyer, Form BC, 11 -21-17, NS                              vSept3 -2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2 
 Protocol Form : A Randomized Controlled Trial for Optimal Feeding Tube Placement  
 
Item [ADDRESS_368753] / Project Summary  Provide a succinct and accurate description of the proposed research. State the 
purpose/aims. Describe concisely the research design and methods for achieving the 
stated goals. This section should be understandable to all members of the IRB, 
scientific and  non-scientific.   
DO NOT EXCEED THE SPACE PROVIDED . 
Purpose/Objectives : Define the optimal  method to place an enteral feeding tube . Our objective is to perform  a randomized controlled trial of two 
different methods of tube placement with outcomes  of cost, safe ty, radiation exposure,  and the time.  
Research Design/Plan : A randomized controlled trial comparing current standard blind method to CORTRAK enteral access system (CEAS), an FDA 
approved  electromagnetic device to place enteric tubes.  
Methods : Patient population would include patients in pediatric intensive care unit, pediatric cardiac unit, intermediate medical care  unit and pediatric 
floor who receives postpyloric feedi ng tube placement s. We are going to monitor total time and number attempts required for each successful 
placement , correlation of findings on x -ray versus CEAS , cost-effectiveness of this new equipment with standard blind method  and decrease in radiation 
exposure with CEAS . 
Clinical Relevance : For insertion of post -pyloric tube, standard blind technique is the most commonly used method. We plan to compare this routine 
methods with another  FDA approved  method of feeding tube placement using electromagnetic guidance . Our goal will be to  determine if the 
electromagnetic  method decreases the number of attempts , duration of time , and the number of x -rays needed  to place a feeding tube. Recent 
retrospective adult and pediatric studies document  promising results with  minimal complications using  this technique .  
 
Item [ADDRESS_368754] experimental 
and/or clinical findings 
leading to the formulation 
of your study.   
For research involving 
unapproved drugs, describe 
animal and human studies.   
For research that involves 
approved drugs or devices, 
describe the FDA approved 
uses of this drug/device in 
relation to your protocol.  Insert background:  
Children admitted to PI [INVESTIGATOR_301815] 40 -60% of times due to poor feeding tolerance. Critical 
illness is a catabolic stress state and nutritional requirements are much higher. Primary methods of 
nutrition delivery are parenteral nutrition  (PN) and enteral nutrition(EN). E nteral feeding is preferable 
whenever possible as it is more physiological and more cost -effective without the added risk of nosocomial 
infection inherent with parenteral nutrition  (PN). Two major routes of enteral nutrition are gastric feeding 
and postpyl oric feeding. Because postpyloric EN reduces gastric residue, it reduces the risk of pulmonary 
aspi[INVESTIGATOR_301816]. Postpyloric feeding has been shown to be associated with 
significantly lesser risk of pneumonia and vomiting as well as incr eased in total percentage of nutrition 
delivered compared to gastric tube feeding in critically ill patients.  From our review of last 6 months’  patient 
charts in last 6 months, there were 85 incidences of postpyloric feeding tube placement in 46 patients a nd 
total 194 x -rays were done to confirm placement, averaging 2.3 X -rays per placement attempt.  
Item 4 
Purpose and rationale  
Insert purpose, objectives 
and research 
questions/hypotheses here.  
 If you cut and paste from 
another document, make 
sure the excerpted material 
answers the question  Purpose:  
 
We hypothesize that enteric feeding tube placement under electromagnetic guidance using CEAS (Cortrak 
Enteral Access System) is superior to curren t standard blind technique. We  wish to expand on previous 
studies to conclusively define that CEAS decreases number of attempts, total time and radiation exposure 
required during an accurate postpyloric feeding tube placement.  
Rationale:  
Previous studies h ave conclusively shown that standard blind technique is associated with higher number 
of attempts, longer total time duration and more x -rays for confirmation as compared to CEAS. None of the 
17-704H, Meyer, Form BC, [ADDRESS_368755] been randomized though. We are planning to  carry out a randomized controlled trial 
to evaluate CEAS more reliably and nullify population bias if any.  
 
October et al, Pediatr Crit Care Med 2009 Vol. 10, No. 2: Successful placement of postpyloric enteral tubes using electromagn etic 
guidance in critically ill children.  
 
Brown et al,  American Journal of Critical Care, May 2017, Volume 26, No. 3 : Use of electromagnetic device to insert postpyloric feeding 
tubes in a pediatric intensive care unit  
 
Goggans et al , Nutrition in Clinical Practice Volum e 32 Number 2 April 2017 233 – 237, Transpyloric Feeding Tube Placement Usin g 
Electromagnetic Placement Device in Children  
Item 5 
Study Population(s) Being Recruited  
 
In your recruitment plan, how many 
different populations of prospective 
subjects do you plan to target? 
Provide number: 100  
 
Identify the criteria for inclusion : 
 Identify the criteria for exclusion : 
 e.g., a population can be individuals 
with type 2 diabetes controlled with diet 
and/or a population of healthy controls.  
Or a population can be individuals 
attending an education program, etc.  
 
List each different population  on a 
separate row and provide a short 
descriptive label :   
(e.g., normal -healthy , diabetics, 
parents, children, etc.)  
 
To add rows use copy & paste  
- Children  admitted to 
pediatric Floor, IMC, PI[INVESTIGATOR_301817] a postpyloric 
feeding tube  - Patient admitted to pediatric floor, 
IMC, pediatric ICU or pediatric 
cardiac ICU requiring postpyloric 
feeding  tube placement of size 8F or 
more and not meeting any of 
exclusion criteria  
 - Open chest wall  
- Open abdominal wall  
 
 
 
Item 6  
Research Plan / Description of the Research Methods  a.  Provide a comprehensive narrative  describing the research methods .   
Provide the plan for data analysis  (include as applicable the sample size calculation).  
uq Step -by-Step Methods: We intend to conduct a randomized controlled trial comparing current standard blind 
technique to CORTRAK enteral access system (CEAS), the electromagnetic device to place enteric tubes.  Both 
techniques are FDA approved and being used across the country. University hospi[INVESTIGATOR_301818]. CEAS uses same feeding tube that is 
currently being used at UHS, . The stylet used with CEAS has a small magnet ic tip to generate a signal captured 
by [CONTACT_301819]’s lower chest .. Receiver is connected to a m onitor which shows the path of 
feeding tube as it advances during insertion. Blind technique uses the same tube and  same stylet except the 
17-704H, Meyer, Form BC, [ADDRESS_368756] documented safety and efficacy of this technique we will be 
performing a prospective randomized trial. Patients will be randomized using sealed envelopes in a locked box, 
prepared by a pers on not part of this study.  We are planning to form a team of total 11  nurses (covering both day 
and night shifts)  to be the super  users for feeding tube placement. Each member  will be trained with the new 
equipment for a period of 1-[ADDRESS_368757] xray is obtained to verify placement. If the tube is not shown to be 
placed correctly (regardless of the placement method), the tube will be repositioned, and another xray is taken 
until confirmation is obtained that t he tube is in proper place. Data collection sheet (attached with this form) , 
monitoring  total time and attempts required, will be complet ed for every participant . An enrollment log will match 
a unique identifier assigned to each participant with their demographic information. All data will be entered and 
maintained on UTHSCSA REDCap server the remaining information (e.g., enrollment log and data sheet) will be 
in locked cabinet. Each successful placement will be considered [ADDRESS_368758] blind method. We are going 
to analyze if using CEAS brings radiation exposure down significantly for enteric tube placement. If statis tically 
significant, we will start a separate study to  analyze if CEAS can be substitute for x -ray confirmation and if the 
current practice  of x-ray confirmation can be discontinued.  Device has the FDA clearance for feeding tube 
placement without an X -ray confirmation. Concurrently, we will gather clinical data on secondary outcomes that 
include intensive care unit stay, hospi[INVESTIGATOR_4408], mechanical ventilati on days, reason for admission and  time to 
achieve full feeds , previous gastrointestinal (GI) procedures or surgeries . 
Data Analysis Plan :  We will make all attempts to standardize the patients within each group. Meaning, we 
recognize that a healthy child with no significant past medical history may not be compara ble to a child with 
caustic ingestion or a child with history of esophageal stricture or previous esophageal surgeries  or a child with 
severe scoliosis . Within each of the groups of standard blind technique and CORTRAK Enteral Access System 
(CEAS) patients , we will index the results to the Pediatric Risk of Mortality (PRISM) score. To determine the 
difference between the two methods we performed a power analysis on our hypothesis that CEAS  method will 
decrease radiation exposure, time to placement, and cost compared to the blind technique . The standard (two -
sided) F -test of association between CEAS  and blind technique placement will yield a power of 86% given 40  
subjects with a Type I error  of 0.05. We made this power calculation using PASS 2008 (NCSS, LLC. Kaysville, 
Utah). For each of the populations we are interested we will enroll a mi nimum of 100  individuals.  At 30 patients,  
we will perform a mid -study analysis to decide ho w long the s tudy needs to continue.   
17-704H, Meyer, Form BC, 11 -21-17, NS                                     vSept3 -2014                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5 
  
Item 7 Risks Section:  
Complete the following table to describe the risks of all research procedures  listed in Step 2, Institutional Form  (items 28 -34).  Do not list risks of Routine care 
procedures here.   
 ☐ N/A, Risks are described in the informed consent document – do not complete this table.  
Research procedures  
 
example:  
• History and physical  
• Questionnaire  
• Laboratory tests  
 
Add or delete rows as needed  Risks  
 
List the reasonably expected risks  
under the following categories as appropriate : 
Placement of device over child’s chest 
and abdomen  Serious and likely;  
o none  
Serious and less likely;  
o none  
Serious and rare;  
o none  
o Not serious and likely;  
none  
Not serious and less likely  
o none  
 
Insertion of a feeding tube  (no 
difference between both procedures)  Serious and likely;  
o none  
Serious and less likely;  
o none  
Serious and rare;  
o Perforation of bowel  
o misplacement into lungs leading to pneumonitis  
Not serious and likely;  
o Discomfort to the child  
Not serious and less likely  
o none  
Data collection  Serious and likely;  
o none  
Serious and less likely;  
o none  
Serious and rare;  
o none  
Not serious and likely;  
o none  
Not serious and less likely  
o Confidentiality bre ach 
 
 
 
 