59th Medical Wing Institutional Review Board  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              1 PROTOCOL FOR NON -EXEMPT RESEARCH INVOLVING HUMAN  SUBJECTS  
Title:  Use of a Self -Guided Mindfulness Mobile Application to Improve Pain Outcomes in Individuals with Knee 
Osteoarthritis  
IRB #:  FWH 20190033H  
Principal 
Investigator (PI)  Rank / Civ 
Rating  Branch  AD/DoD Civ/ 
Ctr/Civilian  Dept/Base Phone #  E-mail  
Jillian Sylvester, MD  Capt  [LOCATION_003]F  AD FMR/ Scott AFB  (919)  244-
1854  jillian.e.sylvester2.mil@mail
.mil 
 
The research relevance of this  protocol focuses on:  ☒ Treatment  
 
Does the research fall under the purview of any other departments or committees?  No 
Radiation Safety Committee  ☒ 
Institutional Biosafety Committee or Biosafety Officer  ☒ 
59th Medical Wing (59 MDW) Office of Research and Technology Applications (ORTA)  ☒ 
59 MDW/SGARB Resource Management Office  ☒ 
1. LOCATION AND SPONSOR  
Collaborating Facilities: None  
AF Sites Seeking Regional IRB:  
Nellis AFB  (99MDG) : Capt Matthew Hess , [EMAIL_14607] , (801) 698 -5008  
Scott AFB (375MDG) : Capt Jillian Sylvester, [EMAIL_14608] , (919) 244- 1854  
Travis AFB  (96MDG) : Capt Alexander Knobloch , [EMAIL_14609] , (309 ) 631 -0046  
Study Sponsors:  None  
2. RESEARCH PLAN  
Purpose of Study:  
This study will investigate if mindfulness training via a smartphone mobile app is effective in improving OA -related knee pain.  
Hypotheses, Research Questions, or Objectives :  
• Objective 1 : Test whether  use of a mindfulness mobile app improve knee pain  in adults with knee OA  among active duty and 
other DoD beneficiaries . 
• Objective 2: Evaluate if self - reported, health -related quality of life and mindfulness scores predict response to mindfulness 
treatment in OA . 
• Null Hypothesis  1: A mindfulness mobile app has no effect on knee pain in adults with knee OA.  
• Alternative Hypothesis  1: A mindfulness mobile app improves knee pain in adults with knee OA.  
• Null Hypothesis 2 : Self- reported, health -related quality of life and mindfulness scores have no effect on  response to 
mindfulness treatment in OA . 
• Alternative Hypothesis 2 : Self- reported, health -related quality of life and mindfulness scores predict response to mindfulness 
treatment in OA.  
Significance:  
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a major cause of disability in the [LOCATION_002] and is expected to affect 26% of Americans by [ZIP_CODE], 9. 
Studies of the socioeconomic burden of OA demonstrate a 2 -4 fold increase in healthcare expenditures for people with OA as 
compared to non -affected controls24, 25. In addition, associated healthcare costs continue to rise: recent estimates of insurer 
and out of pocket healthcare costs of osteoarthritis exceed $185 billion USD per year with another $[ADDRESS_1049651] commonly encountered diagnoses in the study team’s sports medicine clinics. Despi[INVESTIGATOR_765564], effective therapi[INVESTIGATOR_765565], including NSAIDs, injectable , and surgery
17, 20, 21. As a chronic, progressive disease, the management of OA centers on 
maximizing function while controlling pain. Conservative treatment options center on self- treatment modalities of therapeutic 
exercise programs (initiated through Physical Therapy), regular exercise, and weight control. Use of a mindfulness applicatio n 
may be another potential avenue of treatment. As the incidence of osteoarthritis rises, so does the projected physician shortfall. By 2030, this projected shortfall will reach 7,300- 43,100 doctors
10, highlighting the need for increased use of patient 
self-treatment modalities. There is a gap in the literature investigating the potential use o f a mobile health application (“app”) 
59th Medical Wing Institutional Review Board  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              2 as a biopsychosocial intervention to achieve improvement in knee pain, an approach that could be packaged readily for use in 
a clinical setting.  
Military Relevance:  
Osteoarthritis is a leading cause of pain and disability among adults worldwide; it is a very common and expensive ailment 
afflicting Active Duty and Retired Service Members as well as their dependents.  Military members are more likely to 
experience osteoarthritis than their civilian counterparts, and the overall incidence of OA is rising in the military population, particularly among individuals nearing retirement . This study explores an inexpensive, noninvasive, self -directed treatment 
adjunct that may help better manage osteoarthritis -associated pa in.   Such a treatment may help to decrease costs associated 
with osteoarthritis disease management.  
Background and Review of Literature:  
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a progressive, degenerative joint disease and a leading cause of morbidity and disability wo rldwide5. OA 
is estimated to affect 54.[ADDRESS_1049652] common form of OA, and studies estimate that approximately 7% of Americans older 
than 25 (or 14 million people) have symptomatic knee OA6. The lifetime risk of developi[INVESTIGATOR_765566] 45%18. 
 There is a well -established bidirectional relationship between OA and mental health that suggests a role for biopsychosocial 
intervention in management of OA. The practice of mindfulness, classically defined by [CONTACT_385406] -Zinn as “the awareness that 
emerges through paying attention on purpose, in the present moment, and non- judgmentally to the unfolding of experience 
moment by [CONTACT_35993]”, may be an effective treatment for chronic pain
12. Studies of in -person mindfulness training have been 
shown to improve pain outcomes in those with both nonspecific and specific chronic pain, including pelvic pain and low back pain
8, 14,15,22,23. In addition, mindfulness interventions have proven effective adjunct treatments for mood disorders, 
fibromyalgia, rheumatoid arthritis, and stress reduction in otherwise healthy patients3, 4, 26, 27. A recent systematic review of 13 
randomized control trials found that mindfulness training improved patients’ perception of chronic pain and overall quality of life, suggesting it may be an effective adjunct treatment in the multidisciplinary approach to treatment of chronic pain
2. 
Regarding our specific population, a study of indivi duals with knee OA demonstrated that those with greater baseline 
mindfulness exhibited an improved self -perception in their physical quality of life and appeared to decrease the effect of pain 
on stress15. In this same study group, those with higher total mindfulness scores were found to have a 38% greater response to 
a 12- week physical intervention (Tai Chi or physical therapy) than those with low mindfulness scores16. One study found that 
58% of individuals affected by [CONTACT_765570]19; the benefit of mindfulness training may 
demonstrate an increased effect in those with concomitant mood disorders.  
 To date, mindfulness studies involving chronic pain conditions have involved manpower - intensive interventions (in -person 
mindfulnes s training, group therapy, multiple physician appointments, etc.), which are difficult to implement in busy clinical 
settings. Web - and mobile health applications (mHealth) may provide an effective alternative to these interventions. A 2016 
systematic revi ew of 10 web -based mindfulness training programs found that such facilitator - free interventions were effective 
in reducing depression and anxiety
7. To our knowledge, only one protocol to date has been published investigating the use of a 
mindfulness mobile app as an intervention for improving outcomes in chronic pain1. 
 
Our primary aim in this study is to determine if regular use of a mindfulness application improves pain outcomes in adults wi th 
knee osteoarthritis. Our secondary aim is to determine if sel f-reported Healthcare- Related Quality of Life (HRQoL) scores 
predict response to mindfulness treatment in OA. We hypothesize that the use of an mHealth intervention for mindfulness training may be an effective adjunct treatment of chronic knee osteoarthrit is pain; specifically, that regular use of a 
mindfulness application will result in a statistically significant reduction in pain outcomes and improvement in physical fun ction 
as determined by [CONTACT_765571]. We also hypothesize that those with lo wer baseline self -reported HRQoL scores 
are more likely to see a greater improvement in their pain and function with use of a mindfulness application than those with 
higher baseline scores.  
Bibliography:  
1. Ball E, Newton S, Kahan BC,  et al . Smartphone App Using Mindfulness Meditation for Women with Chronic Pelvic Pain 
(MEMPHIS): Protocol for a Randomized Feasibility Trial.  JMIR Res Protoc . 2018; 7(1):e8.   
2. Ball EF, Nur S, Muhammad SE,  et al . Does mindfulness meditation improve chronic pain? A systematic review.  Curr Opin 
Obstet Gynecol . 2017;29(6):359– 366.   
3. Cherkin DC, Sherman KJ, Balderson BH,  et al . Effect of Mindfulness -Based Stress Reduction vs Cognitive Behavioral Therapy 
or Usual Care on Back Pain and Functional Limitations in Adults Wi th Chronic Low Back Pain: A Randomized Clinical 
Trial.  JAMA . 2016;315(12):[ADDRESS_1049653]  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              3  
 4. Chiesa A, Serretti A. A systematic review of neurobiological and clinical features of mindfulness meditations.  Psychol Med . 
2010;40(8):1239– 1252.   
5. Cross M, Smith E, Hoy D,  et al. The global burden of hip and knee osteoarthritis: estimates from the global burden of 
disease 2010 study.  Ann Rheum Dis . 2014;73(7):1323 -30.  
6. Deshpande BR, Katz JN, Solomon DH,  et al . Number of Persons with Symptomatic Knee Osteoarthritis in the US: Impact of 
Race and Ethnicity, Age, Sex, and Obesity.  Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) . 2016;68(12):1743- 1750.   
7. Fish J, Brimson J, Lynch S. Mindfulness Interventions Delivered by [CONTACT_765572]: What 
Research Exists and What Are the Clinical Outcomes?  Mindfulness (N Y) . 2016;7(5):1011 -1023.   
8. Fox SD, Flynn E, Allen RH. Mindfulness meditation for women with chronic pelvic pain: a pi[INVESTIGATOR_799].  J Reprod Med. 
2011;56(3 -4):158 -62.  
9. Hootman JM, Helmick CG, Barbour KE, et al . Updated projecte d prevalence of self- reported doctor -diagnosed arthritis and 
arthritis -attributable activity limitation among US adults, 2015- 2040.  Arthritis Rheumatol . 2016;68(7):1582- 7.  
10. IHS Markit, The Complexities of Physician Supply and Demand 2017 Update: Projectio ns from 2016 to 2030. Prepared for 
the Association of American Medical Colleges. Washington, DC: Association of American Medical Colleges . Accessed 
November 2018.  
11. Jafarzadeh SR, Felson DT. Updated Estimates Suggest a Much Higher Prevalence of Arthritis in  [LOCATION_002] Adults Than 
Previous Ones. Arthritis  Rheumatol . 2018; 70(2):185- 192.   
12. Kabat -Zinn J. Mindfulness -based interventions in context: past, present, and future.  Clin Psychol Sci Prac . 2003;10(2):144–
156.  Kotlarz H, Gunnarsson CL, Fang H, Rizzo JA.  Insurer and out -of-pocket costs of osteoarthritis in the US: Evidence from 
national survey data.  Arthritis Rheum 2009; 60:3546 –3553.   
13. Kotlarz H, Gunnarsson CL, Fang H, Rizzo JA: Osteoarthritis and absenteeism costs: evidence from US National Survey Data.  J 
Occup Environ Med.  2010; 52:263– 268.   
14. la Cour P, Petersen M. Effects of mindfulness meditation on chronic pain: a randomized controlled trial.  Pain Med. 2015 
Apr;16(4):641 -52.  
15. Lee AC, Harvey WF, Price LL,  et al. Mindfulness is associated with psychological health and moderates pain in knee 
osteoarthritis. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2017;25(6):824- 831.  
16. Lee AC, Harvey WF, Price LL,  et al. Mindfulness Is Associated with Treatment Response From Nonpharmacologic Exercise 
Interventions in Knee Osteoarthritis.  Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2017;98(11):2265- 2273.   
17. McAlindon TE, LaValley MP, Harvey WF,  et al. Effect of Intra -articular Triamcinolone vs Saline on Knee Cartilage Volume 
and Pain in Patients With Knee Osteoarthritis: A Randomized Clinical Trial.  JAMA. 2017;317(19):1967- 1975.   
18. Murphy LB, Schwartz TA, Helmick CG,  et al. Lifetime risk of symptomatic knee osteoarthritis.  Arthritis Rheum. 
2008;59(9):1207- 13.  
19. Nazarinasab M, Motamedfar A, Moqadam AE. Investigating mental health in patients with osteoarthritis and its  
relationship with some clinical and demographic factors. Reumatologia. 2017;55(4):183- 188.   
20. Nissen SE, Yeomans ND, Solomon DH,  et al. Cardiovascular Safety of Celecoxib, Naproxen, or Ibuprofen for Arthritis. N Engl 
J Med. 2016;375(26):[ADDRESS_1049654], R oos EM, Laursen MB, et al.  A Randomized, Controlled Trial of Total Knee Replacement.  N Engl J Med. 
2015;373(17):1597 -606.   
22. Turner JA, Anderson ML, Balderson BH,  et al. Mindfulness -based stress reduction and cognitive behavioral therapy for 
chronic low back  pain: similar effects on mindfulness, catastrophizing, self -efficacy, and acceptance in a randomized 
controlled trial.  Pain. 2016; 157(11): 2434 -2444.   
23. Veehof MM, Trompetter HR, Bohlmeijer ET, Schreurs KM. Acceptance - and mindfulness - based interventions for the 
treatment of chronic pain: a meta -analytic review.  Cogn Behav Ther. 2016; 45(1): 5 -31.   
24. Wang SX, Ganguli AX, Bodhani A,  et al. Healthcare resource utilization and costs by [CONTACT_765573] a privately insured population.  J Med Econ. 2017;20(12):1299- 1306.   
25. Xie F, Kovic B, Jin X,  et al. Economic and Humanistic Burden of Osteoarthritis: A Systematic Review of Large Sample 
Studies.  Pharmacoeconomics. 2016; 34(11):1087- 1100.   
26. Zangi HA, Mowinckel P, Finset A,  et al. A mindfulness -based group intervention to reduce psychological distress and fatigue 
in patients with inflammatory rheumatic joint diseases: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012;71(6):911- 7.  
27. Zautra AJ, Davis MC, Reich JW,  et al. Comparison  of cognitive behavioral and mindfulness meditation interventions on 
adaptation to rheumatoid arthritis for patients with and without history of recurrent depression.  J Consult Clin Psychol. 
2008;76(3):[ADDRESS_1049655]  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              4 3. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS 
Research Design and Methods:   
Male and Female active duty members and DoD beneficiaries , ages 18 to 74 years old, meeting the inclusion/exclusion criteria 
will be offered an opportunity to participate. They will be recruited from the clinics located at Scott AFB, Nellis AFB, and Travis 
AFB. All of the below items are research -related unless marked as ‘standard of care’:  
 
Telephone Eligibility review :    We will obtain the potential subject’s permission to be contact[CONTACT_765574]. Those subjects who respond to advertisements or recruitment letters have implicitly given their permission to be  
contact[INVESTIGATOR_530]. We will contact [CONTACT_765575].  We will use the attached “Telephone Eligibility Script”  and record responses . . For those that are interested in 
participating, we will retain the se surveys in accordance with the storage plan outlined in this study for the duration of the 
study. For those not determined eligible, the surveys will be shredded.  
 
Screening  Visit:  
• Obtain  and document  signed  Informed  Consent  document  and HIPAA  Authorization.  
• Review  past  medical  history  in Armed  Forces  Health  Longitudinal  Technology  Application  (AHLTA) to verify  the 
inclusion/exclusion  criteria  including previous  encounter,  vital  signs  review,  co-morbidities,  demographics,  problems  list, 
confirmatory  x-rays demonstrating  radiographic evidence of knee osteoarthritis.  
• We will ask the participants  to complete the Screening Visit  Medical  history  questionnaire.  
• Record:  Age at time of randomization, gender,  Kellgren  and Lawrence (KL) Grade score  at time of enrollment,  age at time of 
osteoarthritis  diagnosis,  prior  knee osteoarthritis  therapi[INVESTIGATOR_765567] , name [CONTACT_765583]  (over -the-counter  
and prescription),  current  email  address  (to be used  for scheduling and weekly  email  reminders ), height  (in inches),  weight  
(in pounds),  history  of prior  injury to the affected  knee(s) , current  level  of exercise,  physical  therapy in the past  year,  and 
prior  experience with  mindfulness .  
 
Randomization:  Subjects  will be randomized  into 1 of 2 groups  using  block  randomization  with  repeated  measures : 
• Intervention  Group:   Patient education  regarding osteoarthritis,  its natural  history,  and common  treatments  plus the 
mindfulness  (intervention)  app.  They  will be provided  with  a pre-paid  12-week  subscription  to the mindfulness  application , and 
provided  an in-person  demonstration  on how  to use it, and the subscription  license  code  will be recorded  for the purposes  of 
tracking use after  the conclusion  of the study.  The intervention  group  will be asked  to use the mindfulness  app 10 minutes  
per day/5  days  per week . To standardize  Pack  usage  across  all participants,  users  will be asked  to complete the Headspace  
Essentials”,  “Pain  Management”, and “Physical  Health”  Session  Packs.  
 
The intervention  application,  Headspace, employs  short,  audio -guided  sessions  that teach  the principles  of mindfulness.   
Participants  will register  an account  within  in the application,  requiring  they  provide  their  name,  an email  address,  and a 
password.    The application  will collect  usage  data, tracking participants’  time  spent  using  the application  and which  specific  
mindfulness  session  (known  as a “Pack”)  they  used.    Aggregate  usage  data  will be provided  to the study team by [CONTACT_765576] 12-week  intervention  period,  identified  only  by [CONTACT_765577] . The study team will compare t his usage  data  
against  participant  self-reported  use to confirm  adherence  to the study proto col.     
 
• Control  Group:   Patient education  regarding osteoarthritis,  its natural  history,  and common  treatments  plus the My Water  
Balance  (control)  app and provided an in-person  demonstration  on how  to use it. My Water  Balance  calculates  an individual’s  
recommended  daily  water  requirements  and assists users  in tracking their  daily  fluid  intake.  The control  group  will be asked  to 
log their  water  intake  for the duration  of the study,  with  requested  use of [ADDRESS_1049656]  party  server;  however,  no 
application  data  will be extracted  by [CONTACT_3476]. Application  use will be reported  via weekly  surveys , alone.  
 
Visit 1  (Baseline, in -person visit) : 
• All participants will receive patient education regarding osteoarthritis, its  natural h istory, and common treatments.  
• All will receive education about the Rx3 Home Exercise Program , which serves as a physical intervention for pain 
management.  
• All participants will be asked to perform the Rx3 Home Exercise Program [ADDRESS_1049657]  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              5 • All participants  will be assigned a study ID# and will be given the on -line  baseline  Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome 
Score (KOOS), Short Form -12 (SF -12), and Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire -15 (FFMQ -15) surveys  using Google Forms 
or Survey Mon key. 
• All participants will receive instructions per the randomization instructions above.  
• All participants will be given a Medication Diary to complete on a weekly basis.  
 
Weeks 2 -11: 
Participants will receive weekly  reminders (via email)  asking that the y use the app throughout the  week . They will also be 
asked to fill out a short  Weekly Survey inquiring:  
o Freq uency and minutes used for the intervention (My Water Balance and Mindfulness app 10 minutes per day/5 days 
per week)  
o Freque ncy and minutes spent pe rforming the Rx3 Home Exercise Program in the past week (3 times weekly)  
o Use of NSAIDs or other over -the-counter pharmacologic methods of pain control in the past week.  
 
Visit 2 (Week 12, electronic contact):  
Participants will complete the following surveys and asked the following questions via Google Forms or Survey Monkey. These 
anonymous forms will be completed via Google Forms  or Survey Monkey  and the results transcribed to a master excel file for 
centralized data tracking. Each subject will use t heir pre -assigned study code to record on each completed questionnaire:  
o KOOS  
o FFMQ15  
o SF-12 
o 12-Week survey to evaluate for treatment response to the Rx3 Home Exercise Program and mindfulness app 
intervention.  
o Group 1  (intervention group) : Following completio n of the [ADDRESS_1049658] free access to the Headspace application . 
o Group 2 (control group) will be asked to cease the use of the My Water Balance application . 
 
Visit 3 (Week 26, electronic contact):  
Participants will complete the following surveys and asked the following questions via Google Forms or Survey Monkey:  
o KOOS  
o FFMQ15  
o SF-12 
o Groups will be queried on their continued use of the Rx3 Home Exercise Program, and over -the-counter analgesic use . 
o Group 1 (intervention group) will be queried on continued employment of mindfulness techniques.  
o Group 2 (control group) will be queried on contin ued use of diet and exercise techniques.  
 
Visit 4 (Week 52, electronic contact):  
Participants will complete th e following surveys and asked the following questions via Google Forms or Survey Monkey:  
o KOOS  
o FFMQ15  
o SF-12 
o Groups will be queried on their continued use of the Rx3 Home Exercise Program, and over -the-counter analgesic use . 
o Group 1 (intervention group) will be queried on continued employment of mindfulness techniques.  
o Group 2 (control group) will be queried on contin ued use of diet and exercise techniques.  
 
Visit 5 (Week 104, electronic contact):  
Participants will complete t he following surveys and asked the following questions via Google Forms or Survey Monkey:  
o KOOS  
o FFMQ15  
o SF-12Groups will be queried on their continued use of the Rx3 Home Exercise Program, and over -the-counter 
analgesic use.  
o Group 1 (intervention group) will be queried on continued employment of mindfulness techniques.  
o Group 2 (control group) will be queried on contin ued use of diet and exercise techniques.  
 
59th Medical Wing Institutional Review Board  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              6  
f. Source of Research Material:   
Will you be using private information  in this study?  ☒Yes 
If Yes  ☒protected health information (PHI) held by a covered entity  Weekly survey data will be obtained using the unique participant identifier. At no time will participants use identifiable 
information when completing these online surveys.  These surveys will be conducted using Google Forms or Survey Monkey, 
and the results transcribed to a master excel file for centralized data tracki ng. This excel file will be password protected and 
stored on an encrypted drive on a CAC -enabled computer in a location separate from the participant identifiable information 
list discussed above.  Likewise, results of interval surveys at 0 -, 12- , 26-, 52-, and 104- weeks will be obtained using Google 
Forms or Survey Monkey and identified only via participants’ unique identifier.  
 
Study participants will receive 3 reminders asking them to complete their end -of-intervention study surveys; if they do not 
respo nd, they will be removed from the study. Those who did not complete the prior set of studies will not be queried for 
subsequent ones. Use of the mindfulness smartphone app will subsequently be discontinued and the license terminated at the 
conclusion of th e study . 
a. Interventions  and Observations:   
Participants will be re -surveyed at 12, 26, 52, and [ADDRESS_1049659] -intervention change in Knee injury and Osteoarthritis Outcome (KOOS) pain subscale. Secondary outcomes will 
include the other KOOS subscale scores, FFMQ outcomes, and SF -12 self -reported mental and physical health self -assessments 
at these same time intervals.  
b. Setting:   
Active Duty members and DoD beneficiaries age s 18-74 years will be recruited at Scott AFB O’Fallon Family Medicine Residency 
Clinic located at 3 St. Elizabeth’s Blvd, Suite 4000, O’Fallon, IL and Scott AFB Family Health Clinic on -base , David Grant Medical 
Center [ADDRESS_1049660], at Travis AFB, and Mike O’Callaghan Federal Medical Center, [ADDRESS_1049661] North at Nellis AFB. No 
special populations (e.g., pregnant women, children, military basic trainees, prisoners, detainees) will be recruited.   
c. Date(s):   
February 201 9-February 202 2 
d. Subjects:   
Adults ages 18 -74 with symptomatic knee osteoarthritis.   All potentially eligible patients will be offered an opportunity to 
participate. Some patients may be patients of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_83852]; however, they will have the research team recruit their patients to 
prevent an y misconception of coercion or undue influence.  
e. Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria:   
Inclusion Criteria  • Male and female Active Duty members and DoD beneficiaries ages 18 -74 years  
• Meet criteria for symptomatic knee osteoarthritis according to the American College of 
Rheumatology (pain on more than half of the days of the past month during at least one of the following activities: walking, ascending or descending stairs, standing upright, or lying in bed at 
night)  
• Demonstrate radiographic evidence of OA, with Kellgren and Lawrence (KL) Grade ≥1 as determined 
by [CONTACT_765578] 
• Must have a ccess to a smartphone with enough memory to download the app My Water Balance or 
the Mindfulness  app  
Exclusion Criteria  • Intra -articular corticosteroid injection in the 3 months prior to participation in the study.  
• Intra -articular hyaluronic acid/PRP injection in the 6 months prior to participation in the study  
• Medical condition contraindicating moderate aerobic exercise as determined by [CONTACT_9682]  
• History of knee surgery in the past 6 months or previous knee arthroplasty  
• Inflammatory joint disease.  
• Current Practice of Mindfulness  
• Non-English -speaking  
• Currently pregnant or planning pregnancy over the study period 
• Enrollment in other clinical research study during the study period 
• Inability to comply with treatment protocol, including participation in the Rx3 Home Exercise 
Program . 
59th Medical Wing Institutional Review Board  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              7 Use of identifiers  with private information   
Identifiers  to be Used ? 
 
 Column A -
Looked at by 
[CONTACT_601004] B -
Recorded  on 
enrollment log, 
subject list, or 
key list  Column C -Recorded 
on data collection 
tool (survey, 
spreadsheet, etc.)  Column D -
Recorded on 
specimen 
containers  Column E -
Shared w / 
others not on  
research team  Column F -
Stored after 
study ended  
Names  ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Study codes linked to 
individuals’ identities using 
a key only accessible by [CONTACT_101491]   ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Phone /Fax Numbers  ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
E-mail s ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
DoD ID#  ☒ ☒ ☐ ☐ ☐ ☐ 
Coding Plan ?  
Describe the method that will be used to 
create and assign unique study  codes to 
data.  The unique study code will be assigned consisting of a location identifier ( “S” for Scott AFB, 
“N” for Nellis AFB, “T” for Travis AFB ), first letter of their first name, the first letter of their 
last name, and the last four digits of their  cell phone number .  The  code will be placed in a 
Master Key of identifiable PHI/PII for each subject  at each collaborating site.  
Describe the method that will be used to 
create and assign unique study codes to 
specimens.  ☒N/A, not collecting specimens  
  
What is the format of the key?  ☒Electronic  
Who will have access to the key?  Research Coordinator at each study site . 
Where will the key be stored and how 
will it be protected?  
 Location(s): Each collaborating site will maintain a Master Key of identifiable PHI/PII that 
will be kept in an electronic database, which will be encrypted, password protected and the access will be restricted to the Research Coordinator. The Master Key will be electr onically stored separately from the coded de -identified research data.  The Master 
Key will not be stored on any non- government or personal computers or laptops.   At the 
conclusion of the study, the data from each site will be de -identified prior to revie w and 
analysis.  
 
Confidentiality measures: The coded research data will be kept in a locked cabinet in a 
locked office and only the research department has the key. The coded research data will 
be retained until the conclusion of the research study. Once a  Final Report has been 
approved by [CONTACT_1201], all the paper records will be de -identified and any key linking the 
subject to their records will be destroyed, based on AFI 33 -332, “The Air Force Privacy and 
Civil Liberties Program” and the National Institute of Standards and Technology Special Publication (NIST SP 800 -88) for the approved methods to destroy PII. The anonymized 
research data will not be utilized for further research activity beyond the protocol 
stipulations without additional IRB approval.  
Com plete the table .  
 Source of Research Material per Participant (Procedures)  # Routine Care  # Research Driven  # Total Procedures  
 Patient Education  1 0 1 
 Mindfulness App usage (intervention group)  0 90 90 
 My Water Balance (Placebo) App usage (control group)  0 90 90 
 Study Diary  0 1 1 
 Rx3 Home Exercise Program  (all groups)  0 36 36 
 KOOS Survey  0 5 5 
 FFMQ -15 Survey  0 5 5 
 SF-12 Survey  0 5 5 
g. Instrumentation:  
59th Medical Wing Institutional Review Board  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              8 The KOOS is a validated patient -reported outcome survey designed to assess an individual’s perception of their knee pain and 
associated disability. The SF- 12 is a validated assessment of an individual’s perception of their physical and mental health-
related quality of life.  The FFMQ -15 is designed to provide a quantita tive evaluati on of mindfulness. The Rx3 (rehab, refit, 
return to duty) Home Exercise Program  (which serves as a physical intervention for pain management ) is a rehabilitation 
program designed to treat generalized knee pain.  
4. HUMAN SUBJECT PROTECTION  
Recruitment and Consent Processes:   
All potentially eligible patients will be offered an opportunity to participate. Participants will be recruited from Family 
Medicine, Internal Medicine, Orthopedics, and Sports Medicine clinics by [CONTACT_765579], hospi[INVESTIGATOR_765568] , and 
in community boards at public venues on post (Commissary, BX, etc. ). Some patients  may be patients of the PI [INVESTIGATOR_83852]; however, 
they will have the research team recruit their patients to prevent any misconception of coercion or undue influence. When a 
potential subject is identified by [CONTACT_1963], the Research Staff will be con tacted to speak with the patient directly, 
with prior verbal or written authorization by [CONTACT_102]. Hospi[INVESTIGATOR_765569] w ith the 
research staff and, if they agree, then the research staff will be contact[CONTACT_765580]. Advertisements will be posted around the base.  Pregnant women will be excluded from the study as they 
experience a shift in their center of mass and a progressive weakening of their a bdominal muscles, both of which contribute to 
knee pain outside the scope of this study.  
 
Consent Processes:  
Informed Consent and HIPAA authorization will be sought in advance of any screening and study -related procedures from each 
prospective study subject and appropriately documented in accordance with 32 CFR 219.117. Potential candidates will be notified about  the study either through posted advertisements or by [CONTACT_601006]. The study coordinator will provide a written copy of the 
Informed Consent Document (ICD) . The subject may decline to consent without prejudice. At the subjects’ discretion, they may 
take the ICD home to discuss further with family members or another physician, prior to making a decision. If they decide the y 
are interested in participating in the study, they can contact [CONTACT_481808]. If the subject consents, a copy of the 
signed ICD and HIPAA Authorization Document will be given to the subject. No vulnerable populations are included in this 
research study. Subjects who cannot provide  Informed Consent will not be allowed to participate. No Legally Authorized 
Representatives (LAR) will be utilized. Each subject will be asked to place their de -identified research data  into the “ Mike 
O'Callaghan Military Medical Center General Research Data Repository
” (FWH20180064H ) for future research. If the subject 
does not give their authorization, then  the de-identified research data  will be destroyed no later than 3 years following the 
closure . 
 
Recruiting Service M embers  Will you be recruiting service members in a group setting?  ☐Yes ☒No 
 
Participation Compensation :  
☒ Participants will not be compensated .  
 
Assent Process : N/A 
 
Benefits:   
The primary benefit of this research on subjects is a potential improvement in their osteoarthritis -related knee pain ; however, 
this is not a guarantee.  
 
Risks:   
Breach of confidentiality of the data is a potential risk. Every effort will be made by [CONTACT_765581].  
This study otherwise holds minimal risk to the participant.  Given use of third party mobile applications, there are additional 
risks based on participants’ study cohort:   
 
Participants in Group [ADDRESS_1049662] of an individual’s name [CONTACT_480672].  They will also track time spent on the appli cation, the specific mindfulness sessions or packs employed, and the 
59th Medical Wing Institutional Review Board  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              9  
Costs: N/A 
 
Safeguards for Protecting Information:   
Data and Specimen Storage Plan  
How will coded or identifiable data/specimens be stored?  
☒ Paper data , including 
completed consent forms  The research consents and HIPAA Authorization Documents will be stored in a locked 
cabinet in a locked room with restricted access.  
☒ Electronic data  Medical records will be annotated to reflect the subject’s participation in a research 
study. All coded, de -identified research data will be electronically stored separately 
from the Master Key of identifiable patient demographics and PHI/PII at each site.  
☒ Long-term storage 
(following completion of 
the study and inactivation 
of IRB approval)  The research data will be coded and any links to identifiable data will be destroyed (an 
approved shredding bin) as soon as possible as or  no later than at the closure of the 
study. The anonymized research data will not be utilized for further research activity 
beyond the protocol stipulations without additional IRB approval . All de-identified 
research data will be maintained for 3 years fol lowing study closure.  
 
 
Categories of subjects  N/A 
 
Clinical Care :  
If at any time a subject experiences any injury or adverse effects, appropriate clinical care will be given or subject will be 
referred to appropriate provider.  
 
Injury Compensation : N/A 
 
Data Safety Monitoring  ☒N/A – none of the situations listed above apply  
5. ALTERNATIVES  
Alternatives :  
The alternative is not to participate in this research study and to receive standard of care.  operating system upon which the app was accessed (iOS, Android, etc.). While this information is stored on an encrypted 
server, there is a risk of a security breach that would result in t his data being compromised . Cookies may be used to store login 
information and remember user preferences in the application . While not a component of  registration for this study, it is 
possible to link one’s account with social media accounts such as Facebook. Linking one’s social media account is not 
recommended and may result in compromise of more data, including Facebook profile information.    
 
Participants in Group [ADDRESS_1049663] of choice, gender, and weight.  In addition, they may store participants’ recorded 
intake of water.  During initial application setup, the app will be denied access to users’ geographic location ; however, there is 
a risk that individual users may reverse this option and the application may store this information. This information may be 
stored on a third party server and is subject to security breach and loss of confidentiality.   
 
As a free application, users will be exposed to ads and will be offered the chance to upgrade to an ad- free, paid version . All will 
be advised to not make any in -applica tion purchases as a part of this study. It is possible to link use of this application to one’s 
social media account on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram.  Doing so will allow the application to store their social media information, including username [CONTACT_765584].  Users will be advised that linking one’s social media account is not 
recommended and may result in compromise of more data.  
Safeguards for Protecting Subjects  Relative to Reasonably Expected Risks :  
Safeguards are in place for protecting subjects and their health data. The research consents and HIPAA Authorization 
Documents will be stored in a locked cabinet in a locked room. Risks related to participating will be minimized,  as the subjects 
do not have to participate or answer any question that they do not want to comple te. If at any time the patient reports a side 
effect, they will be referred to one of the Investigators for care.   
59th Medical Wing Institutional Review Board  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              10 6. DATA ANALYSIS  
Data Analysis:  
 
Outcome Measures:   
To compare the effect of the mindfulness app intervention against the control: using an intention -to-treat paradigm, the two 
groups will be compared via one -way analysis of variance (ANOVA).  
  
To compare the effect of a mindfulness app intervention among high and low strata of baseline  pre -intervention SF -12 and 
FFMQ -15 scores: statistical calculation is based on the interaction effect in a 2- way analysis  of variance (ANOVA) model with 
5% two -sided significance level.  
 
Sample Size Estimation/Power Analysis:   
Based on the KOOS Minimal Detectable Changes in patients with knee OA of [ADDRESS_1049664] 80% power to detect such a difference based on Student's t test for independent samples with 5% 
two-sided significance level. Allowing for 25% dropout, the required sample size is [ADDRESS_1049665] aim.  
 
However, to determine if high or low strata of baseline mindfulness affects pain outcomes, a sample size of 144 per group (72 
in each SF12 stratum) will have 80% power to detect a difference of [ADDRESS_1049666] deviation of 15 points (i.e., n o 
mindfulness effect in the hi gh SF12 stratum vs. a 10- point mindfulness effect in the low SF12 stratum). Allowing for the 
aforementioned 25% dropout rate, we anticipate 180 participants per group or 360 total participants.  
 
Statistical Analysis:   
Using an intention -to-treat paradigm, the first primary aims will be statistically compared via one -way analysis of variance 
(ANOVA) . The second primary aim will be statistically compared via two -way analysis of variance (ANOVA).   
  
Missing primary outcome data will be acknowledged in the overall report of analysis . The primary outcome data is based on 
KOOS scoring system . Per the validated instructions of KOOS analysis, “as long as at least 50% of the subscale items are 
answered for each subscale, a mean score can be calculated. If more than 50% of the subscale items are omitted, the response is considered invalid and no subscale score should be calculated.”  In the event that the KOOS data is omitted, the participa nt 
will be regarded as a “drop out” and they will be included as such in the intent -to-treat analysis.  
  
Subgroup analyses will be completed via 2- way ANOVA, stratified by [CONTACT_765582] -15 and SF- 12 scores . Subgroup analysis based on 
age, gender, comorbid behavioral health conditions, and duration of Knee OA symptoms may be conside red.    
  
Over -the-counter pharmacologic treatment of musculoskeletal pain is a common practice; given the near ubiquitous usage of 
these medications, this protocol does not preclude use of NSAIDs or acetaminophen.  However, medication use will be 
monitore d via weekly surveys and analyzed post -hoc as a potential confounder of the collected data .  
 
Number of Subjects :  
 # Planned to Enroll  # Enrolled  # Planned to 
Complete Study  TOTAL  
Number of Subjects at Scott AFB  120 0 96 
360 Number of Subjects at  Travis AFB  120 0 96 
Number of Subjects at Nellis AFB  120 0 96 
*If any location recruits more subjects, they will be allowed to continue recruiting not to exceed the total number of subjec ts for 
all locations.  
7. STUDY DURATION  
Duration of Study:   
Approximate duration of the study: 3 years  
8. LOCAL AND EXTERNAL SUPPORT SERVICES 
Local and External Support Services: None  
59th Medical Wing Institutional Review Board  
Version: 4 Apr 2018              11 Describe the plan for training  ☒Not applicable – no training o f non -study personnel required  
9. INTRAMURAL (GME) AND EXTRAMURAL FUNDING SUPPORT  
Intramural (GME) and Extramural Funding Support:  
A grant application was awarded in the amount of $25,000 . Distribution of funds is pending IRB approval.  
10. DRUGS, BIOLOGICS, DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS, AND MEDICAL DEVICES  
Does the study plan dictate the use of any of the following?  
A drug  ☒No 
☒No 
☒No 
☒No 
☒No A biologic  
A compound intended to affect structure or any function of the body  
A dietary supplement or substance generally recognized as safe  that will be used to diagnose, cure, mitigate, treat, or prevent disease  
A medical device  
 
Is this research an “ applicable clinical trial ” which must be registered on ClinicalTrials.gov?  
☒No 
 
Use of a placebo in place of standard therapy : 
Is a placebo being used in place of standard therapy?  ☒No ☐Yes 
11. MEDICAL RESEARCH AREA  
☒Orthopedics  ☒Family Medicine  ☒Family Medicine Residency   
12. ATTACHMENTS  
1. Form A, Signature [CONTACT_108798]  
2. Form A -2, Study Personnel Listing  
3. Form D, Informed Consent Document  
4. H15 Template, HIPAA Authorization Document  
5. Five Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire -15 (FFMQ -15) survey  
6. Osteoarthritis Outcome Score (KOOS)  
7. Short Form -12 (SF -12) 
8. Study Diary  
9. OA Informational Handout  
10. OA Study Flyer  
11. Screening Visit Med Hx Questionnaire  
12. Telephone Eligibility  Script  
13. Rx3 Home Exercise Program  
14. Week 12 survey  
15. Weekly email script  
16. Weekly survey  