Protocol & Statistical Analysis Plan for:  
Pragmatic Trial of Behavioral Interventions to Increase Response to Mailed FIT Outreach  
University of Pennsylvania  
[CONTACT_338602]  
NCT# 05341622  
v. 4/7/22  
Approved: 4/11 /[ADDRESS_1148718] (FIT) kits among eligible patient s, including differentiated packaging, sending  text 
reminders , and personalized reminders . 
 
Protocol  
Abstract  
While colonoscopy procedures are  recommended by [CONTACT_827820], 
colonoscopy access remains limited due to delays in screening due to the pandemic and capacity issues .  
In this project, we will evaluate different ways of reaching out to eligible patients to encourag e them to 
participate in colorectal cancer screening  using fecal immunochemical testing (FIT) . In a mailed FIT 
outreach campaign, w e will compare user friendly  packaging, text messaging , and personalized 
remind ers to standard outreach with the goal of increasing colorectal  cancer screening uptake.  
Study Instruments  
N/A 
Group Modifications  
N/A 
Method for Assigning Subjects to Groups  
We will randomize patients in a 2 x 2 x 2 factorial design. Eligible patients will be randomized in a 1:1 
ratio (stratified by [CONTACT_14603]) to receive a standard mailing envelope or a Penn Medicine -branded blue 
box highlighting the importance of screening.  
In a factorial design, patients will concurrently be randomized in a 1:1 ratio (stratified by [CONTACT_827821]) to receive text messaging in addition to the standard messaging. Text messaging will include a 
series of messaging about the importance of C RC screening, the recommendation from the PCP, and an 
opportunity for feedback.  
In a factorial design, we will  concurrently  randomize patients in a 1 :1 ratio (stratified by [CONTACT_72392], text arm  
and practice ) to receive a mailed reminder letter signed by [CONTACT_827822] 1 month 
of initial outreach .  
Administration of Surveys and/or Process  
[ADDRESS_1148719] of 1996 (HIPAA). Source documents are 
maintained in PennChart. No source documents will be print ed or maintained in paper form at the study 
site. Data from PennChart will be recorded in Penn Medicine's REDCap system. The investigator and 
study team will have access to PHI within PennChart and REDCap. We will label all PHI within REDCap as 
identifiabl e information so that de -identified exports are possible. All reports that include identifiable 
information will be stored on the Innovation Center secure drive, maintained behind the UPHS firewall.  
Direct identifiers will be maintained on RedCap until manuscript publication in case additional chart 
review is needed for confirmation of results. Once data analysis and manuscripts have been published, 
direct identifiers will be deleted from RedCap and t he de -identified database will be stored on the 
Innovati on Center secure drive.  
 
Objectives  
Overall objectives  
In addition to providing direct outreach to patients in included practices, we have the following aims:  
Aim 1:  To evaluate if a differentiated box  increases uptake of mailed FIT  
Aim 2:  To evaluate if text messaging could increase uptake for mailed FIT  
Aim 3:  To evaluate if sending personalized reminders increases uptake  
 
Primary outcome variable(s)  
The primary outcome will be the percentage of patients who complete FIT within 4 months of outreach.  
Secondary outcome variable(s)  
Secondary outcomes will be completion of FIT within [ADDRESS_1148720] positive 
results and schedule and complete colonoscopy, as well as the results of the procedure (adenoma, 
advanced adenoma, cancer). We will compare response rates by [CONTACT_654], race/ethnicity, insurance, income 
(by [CONTACT_121810]), MyPennMedicine status, and completion of prior CRC screening.  We will also compare 
colorectal cancer scr eening completion of the patients in the trial to patients in similar practices that 
were not included in the trial to understand the effect size for outreach compared to no outreach. We 
will use the same inclusion and exclusion criteria to identify a coho rt of patients in the control practices, 
and compare completion of any colorectal cancer screening method to the trial participants during the 
trial follow -up period.  
Background                                                 
4 
 The initial and subsequent surges from the COVID -19 pandemic caused many patients to delay evidence -
based colorectal cancer (CRC) screening. A major challenge was that many of our CRC screening efforts 
relied on screening colonoscopy. Many patients deferre d screening, and there were also access issues 
related to scheduling and clinician capacity.  
In September 2020, Penn Medicine identified CRC screening among Black patients as a system -wide 
goal. Due to issues with endoscopy capacity and limited scope of clinic -based outreach efforts, the 
Colorectal Cancer Strategy group conducted a sprint in the Spring of [ADDRESS_1148721] (FIT) kits directly to patients based on prior experiences from pi[INVESTIGATOR_36155]. We 
sent o ut approximately 4000 kits to practices with a high proportion of minority patients, and included a 
user -friendly Penn Medicine -branded box as well as text message navigation, resulting a 25% response 
rate.  
Due to continued endoscopy capacity issues, we would like to conduct a similar outreach campaign, but 
also rigorously evaluate the effectiveness of the designed box, text messaging, as well as a reminder that 
might increase uptake. These behavioral interve ntions require additional resources, so the goal is to 
determine effectiveness of each approach, which will inform future efforts.  
  
Study Design  
We will randomize patients in a 2 x 2 x 2 factorial design. Eligible patients will be randomized in a 1:1 
ratio (stratified by [CONTACT_14603]) to receive a standard mailing envelope or a Penn Medicine -branded blue 
box highlighting the importance of screening.  
In a factorial design, patients will concurrently be randomized in a 1:1 ratio (stratified by [CONTACT_827821]) to receive text messaging in addition to the standard messaging. Text messaging will include a 
series of messaging about the importance of C RC screening, the recommendation from the PCP, and an 
opportunity for feedback.  
In a factorial design, we will concurrently randomize patients in a 1:1 ratio (stratified by [CONTACT_72392], text arm 
and practice) to receive a mailed reminder letter signed by [CONTACT_827823] [ADDRESS_1148722] the research; all research staff have adequate office space on 
the UPenn campus.  
 
Characteristics of the Study Population  
Target population  
Patien ts age [ADDRESS_1148723] 
(EHR). All eligible patients in the included primary care practices will receive outreach through the study.  
  
Accrual  
We plan to include approximately [ADDRESS_1148724] 2 years  
3. Not up to date on colorectal cancer screening per Health Maintenance (no c olonoscopy in the 
last [ADDRESS_1148725] 3 years) . 
Key exclusion criteria  
1. Personal or significant family history of CRC, colonic polyps, hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal 
cancer syndrome, familial adenomatous polyposis syndrome, other gastrointestinal cancer, 
gastrointestinal bleeding, iron -deficiency anemia, or inflammatory bow el disease  
2. History of total colectomy, dementia or metastatic cancer  
3. Currently on hospi[INVESTIGATOR_827817]  
4. Uninsured or self -pay patients  
5. Currently scheduled for a colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy  
[ADDRESS_1148726] no other exclusions.  
 
 
Procedures  
Program Planning : Through automated data extraction  from Clarity , we will identify eligible patients, 
along with their contact [CONTACT_151064]. We will obtain approval from the PCSL and 
participating practices.  
Randomization: We will randomize patients in a 2 x 2 x 2 factorial design. Eligible patients will be 
randomized in a 1:1 ratio (stratified by [CONTACT_14603]) to receive a standard mailing envelope or a Penn 
Medicine -branded blue box highlighting the importance of screening.  
In a factorial design, patients will concurrently be randomized in a 1:1 ratio (stratified by [CONTACT_827821]) to receive text messaging in addition to the standard messaging. Text messaging will include a 
series of messaging about the importance of C RC screening, the recommendation from the PCP, and an 
opportunity for feedback.  
In a factorial design, we will concurrently randomize patients in a 1:1 ratio (stratified by [CONTACT_72392], text arm 
and practice) to receive a mailed reminder letter signed by [CONTACT_827823] 1 month 
of initial outreach.  
Centralized Outreach.  After identifying the patients, we will work with physician leads for the practices 
to bulk order FIT kits for all eligible patients in their respective clinics, with the PCP listed as the 
authorizing  provider. In April , we will mail 5000  FIT kits : [ADDRESS_1148727] envelopes containing a  letter 
describing the importance of CRC screening, the patient’s eligibility for FIT, a FIT kit, and information 
about how to complete an d return the test; and [ADDRESS_1148728] information will be transferred to a Penn 
Medicine approved vendor (Paradigm Digital Color), who has agreed to comply with security measures 
identified by [CONTACT_827824] d protection of this data. Digital Color will not 
store any patient data once the appropriate files have been produced.  
Those randomized to the texting arm will receive outreach with a series of text message reminders that 
incorporate prin ciples from behavioral science using the Way to Health platform.   
Among those who are randomized to receive reminder outreach, we will mail a reminder letter signed 
by [CONTACT_827825].  
All FIT results will be routed to  the authorizing provider (PCP) and all patients will be notified of their 
results. The PCP will assist with care coordination and follow -up for patients with FIT positive results.  
 
Analysis Plan  
7 
 We plan to include approximately 5000 patients determined by [CONTACT_827826] . Our power calculations are based on the number of estimated eligible patients and 
meaningful differences to justify implementation of the interventions.  
We estimate a n 18% response rate in the simple outreach  arm ( no box , no text message , no reminder ), 
based on a prior outreach and findings from other outreach activities. We anticipate  an additive effect 
from each intervention with an effect size of 4 percentage points for each enhancement, based on prior 
work and other studies. For the box mailing comparison, we therefore anticipate  an aggregate  response 
rate of 22%  in the no box  arm (with half the patients receiving text messaging and half receiving 
remin ders in a factorial design) . See Figure 1. An equal allocation of 2,500 in each arm will provide over 
90% power to detect a [ADDRESS_1148729] of proportions and intention -to-treat protocol, and considering a two -sided P value less 
than 0.05 as sta tistically significant [STATA: power twoprop .2 2 .26, n(5000) a(.05)]. This increase is 
clinically meaningful and would justify investment by a health system in the materials and packaging o f 
the box after it is implemented.   
We estimate a 22% response rate in the no text messaging arm, based on prior work. Similar to the box 
comparison, half the patients will receive the box and half will be assigned to receive a reminder in a 
factorial design. The eligible population of 5,000 would provide over 90% power to detect an increase in 
response rate of 4 percentage points in the text message arm compared to no text message [STATA: 
power twoprop .22 .26, n(5000) a(.05)]. This increase would justify inve stment in the text messaging 
technology and implementation.  
For the personalized mailed remind er comparison, we estimate a 22% response rate in the no reminder 
arm that includes 2.500 patients. This will provide over 90%  power to detect an increase in response 
rate of 4 percentage points in the personalized mailed reminder arm compared to no mailed reminder. 
[STATA: power twoprop .2 2 .26, n(5000) a(.05)]. This increase would justify investment in the resources 
to mail reminder letters.  
For the main comparisons, we will use the chi -squared test of proportions to calculate difference and 
95% confidence intervals, along with P -value. We will also conduct analyses for the secondary outcomes 
of FIT completion at [ADDRESS_1148730] likelihood ratio tests to examine significance of the 
interaction term i n each model. We will report the estimated log odds ratio along with a 95% confidence 
interval for each interaction, which quantifies the differential effect of treatment between subgroups 
(relative to a reference group for categorical covariates), adjusting for all other covariates in the model. 
We will report p-values both unadjusted and adjusted for multiple comparisons using the Holm 
procedure.  
[ADDRESS_1148731] of 1996 (HIPAA). All PHI will be  
maintained on UPHS servers. Source documents are maintained in PennChart. No source documents  
will be printed or maintained in paper form at the study site. Data from PennChart will be recorded in  
Penn Medicine's REDCap system. The investigator and study team (which includes the research  
coordinator, and research assistants) will have access to PHI within PennChart and REDCap. We will  
label all PHI within REDCap as identifiable information so that de -identified exports are possible. All  
reports that include identifiable information will be stored on the Innovation Center secure drive,  
maintained behind the UPHS firewall.  Digital Color will not store any patient data once the appropriate 
files have been produced.  

[ADDRESS_1148732]  to patients which will include PHI such as name, etc., 
research and print vendor staff will be required to check the addresses listed for the patient to ensure 
mismatches are not made. A file including these data elements will be transferred to a Penn Medicine 
approved vendor (Paradigm Digital Color), who has agreed to comply with security measures identified 
by [CONTACT_827827]. Digital Color will print one cu stom 
printed label combo sheet with patient name, address, barcode, and test -kit label. One box/envelope 
will be assembled at a time using one custom label sheet.  Once the kit and the box has been fully 
assembled it will be labeled using the address and barcode from the same custom label sheet, sealed 
and shrinkwrapped prior to assembling the next. Reminder letters will be generated using a similar file 
and mail mer ge to complete patient information in specified fields, then  included in a window envelope 
so no matching between names and address on envelopes and letters will be required. Digital Color will 
not store any patient data once the appropriate files have been produced.  
 
Data Disclosure  
Completed fecal immunochemical testing (FIT)  results will be disclosed to the participant's provider for 
continuity of care.  
 
Protected Health Information/Data Protection  
• Name  
• Street address, city, county, precinct, zip code, and equivalent geocodes  
• All elements of dates (except year) for dates directly related to an individual and all ages over 89  
• Telephone and fax numbers  
• Medical record numbers  
 
Consent  
1. Consent Process  
Overview  
Waiver of consent for this study will be requested. Please see below.                                                     
Children and Adolescents  
Not applicable.  
Adult Subjects Not Competent to Give Consent  
Waiver of consent is being requested.  
2. Waiver of Consent  
Waiver or Alteration of Informed Consent*  
10 
 Waiver or alteration of required elements of consent.                                           
Minimal Risk*  
This study involves no more than minimal risk to subje cts. F ecal immunochemical testing (FIT) is 
clinically available and routinely utilized to s creen patients for colorectal cancer . The outreach methods 
in each arm are all offered during routine clinical care either at Penn Medicine or other health systems 
across the country. The only research related activity is the randomization of subjects to different 
outreach strategies that wo uld typi[INVESTIGATOR_827818].                                     
 
 
Impact on Subject Rights and Welfare*                                      
Subjects' rights and welfare will not be adversely affected by [CONTACT_338594]. 
All subjects will have the opportunity to voluntar ily participate in colorectal cancer  screening.  This 
outreach program is supported as clinical care by [CONTACT_827828].  
Waiver Essential to Research*                                       
We believe that we would not be able to practically conduct the research without waiver of consent. If 
we had to obtain either written or verbal consent ahead of time, it would substantially limit our study 
population and it may alter their participation i n the intervention. Thus, we would only learn about the 
response rate for patients who we were able  to speak to for consent. This would limit the 
generalizability to practice. Simply waiving documentation of consent (and thus including a consent 
letter that does not require a subject signature) is not sufficient in this scenario. We believe that 
including a consent letter in the mailings could poten tially bias subjects to not participate in a clinically 
available and indicated screening test, and it could alter their participation. Obtaining waiver of consent 
would allow us to avoid the potential selection/volunteer bias for inclusion of patients par ticularly 
interested in screening that can occur when consent is required. Since our main objective is to 
understand the potential influence varying outreach strategies on subject behavior, we believe that 
obtaining consent would compromise our primary obj ective. Additionally, we have received waiver of 
consent for similar studies related to population health screening outreach  (Hepatitis C S creening 
Outreach (#831526), COVID Vaccine Texting Outreach (#848696) , and Mammogram Outreach 
(#849863) ).                                                       
Additional Information to Subjects                    
Subjects who are screened will be provided with appropriate information about screen ing results as is 
routine clinical practice.                    
                        
Written Statement of Research*                                                            
No        
Risk / Benefit                                                    
[ADDRESS_1148733] and/or in a HIPAA -compliant system (e.g. 
REDCap). There is also the risk of psychological harm associate d with being screened for colorectal  
cancer. We will minimize this risk by [CONTACT_827829] a 
timely fashion and facilitating the scheduling of treatment evaluation if the screening test is positive (as 
is usual practice for screening outreach programs).                                                                       
 
 
Potential Study Benefits  
If a participant completes colorectal  cancer screening, which is standard clinical care, the subjects will 
potentially benefit from participation by [CONTACT_827830]. Information learned from this study may benefit society through a better understanding of how 
to effectively increase overa ll participation rates in colorectal  cancer screening which could in turn 
reduce the morbidity and mortality of the diagnosis.                                                                       
Data and Safety Monitoring  
Safety will be overseen by [CONTACT_978] [INVESTIGATOR_98909]. In the case of possible events, the PI [INVESTIGATOR_827819], 
relationship to the study procedure, expectedness, and  the course of action for each subject is 
documented . 
Risk / Benefit Assessment                                              
The risks associated with this study are no more than minimal. Better knowledge of how to increase 
colorectal cancer screening rates could potentially address one of the major barriers of accessing care, 
i.e. having patients come in for clinical office visits. For these reasons and those outlined in the above 
benefits sec tion, the investigators believe  that the risks of participating in the study are outweighed by 
[CONTACT_286562].  